NASA 

Technical Memorandum 102041 


AVSCOM 
Technical Report 89-C-002 


A Data Acquisition and Control Program for 
Axial-Torsional Fatigue Testing 


Sreeramesh Kalluri 
Sverdrup Technology, Inc. 

NASA Lewis Research Center Group 
Cleveland, Ohio 

and 

Peter J. Bonacuse 
Propulsion Directorate 

U.S. Army Aviation Research and Technology Activity— AVSCOM 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 


Prepared for the 

Symposium on the Applications of Automation Technology 
to Fatigue and Fracture Testing 

sponsored by the American Society for Testing and Materials 
Kansas City, Missouri, May 22-23, 1989 





US ARMY 
AVIATION 
SYSTEMS COMMAND 
AVIATION R&T ACTIVITY 


{NASA-TS- 10 2041) A DATA ACQUISITION AND 
CONTROL PROGRAM FOR AXIAL -TORSION AL FATIGUE 
TESTING (NASA. Lewis Research Center) 

23 p 


CSCL 20K 


N89-280 29 


G3/39 


Unclas 

0224991 



E-4790 


A DATA ACQUISITION AND CONTROL PROGRAM FOR AXIAL- TORSIONAL FATIGUE TESTING 


Sreeramesh Ka 1 1 url 
Sverdrup Technology, Inc. 

NASA Lewis Research Center Group 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 

and 


Peter J. Bonacuse 
Propulsion Directorate 

U.S. Army Aviation Research and Technology Activity - AVSCOM 

Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 


SUMMARY 

A computer program was developed for data acquisition and control of the 
axial-torsional fatigue experiments at NASA Lewis Research Center. The multi- 
tasked, interrupt-driven program was written in Pascal and assembler. This 
program is capable of dual-channel control and six-channel data acquisition. 

It can be utilized to perform inphase and out-of-phase axial-torsional isother- 
mal fatigue or deformation experiments. The program was successfully used to 
conduct inphase axial-torsional fatigue experiments on 304 stainless steel at 
room temperature and on Hastelloy X at 800 °C. This paper describes the 
details of the software and gives some of the results generated to date. 


INTRODUCTION 

Failure of engineering components due to fatigue is a common occurrence in 
the aerospace and automotive industries. It is therefore necessary to charac- 
terize the fatigue behavior of materials so that the engineering components can 
be operated safely and reliably. The fatigue behavior of a material is usually 
determined by conducting axial (tension/compression) and sometimes torsional 
fatigue experiments at the service temperature. In reality, however, engineer- 
ing components are subjected to loads in multiple directions, and these loads 
produce complex states of stress and strain within the component. The fatigue 
life is governed by the state of stress and strain within the component. 

Indeed, the often detrimental effect of multiaxial states of stress and strain 
on fatigue life has been well documented in the literature (refs. 1 to 3). 
Fatigue life prediction models developed primarily with axial or torsional 
fatigue data can lead to erroneous life estimates when they are used to pre- 
dict fatigue life for multiaxial stress and strain states. The reason for this 
error is that under complex multiaxial states of stress and strain the mechan- 
isms causing fatigue failure can be completely different from those causing 
fatigue failure under either axial or torsional loading conditions. As a 
result, fatigue life prediction models must be developed with data generated 
under multiaxial loading conditions so that the fatigue lives of components can 
be estimated accurately. 

Generation of fatigue data under multiaxial states of stress and strain 
is not only expensive but is also very labor intensive. Fatigue testing under 


multiaxial loading has been limited by the complexities involved as well as by 
the lack of suitable equipment to automate such experiments. Hence, only a 
limited amount of fatigue data is available in the literature for multiaxial 
conditions, compared with the large amount of axial and torsional fatigue data. 
More often than not, researchers have chosen to conduct multiaxial fatigue 
experiments to document the fatigue behavior of a material under specific 
multiaxial states, such as combined axial-torsional testing and biaxial tension 
testing (refs. 4 and 5). Even under these seemingly simple multiaxial states 
of stress, substantial experimental difficulties can be encountered. For 
example, in axial-torsional fatigue (unlike simple axial or torsional fatigue) 
two waveforms of loading must be controlled simultaneously. In addition, 
these axial and torsional waveforms can be applied either inphase (proportional 
loading) or out-of-phase (nonproportional loading). During inphase loading, 
no phase difference exists between the axial and torsional waveforms, whereas 
during out-of-phase loading the torsional waveform lags behind the axial wave- 
form by a predetermined phase angle. Schematic illustrations of inphase and 
out-of-phase axial-torsional waveforms are shown in figure 1. Under these cir- 
cumstances, computer data acquisition and control are necessary to simplify 
the testing procedures. 

The axial and torsional stress-strain hysteresis loops, and the variation 
of axial and torsional stress and strain with time have to be recorded for the 
duration of an axial-torsional fatigue test. These data are required to char- 
acterize the fatigue life and the hardening-softening behavior of a material 
under the imposed loading conditions. In the past, these tasks were performed 
by using X-Y recorders and strip chart recorders, respectively. The testing 
procedures can be simplified considerably by automating both the control of the 
axial-torsional fatigue experiment and the acquisition of the required data. 
This automation is possible with digital computers and appropriate hardware 
and software. Automation with a digital computer can considerably reduce the 
amount of human attention required to monitor the fatigue experiment. In addi- 
tion, data stored on the computer can easily be accessed for further analysis. 

A computer program was written in Pascal at NASA Lewis Research Center to 
control as well as to acquire data from either an inphase or an out-of-phase 
axial-torsional isothermal fatigue experiment. Assembler routines were written 
to interface with test control and data acquisition hardware. Specific atten- 
tion was given to speed of execution and efficiency in these routines. The 
program can generate either sine or triangular axial-torsional control wave- 
forms that can be used under either load control or strain control. The capa- 
bilities of the software, the equipment required to run the software, and some 
of the data acquired are presented in this paper. 


BACKGROUND 

Automation of combined axial-torsional testing was first reported during 
the 1970' s by Penn, Fong, and Kearsley (ref. 6). Penn et al . described the 
computer software and hardware that were necessary to control and acquire data 
from axial-torsional experiments. Their test facility consisted of a servocon- 
trolled biaxial test machine and a computer system for test control and data 
acquisition. The software was written primarily in BASIC with some subroutines 
written in assembly language. Penn et al . conducted computer-controlled axial- 
torsional deformation experiments on thin tubular specimens made of polyvinyl 


2 



chloride (PVC). The results of the deformation experiments were used by Penn 
and his coworkers to characterize the biaxial yield and ultimate strength of 
PVC for different axial-to-torsional load ratios. However, only a limited 
amount of fatigue testing results were reported by Penn and his coworkers 
(ref. 6). The reported fatigue results were confined to pure axial fatigue 
and axial fatigue with a static torque. No combined axial-torsional fatigue 
testing results were reported. 

In general, combined axial-torsional loading of metals and alloys can 
activate failure mechanisms that are not present in either axial fatigue or 
torsional fatigue tests. Hence, it is necessary to conduct combined axial- 
torsional fatigue testing to understand the different types of mechanisms that 
are likely to cause failure under these conditions. 

In order to simplify the experimental procedure required for performing 
the combined axial-torsional fatigue tests, automation of the control and data 
acquisition of the fatigue testing system is essential. The advances in com- 
puters and electronics, and the subsequent reductions in cost, have brought 
the task of automating axial-torsional fatigue tests within the reach of exper- 
imentalists. The set of instructions required to automate an axial-torsional 
test can be encoded into a computer program that can be used to control the 
fatigue test under the combined axial-torsional loading and to acquire the 
desired data simultaneously. The desirable features of such a computer program 
are described in the following section. 


AXIAL-TORSIONAL FATIGUE TESTING SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS 

In general, the goal of automating any system is to minimize the number 
of Instructions required while maximizing the computer-controlled aspects of a 
test program. The control of axial and torsional loading waveforms and simul- 
taneous acquisition of data require several features in the software. These 
features can be divided into four major areas: 

(1) Determination of elastic and shear moduli 

(2) Dual-channel command waveform generation 

(3) Data acquisition from multiple channels 

(4) Program interruption capability at predetermined intervals 

In the following paragraphs, the importance of each of these features is 
described in detail . 


Determination of Elastic and Shear Moduli 

The elastic modulus of a material (either axial or shear) is a very use- 
ful piece of Information in fatigue analysis. During fatigue experiments, it 
is common to control either load or strain. However, while analyzing the 
experimental data, most strain-based fatigue life prediction models require the 
separation of the total strain into elastic and inelastic components (refs. 7 
and 8). The elastic strain component is usually calculated by dividing the 
stress by the elastic modulus. The Inelastic strain is then obtained by sub- 
tracting the elastic strain from the total strain. Thus, for axial-torsional 
fatigue data analysis, the Young's and shear moduli must be determined for 


3 



each specimen. In addition, the variation in these properties within the same 
heat of material can also be documented by determining the Young's and shear 
moduli for each specimen. 


Dual-Channel Command Waveform Generation 

The primary goal of the axial-torsional test control and data acquisition 
software is to generate independent, yet synchronized, axial and torsional 
waveforms of loading at a desired frequency. The software should enable the 
experimentalist to apply these axial and torsional waveforms of loading either 
Inphase or with a prescribed phase difference (e.g., 0°, 30°, 60°, and 90°). 

In addition it would be useful if the software could generate different types 
of waveforms: namely, triangular (constant rate) and sinusoidal waveforms. 

At room temperature, most metals and alloys exhibit a deformation response 
which is independent of the type of waveform of loading. However, the type of 
waveform can Influence the deformation response of these materials signifi- 
cantly at elevated temperatures. For a given amplitude and frequency, the 
material spends more time at higher stress during a sinusoidal waveform than 
It does during a triangular waveform. Thus, at elevated temperatures a sinu- 
soidal waveform is more likely to introduce time-dependent creep deformation 
in the material than is a triangular waveform. The software should also enable 
the experimentalist to conduct the fatigue test in either load control or 
strain control. 


Data Acquisition From Multiple Channels 

The second goal of the axial-torsional test control software is to acquire 
load and deformation data from both the axial and torsional controllers while 
the test is in progress. The functions of controlling the fatigue test and 
simultaneously acquiring the data can be accomplished through a feature known 
as "multitasking," which is commonly used in the real-time control of pro- 
cesses. This feature allows two Independent "threads" of code to be executed 
in apparent concurrency by a single central processing unit (CPU). Once the 
data are written to a file in American Standard Code for Information Inter- 
change (ASCII) format, they can be manipulated with commercially available data 
analysis packages to construct axial and torsional stress-strain hysteresis 
loops and to characterize the hardening and softening behavior of the material 
under investigation. The axial and torsional hysteresis loops generated thus 
can be used subsequently to estimate the fatigue life under combined axial- 
torsional loading conditions. 


Program Interruption Capability at Predetermined Intervals 

Crack initiation in fatigue usually occurs on the surface of a specimen 
(ref. 9). In the absence of internal defects, the cracks tend to originate at 
the surface of the specimen and to propagate either into the specimen or along 
the surface as the number of cycles increases. Replication of the specimen 
surface with cellulose film is one of the techniques used to monitor the initi- 
ation and growth of fatigue cracks (ref. 10). By Interrupting the program and 
replicating the surface of the specimen at periodic intervals during a fatigue 
test, a quantitative measure of the crack growth rate can be obtained. This 


4 


technique also provides qualitative information on the mechanisms prevailing 
during crack initiation and propagation. In addition, it is sometimes neces- 
sary to interrupt the fatigue tests well before failure either to study the 
damage mechanisms or to evaluate the extent of damage to the specimen. Metal- 
lographic techniques are usually employed to characterize the damage mechan- 
isms, while nondestructive techniques such as dye penetration and radiography 
are used to assess the extent of damage in the specimen. The necessity of 
periodic evaluations of cracks and damage make program interruption capability 
a requirement for the software. 

Features in the four major areas that have been described should be 
included in the axial-torsional fatigue test-control and data acquisition soft- 
ware. However, this set of features is by no means complete. For example, 
temperature control, which is required in a thermomechanical fatigue test, has 
not been addressed. The current program automates only isothermal axial- 
torsional fatigue testing. Noni sothermal axial-torsional fatigue testing could 
be automated by adding another control channel and a data acquisition channel 
for temperature. 


EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEM 

The experimental system consists of an axial-torsional servohydraul ic 
fatigue test rig, a minicomputer, digi tal-to-analog (D/A) and analog-to-di gi tal 
(A/D) hardware, and computer software. Since the software development depends 
on the machine interface hardware available and the computer system, these two 
systems are described first. The details of the software are presented at the 
end of thi s section. 


Axial-Torsional Fatigue Rig 

The axial-torsional fatigue rig (fig. 2) at NASA Lewis is a dual-post 
test machine, with hydrocollet grips designed for smooth-shank fatigue speci- 
mens. The geometry of a thin-walled, tubular axial-torsional fatigue specimen 
is shown in figure 3. The upper grip of the test rig is rigidly attached to 
the axial-torsional load cell, which in turn is bolted to the cross-head of 
the machine. The lower grip is capable of executing a helical motion. Thus, 
tension and compression, and clockwise and counter-clockwise twist, can be 
imparted by the movements of the bottom grip. Axial and torsional strains are 
measured with a commercially available high-temperature extensometer . A photo- 
graph of the axial-torsional extensometer is shown in figure 4. The mounting 
technique and the operational details of the extensometer are presented in ref- 
erence 11. A linear actuator imparts the axial loads to the specimen, while a 
rotary actuator imparts the torsional loads. The displacement and rotation of 
the axial and rotary actuators are measured by a linear and a rotary variable- 
differential transformer, respectively. The axial and torsional load, strain, 
and stroke specifications of the system are listed in table I. The test rig 
is also equipped with a 50-kW audiofrequency induction heating system to per- 
form elevated temperature fatigue tests. 

The axial and rotary actuators are driven by two separate servovalves, 
each with a 5 gal/min capacity. The axial and torsional servovalves are con- 
trolled by two separate servocontrol lers . Each of these controllers is capable 


5 


of operating in any one of the following control modes: load, strain, or 

stroke. Each servocontrol channel (on either the axial or torsional servocon- 
troller) can operate at four different range settings: that is, 100, 50, 20, 

and 10 percent of the rated capacity. All of the servocontrol channels are 
designed to operate between ±10 V regardless of the range setting of the servo- 
control channel. The test rig can be operated in axial mode, torsional mode, 
or combined axial-torsional mode. 


Computer Hardware 

The computer system used in this program consists of a Data General S/20 
minicomputer (Data General, Westborough, MA) interfaced to a D/A converter and 
a multiplexed A/D converter. The S/20 minicomputer uses a multiprocessing, 
multitasking operating system that enables multiple tasks to be serviced by a 
single CPU. This particular feature of the computer system permits simultane- 
ous waveform generation and data acquisition. Table II contains the specifica- 
tions of the computer system and the test interface hardware. 

The computer system was used to generate two separate command waveforms 
that served as the input signals for the axial and torsional servocontrol 1 ers . 
Data acquisition from the axial and torsional load, strain, and stroke trans- 
ducers and the subsequent output of these data to the hard disk was also per- 
formed with the computer system. The interface between the axial-torsional 
test rig and the computer system is shown schematically in figure 5. 

Once the fatigue test was completed, the data were transferred via a high- 
speed multiprocessor communication system from the S/20 minicomputer to a Data 
General MV/4000 computer (Data General, Westborough, MA) . Data were archived 
and analyzed on the MV/4000 system, which was also used as an environment for 
test-control software development. 

The details of the computer network of NASA Lewis' High Temperature 
Fatigue and Structures Laboratory are described in reference 12 by McGaw and 
Bartolotta. 


Computer Software 

The axial-torsional fatigue test-control and data acquisition software was 
written in Pascal language for two principal reasons. First, Pascal is a 
wel 1 -structured (with respect to modularity and readability) and "strong-typed" 
(all variables and their data type must be explicitly declared) programming 
language. Second, implementation of multitasked procedures for the existing 
operating system on the S/20 minicomputer is less cumbersome with Pascal than 
with either BASIC or Fortran languages. The D/A, A/D, and programmable inter- 
val timer (PIT) device driver procedures were written in assembly language. 

The software package was developed to meet the fatigue testing software 
requirements discussed in the earlier sections. In the following paragraphs 
the main features of the axial-torsional fatigue testing software are 
described, and flow diagrams are presented to indicate the control path and 
data flow. Examples of applications of the software are presented in the next 
section. 


6 



Figure 6 shows a flow diagram for the logic of the axial-torsional 
fatigue testing software. The relevant test data are input to the program 
through an initialization procedure. This procedure queries the user for the 
following parameters: (1) the name of the engineer, (2) the name of the mate- 

rial and the specimen number, (3) the inner and outer radii of the tubular 
test specimen, (4) the ambient and test temperatures, (5) the mean coefficient 
of thermal expansion, and (6) the names for the data storage files. The proce- 
dure then computes the gage length, the cross-sectional area, and the torsional 
moment of inertia of the specimen at the specified test temperature. 

The data for the determination of the axial and shear moduli are input 
through a second data inout procedure. Initially, the axial and torsional 
load, strain, and stroke range settings for the servocontrol ler are input 
through this procedure. The procedure then assigns the appropriate engineering 
units to each of the ranges from the calibration constants of the transducers 
which have been "hard-coded" into the program. This procedure requires an 
estimate of the axial yield strength of the material at the test temperature 
and the frequency of elastic loading waveforms. The program estimates the tor- 
sional yield strength of the material from the axial yield strength with the 
von Mises yield criterion. The'procedure then computes the upper limits for 
the axial and torsional loads by using onl^y 25 percent of the estimated axial 
and torsional yield strengths and the specimen geometry constants generated 
for the specified test temperature. Limiting the axial and torsional loads to 
about 25 percent of the respective estimated yield strengths, ensures that no 
plastic deformation occurs in the specimen during the determination of the 
elastic modul i . 

The elastic modulus determination is performed under load control with 
triangular waveforms. A schematic illustration of the waveforms used for the 
elastic loadings is shown in figure 7. Each of the triangular waveforms is 
incremented in multiple steps. The 12-bit 0/A converter is capable of analog 
output values ranging from -10 to 10 V with a resolution of 1 part in 4096. 

The elastic moduli procedure is programmed to calculate the digital equivalents 
of the previously computed axial and torsional load limits. The waveforms are 
divided into 500 increments each, with the time interval between each increment 
controlled by a PIT interrupt. The PIT is set to operate at a frequency of 
1 kHz. Thus, if the frequency of the waveform of loading is 0.1 Hz, and the 
waveform has 500 increments; the interval between each PIT interrupt is 20 msec 
(20 PIT cycles). At each increment of loading, the digital value of the wave- 
form is computed by the procedure, and the corresponding analog value is output 
by the D/A converter to the appropriate servocontrol ler. At the same time, the 
program resets the A/D multiplexer to the first channel and proceeds to take 
data sequentially on six channels. Because the interval is small between con- 
versions (about 17 nsec per conversion), data from all six channels are consid- 
ered to be acquired simultaneously. As shown in figure 7, the axial loading is 
applied first. Once the axial elastic waveform is applied to the specimen, a 
linear regression is performed on the acquired axial stress and strain data to 
determine the Young's modulus. At this stage, the procedure is repeated with 
the torsional waveform of loading, to determine the shear modulus. The axial 
and torsional load, strain, and stroke data acquired by this procedure are 
stored in the elastic compliance data file. In addition, the elastic moduli 
can be checked to ensure that the axial-torsional test system is performing as 


7 



desired, so that the axial-torsional fatigue experiment can be started with 
confidence. 

After the elastic moduli have been successfully determined, the input for 
the axial-torsional fatigue experiment is queried by another procedure. The 
software allows the user to perform the axial-torsional fatigue experiment in 
either load or strain control. The amplitudes, the type of waveforms (triangu- 
lar or sinusoidal), the frequency, and the phase difference, if any, between 
the axial and torsional command waveforms are entered into the program. The 
phase difference between the axial and the torsional waveforms can vary from 
0° to 90°. The digital equivalents of the axial and torsional amplitudes are 
then computed by the software. At this stage, all the specifications of the 
axial-torsional fatigue test and the results from the elastic moduli experi- 
ment are written concisely to a test specification file on the hard disk. An 
example of the test specification file is shown in the appendix. The fatigue 
test control procedure also initiates a separate task which writes the data 
collected from the axial and torsional load, strain, and stroke channels to a 
fatigue data file (fig. 6). 

Figure 8 shows a flow diagram that depicts the execution of the axial- 
torsional fatigue experiment. At the beginning of the experiment, the PIT is 
initialized and the D/A and A/D converters are cleared. If a phase difference 
between the axial and torsional waveforms of loading is specified, the axial 
waveform Is ramped to create the required Initial phase angle. The amplitudes 
of both the axial and torsional waveforms are then gradually increased over a 
period of five cycles to the full amplitudes required by the test. This exper- 
imental technique prevents the extensometer from slipping out of the indenta- 
tions in the specimen. However, these five cycles are not counted towards the 
fatigue life of the specimen, and no data are collected during this portion of 
the experiment. In both triangular and sinusoidal types of waveforms, the 
axial and torsional cycles are divided into 500 increments. The PIT is used to 
create the required time interval between two successive digital output incre- 
ments. These digital outputs from the S/20 computer are fed to the D/A con- 
verters, the output of which is used to control both the axial and torsional 
servocontrol 1 ers simultaneously. 

The digital data are collected from the axial and torsional load, strain, 
and stroke in a multitasking mode. These data are collected continuously dur- 
ing the first 10 cycles and logarithmically thereafter. At the beginning of a 
test, an array is generated which contains the cycle numbers for which the data 
is to be stored. The data are continuously acquired for every cycle during the 
ax i al -tors ional fatigue experiment and stored alternately in two data arrays. 

If the data from a particular cycle are required to be saved, then they are 
transferred from the data array to a permanent data file on the hard disk in a 
compact format during the test. Two data arrays are utilized so that one array 
can be used to store the data while the data in the second array are being 
transferred to the hard disk. If the data of a particular cycle are not 
required to be saved, then the data stored in the data arrays are written over 
by data acquired in subsequent cycles. 

If the test is required to be paused for surface replication, the execu- 
tion of the test-control and data acquisition software is periodically halted 
after a predetermined number of cycles. If no interruption is specified, the 


8 



test continues until the specimen fails. The test program also can be inter- 
rupted at any moment from the computer keyboard. The axial-torsional fatigue 
test control software has a programmed specimen failure detection scheme. If 
the difference between the command digital signal and the feedback digital sig- 
nal of either the axial or torsional control channel exceed a programmed limit, 
then the test specimen is considered to have failed, and the generation of the 
axial and torsional command waveforms is terminated. The data from the last 
two fatigue cycles are transferred from the data arrays to the compact data 
file. Finally, the digital data stored in the compact format are unpacked and 
converted into SI units. These data in SI units are finally written to a 
fatigue data file in ASCII format. The execution of the axial-torsional 
fatigue test control software is terminated after all of the data is trans- 
ferred to a ASCII data file. A portion of data from the fatigue data file is 
shown in table III. Each axial-torsional fatigue cycle is stored in an array 
of 500 by 7 elements. The first three columns contain data from the axial 
load, strain, and stroke channels; and the next three columns contain the cor- 
responding data from the torsional channels. The seventh column contains a 
time stamp for the data in each row. At the end of the axial-torsional fatigue 
experiment, the data are transferred from the S/20 minicomputer to the MV/4000 
host computer for further analysis and archiving. Then the data are trans- 
ferred cycle by cycle to IBM PC compatible systems, and they are analyzed with 
commercially available data analysis packages. 

The axial-torsional fatigue test software described meets all four of the 
requirements discussed earlier in this report. 


APPLICATIONS OF THE AXIAL-TORSIONAL TEST-CONTROL SOFTWARE 

The axial-torsional test control and data acquisition software described 
in this report was utilized in two separate programs. To date, only inphase 
axial-torsional isothermal fatigue testing has been performed with this soft- 
ware. The results of some of the experiments conducted with the software are 
presented in this section. 

Inphase axial-torsional fatigue tests were conducted on 304 stainless 
steel at room temperature in strain control as part of a round-robin program 
initiated by the ASTM task group on multiaxial fatigue research. Fatigue tests 
with and without surface replication pauses were conducted with the software 
(ref. 11). The axial and torsional hysteresis loops of one of the tests are 
presented in figure 9. These hysteresis loops are constructed from the data 
collected with the software for a near half-life cycle. Figure 9 also shows 
"cross-plots" of the axial strain versus torsional strain and the axial stress 
versus torsional stress for the same cycle. If the axial strain and torsional 
strain feedback signals are inphase, then a cross-plot would show no hystere- 
sis. However, it is interesting to note that the axial strain and torsional 
strain feedback signals are slightly out-of-phase even though the axial and 
torsional strain command signals were inphase. This is, most likely, due to 
the small differences in the gains of the axial and torsional servocontrol lers. 
The cross-plot of axial stress versus torsional stress exhibits substantial 
hysteresis compared with the cross-plot of axial strain versus torsional 
strain. This can be attributed to the large amount of inelastic deformation 
occurring in the specimen. The data acquired from the axial-torsional fatigue 
test software allow these comparisons to be made with relative ease. The 


9 


hardening-softening curves for the axial and torsional stresses are shown in 
figure 10 for the same inphase axial-torsional fatigue test. 

The software presented in this report was developed mainly for controlling 
and acquiring data from out-of-phase axial-torsional fatigue experiments with 
any given phase difference between 0 and 90°. However, this software can also 
be utilized to conduct out-of-phase axial-torsional deformation experiments to 
characterize the constitutive behavior of a material under biaxial conditions. 
Such experiments were conducted by Kanazawa et al . (ref. 13) on 1 percent 
Cr-Mo-V steel to study the flow behavior of that material. The test control 
and data acquisition for such out-of-phase axial-torsional deformation experi- 
ments would be simplified substantially by the software package described in 
this paper. 

In the second program, the Young's modulus and the shear modulus were 
determined at different temperatures for Hastelloy X (Cabot Corporation, 
Waltham, MA). This is a nickel-base superalloy which is used as a combustor- 
liner material in gas turbine engines. Strain-controlled, Inphase axial- 
torsional fatigue experiments were also conducted on Hastelloy X at 800 °C. A 
single specimen was used to generate the moduli at 100 °C increments starting 
with the room temperature. At each temperature, the axial-torsional fatigue 
test-control software was initialized, and the elastic modulus determination 
procedure was executed. The software execution was stopped after elastic 
moduli were determined. The results (fig. 11) are in close agreement with the 
data available for this superalloy (ref. 14). The axial and torsional hystere- 
sis loops from one of the inphase axial-torsional fatigue experiments on 
Hastelloy X at 800 °C are presented in figure 12. The hardening and softening 
curves for the axial and torsional stresses are shown in figure 13 for the 
same fatigue test. 

The axial-torsional test-control and data acquisition software presented 
In this report simplifies the procedures for conducting complex axial-torsional 
fatigue experiments. In addition, it acquires the data from these experiments 
in a format that eases some of the burden on the data analyst, and it also 
allows some analysis which would be cumbersome, if not impossible, with data 
acquired from traditional experimental techniques. 

The axial-torsional test-control and data acquisition software presented 
in this report is intended primarily for isothermal, continuous-cycling, 
inphase and out-of-phase fatigue experiments. Clearly, noni sothermal fatigue 
experiments, such as bithermal and thermomechanical axial-torsional fatigue 
experiments, would require temperature waveform control. For example, in 
bithermal axial-torsional fatigue experiments (ref. 15), the axial and tor- 
sional mechanical loading waveforms must be activated at appropriate moments 
with respect to the temperature waveform. The temperature waveform can be con- 
trolled by using additional data input and output channels. 

The test-control and data acquisition software will also have to be modi- 
fied to perform isothermal creep-fati gue axial-torsional experiments at ele- 
vated temperatures. Creep strain can be introduced by either a stress hold or 
a strain hold in both axial and torsional directions. In order to maintain the 
synchroni zation of the axial and torsional waveforms of loading, creep should 
be introduced at the same time and for the same duration for both waveforms. 


10 



Since creep is time-dependent deformation, the data acquisition rate can be 
reduced during this portion of the cycle. 


CONCLUSIONS 

1. A general purpose computer program to control and acquire data from 
inphase and out-of-phase axial-torsional isothermal fatigue experiments has 
been developed. This software has greatly simplified the procedures for con- 
ducting axial-torsional fatigue experiments and the analysis of the resulting 
data. 


2. The computer program utilizes the multitasking capabilities of the com- 
puter system to generate two separate command waveforms and to acquire data 
from six different channels. 

3. Inphase axial-torsional fatigue experiments were successfully conducted 
with the computer program on 304 stainless steel at room temperature and on 
Hastelloy X at 800 °C. 

4. The same computer program can also be used to control and acquire 
data from inphase and out-of-phase axial-torsional isothermal deformation 
experiments. 


11 



APPENDIX - TEST SPECIFICATION FILE 


SPECIFICATION FILE FOR MAX PROGRAM 

COMPLIANCE CHECK DATA FILE NAME : HX8_EMOD.DAT 

FATIGUE DATA FILE NAME : HX8 . DAT 

NAME OF THE ENGINEER : PETE AND RAMESH 

MATERIAL AND SPECIMEN NUMBER : HAST-X No. 8 

AMBIENT TEMPERATURE = 23.0 C 

TEST TEMPERATURE = 800.0 C 

MEAN VALUE OF ALPHA = 0.00001600 [mm/mm/C] 

THE FOLLOWING VALUES WERE COMPUTED AT TEST TEMPERATURE 

INNER RADIUS = 11.190 [mm] 

OUTER RADIUS = 13.161 [nun] 

MEAN RADIUS = 12.175 [mm] 

CROSS SECTIONAL AREA = 150.797 [mm**2] 

TORSIONAL MOMENT OF INERTIA = 22499.900 [mm*M] 

ELASTIC COMPLIANCE DATA 

ESTIMATED AXIAL YIELD STRENGTH = 230.0 [MPa] 

ELASTIC MODULUS = 149.503 [GPa] 

REGRESSION COEFF. = 0.99818 

SHEAR MODULUS - = 53.187 [GPa] 

REGRESSION COEFF. = 0.99970 

CONSTANT RATE FATIGUE DATA 

CONTROL MODE - STRAIN 

AXIAL CONDITIONER SETTINGS : 

LOAD : 2 

STRAIN : 3 

STROKE : 2 

TORSIONAL CONDITIONER SETTINGS : 

LOAD : 2 

STRAIN : 2 

STROKE : 2 


AXIAL STRAIN LIMITS 

= +/- 

0.00250 

TORSIONAL STRAIN LIMITS 

= +/- 

0.00433 

AXIAL STRAIN RATE 


0.00100 [sec-1] 

TORSIONAL STRAIN RATE 


0.00173 [sec-1] 

AXIAL VOLTAGE LIMITS 

= +/- 

1.25526 

TORSIONAL VOLTAGE LIMITS 

* +/- 

2.07016 

PHASE SHIFT 

= 

0.00 [Degrees] 

TRIANGULAR WAVEFORM FREQUENCY = 

0.20 [Hz] 


TEST STARTED : Friday January 13, 1989 10:35:07 AM 

LAST CYCLE = 1500 


12 



REFERENCES 


1. Brown, M.H.; and Miller, K.J.: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechani- 

cal Engineers , Vol . 187, No. 65/73, 1973, pp. 745-755. 

2. Krempl , E.: The Influence of State of Stress on Low Cycle Fatigue of 

Structural Materials: A Literature Survey and Interpretive Report , ASTM 

STP-549 , ASTM, Philadelphia, 1974, pp. 1-46. 

3. Garud, Y.S.: Journal of Testing and Evaluation , Vol. 9, No. 3, May 1981, 

pp 165 _ 178> 

4. Brown, M.W.; and Miller, K.J.: Journal of Testing and Evaluation , Vol. 9, 

No. 4, July 1981, pp. 202-208. 

5. Lohr, R.D.; and Ellison, E.G.: Fatigue of Engineering Materials and 

Structures , Vol. 3, 1980, pp. 19-37. 

6. Penn, R.W.; Fong, J.T.; and Kearsley, E.A.: in Use of Computers in the 

Fatigue Laboratory , ASTM STP-613, H. Mindlin and R.W. Landgraf, Eds., 

ASTM, Philadelphia, 1976, pp. 78-93. 

7. Morror, J.: in Fatigue Design Handbook , SAE Advances in SAE Advances in 

Engineering, Vol. 4, J.A. Graham, Ed., 1968, pp. 21-28. 

8. Lesse, G.E.; and Morrow, J: in Multiaxial Fatigue , ASTM STP-853, 

K.J. Miller and M.W. Brown, Eds., ASTM, Philadelphia, 1985, pp. 482-496. 

9. Fuchs, H.O.; and Stephens, R.I.: Metal Fatigue in Engineering , John Wiley 

and Sons, 1980, p. 29. 

10. Bannantine, J.A.: "Observations of Tension and Torsion Fatigue Cracking 

Behavior and the Effect on Multiaxial Damage Correlations," University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champai gn , College of Engineering, Report No. 128, 

July 1986, pp. 79-95. 

11. Bonacuse, P.J.; and Kalluri, S.: "Results of Inphase Axi al -Torsional 

Fatigue Experiments on 304 Stainless Steel," NASA TM-101464, National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, DC, 1989. 

12. McGaw, M.A.; and Bartolotta, P.A.: in 4th Annual Hostile Environments and 
High Temperature Measurements Conference Proceedings , Society for Experi- 
mental Mechanics Inc., Bethel, 1987, pp. 12-29. 

13. Kanazawa, K.: Miller, K.J.; and Brown, M.W.: Fatigue of Engineering Mate- 

rials and Structures , Vol. 2, 1979, pp. 217-228. 

14. "Hastelloy Alloy X," Cabot Wrought Products Division, Cabot Corporation, 
Kokomo, IN, 1984, pp. 1-15. 

15. Halford, G.R.; McGaw, M.A.; Bill, R.C.; and Fanti , P.D.; in Low Cycle 
Fatigue , ASTM STP-942, H.D. Solomon, G.R. Halford, L.R. Kaisand, and 
B.N. Leis, Eds., ASTM, Philadelphia, 1988, pp. 625-637. 


13 



TABLE I. - SPECIFICATIONS OF THE 
AXIAL-TORSIONAL FATIGUE RIG 


Axial load, kN ±223 

Axial strain, 3 percent ±10.0 

Axial stroke, mm ±127 

Torsional load, kN-m ±2.26 

Torsional strain, 15 percent . . . ±4.2 

Torsional stroke, deg ±50 


3 Based on a gage length of 25 mm. 
^Equivalent to a twist amplitude of 5° 
within a 25-mm gage section. 


TABLE II. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE COMPUTER SYSTEM 

(a) 16-bit minicomputer (Data General S/20 
satel 1 i te computer) 


Clock speed, MHz 2 

RAM, kbytes 1024 

Winchester disk capacity, Mbytes 5 

Floppy drive capacity, Mbytes 1.2 


(b) Digital-analog converter 3 


Resolution, bits 12 

Number of channels 2 

Conversion time, ^isec 7 


(c) Anal og-to-digi tal converter and multiplexer 


Resolution, bits 12 

Number of channels 16 

Conversion time, jasec 7 

Multiplexer switching time, jisec 10 

Aperture, *isec 5 


(d) 32-bit superminicomputer (Data General MV/4000 
host computer) 


RAM, Mbytes 4 

Winchester disk capacity, Mbytes 354 

Drive capacity 

Tape drive, bits/in 800/1600 

Streaming tape drive, bits/in 800 

Floppy drive. Mbytes 1.2 

Multiprocessor communication subsystem 1 


3 Two digi tal -to-anal og converters are available. 

°Two floppy drives are available. Each has a 1.2-Mbyte 
capaci ty . 


14 











STRAIN 


TABLE III. - EXAMPLE OF OATA STORED IN AXIAL-TORSIONAL FATIGUE DATA FILE 



Axial data 


Torsional data 

Time, 

sec 

Stress, 

MPa 

Strain 

Stroke, 

mm 

Stress , 
MPa 

Strai n 

Stroke, 

deg 


-192.0 

-0.00171 


-104.4 

-0.00299 

-0.6348 

655.00 

-192.3 

-.00175 

■ IEwi 

-104.4 

-.00301 

-.8789 

655.01 

-192.7 

-.00175 

-.2791 

-104.4 

-.00305 

-.6470 

655.02 

-193.4 

-.00177 

-.2480 

-104.4 

-.00304 

-.9277 

655.03 

-193.0 

-.00178 

-.2170 

-103.5 

-.00306 

-.8789 

655.04 

-193.0 

-.00180 

-.0620 

-102.9 

-.00305 

-.8423 

655.05 

-193.4 

-.00179 

-.0310 

-101.1 

-.00302 

-.9033 

655.06 

-192.7 

-.00179 

-.1240 

-98.7 

-.00299 

-.7690 

655.07 

-192.7 

-.00180 

-.2170 

-97.2 

-.00296 

-.7690 

655.08 

-192.3 

-.00178 

-.2170 

-96.0 

-.00294 

-.9033 

655.09 



(A) INPHASE LOADING. (B) OUT-OF-PHASE LOADING. 

FIGURE 1. - INPHASE AND OUT-OF-PHASE AXIAL-TORSIONAL WAVEFORMS OF LOADING. 


15 














FIGURE 2. - AXIAL-TORSIONAL FATIGUE RIG 


86 RADIUS 


0.8 x 45 
CHAMFER - 


FIGURE 3. - GEOMETRY OF THIN-WALLED TUBULAR AXIAL -TORSIONAL FATIGUE SPECIMEN. ALL DIMENSIONS ARE GIVEN IN 
MILLIMETERS. 


0RJG1NAI PAGE 
NO Wl-flTF. PI-tOTBGRAPW 






NASA 

I 2.5 


C-88- 12399 


FIGURE A. - HIGH-TEMPERATURE AXIAL-TORSIONAL EXTENSOMETER 


PHOTOGRAPH 




FIGURE 5. - SCHEMATIC OF INTERFACE BETWEEN AXIAL-TORSIONAL FATIGUE RIG AND COMPUTER SYSTEM. 



FIGURE 6. - FLOW DIAGRAM FOR AXIAL-TORSIONAL 
FATIGUE TEST-CONTROL SOFTWARE. 


18 








UPPER LIMIT (+) 


AXIAL LOAD (kN) 


LOWER LIMIT (-) 


0 


TORSIONAL LOAD (kN-m) 



UPPER LIMIT (+) 


LOWER LIMIT (-) 


TIME 


FIGURE 7. - SCHEMATIC OF AXIAL AND TORSIONAL 
WAVEFORMS USED FOR THE DETERMINATION OF ELAS- 
TIC MODULI. 



FIGURE 8. - FLOW DIAGRAM DEPICTING EXECUTION OF AXIAL-TORSIONAL FATIGUE TEST. 


19 






< 




FIGURE 9. - HYSTERESIS LOOPS FOR INPHASE AXIAL-TORSIONAL FATIGUE TEST; 304 STAINLESS 
STEEL AT ROOM TEMPERATURE; CYCLE 1000. 



FIGURE 10. - CYCLIC HARDENING-SOFTENING 
BEHAVIOR OF INPHASE AXIAL-TORSIONAL 
FATIGUE TEST; 304 STAINLESS STEEL AT 
ROOM TEMPERATURE. 



TEMPERATURE, °C 

FIGURE 11. - VARIATION OF YOUNG'S AND 
SHEAR MODULI WITH TEMPERATURE FOR 
HASTELLOY X. 


20 


TORSIONAL AXIAL STRESS 

STRAIN MPa 


200 r— 




-200 1 1 1 

-.005 0 .005 

TORSIONAL 

STRAIN 



800 °C; CYCLE 532. 



CYCLE NUMBER, N 

FIGURE 13. - CYCLIC HARDENING-SOFTENING 
BEHAVIOR OF INPHASE AXIAL-TORSIONAL 
FATIGUE TEST; HASTELLOY X AT 800 °C. 


21 


IW\S/\ 

National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 


Report Documentation Page 


1. Report No. 


NASA TM- 102041 
AVSCOM TR 89-C-002 


2. Government Accession No. 


4. Title and Subtitle 


A Data Acquisition and Control Program for Axial-Torsional Fatigue Testing 


3. Recipient’s Catalog No. 


5. Report Date 


6. Performing Organization Code 


7. Author(s) 

Sreeramesh Kalluri and Peter J. Bonacuse 


8. Performing Organization Report No. 


E-4790 


10. Work Unit No. 


111. Contract or Grant No. 


13. Type of Report and Period Covered 
Technical Memorandum 


14. Sponsoring Agency Code 


9. Performing Organization Name and Address 505-63- IB 

NASA Lewis Research Center 

Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191 

, 11. Contract or Grant No. 

and 

Propulsion Directorate 

U.S. Army Aviation Research and Technology Activity— AVSCOM 

Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3127 13. Type of Report and Period Covered 

12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address Technical Memorandum 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Washington, D.C. 20546-0001 14. Sponsoring Agency Code 

and 

U.S. Army Aviation Systems Command 
St. Louis, Mo. 63120-1798 

15. Supplementary Notes 

Prepared for the Symposium on the Applications of Automation Technology to Fatigue and Fracture Testing 
sponsored by the American Society for Testing and Materials, Kansas City, Missouri, May 22-23, 1989. 

Sreeramesh Kalluri, Sverdrup Technology, Inc., NASA Lwis Research Center Group, Cleveland, Ohio 44135; 

Peter J. Bonacuse, Propulsion Directorate, U.S. Army Aviation Research and Technology Activity— AVSCOM. 

16. Abstract 

A computer program was developed for data acquisition and control of the axial-torsional fatigue experiments at 
NASA Lewis Research Center. The multitasked, interrupt-driven program was written in Pascal and assembler. This 
program is capable of dual-channel control and six-channel data acquisition. It can be utilized to perform inphase 
and out-of-phase axial-torsional isothermal fatigue or deformation experiments. The program was successfully 
used to conduct inphase axial-torsional fatigue experiments on 304 stainless steel at room temperature and on 
Hastelloy X at 800 °C. This paper describes the details of the software and gives some of the results generated to 
date. 


17. Key Words (Suggested by Author(s)) 

Axial-torsional fatigue; Computer-controls; Data acquisition; 
Inphase test; Out-of-phase test; Software development; 
Multitasking; Hysteresis loops 


18. Distribution Statement 

Unclassified — Unlimited 
Subject Category 39 


20. Security Classif. (of this page) 
Unclassified 


21. No of pages 
22 


22. Price* 


NASA FORM 1626 OCT 66 


*For sale by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161 





