NASA Contractor Report 1 85662 



The Effect of On/Off Indicator Design on 
State Confusion, Preference, and 
Response Time Performance 



Kimberly A. Donner, Kritina L. Holden, and 
Meera K. Manahan 



CONTRACT NAS9-17900 
March 1991 



LESC 29239 



(NASA-CR-185o62) THE EFFECT OF ON/OFF N<?2-1241b 

INDICATOR DESIGN ON STATE CONTUSION, 

PREFERENCE, ANO RESPONSE TIME PERFORMANCE, 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY (Lockheed Engineering and Unclas 

Sciences Co.) 36 p CSCL 05H G3/54 0043226 



]\J/\SA 



( ^ 



NASA Contractor Report 185662 
LESC 29239 



The Effect of On/Off Indicator Design on 
State Confusion, Preference, and 
Response Time Performance 



Kimberly A. Donner, Kritina L. Holden, and Meera K. Manahan 
Lockheed Engineering and Science Company 
Houston, Texas 



Prepared for 
Johnson Space Center 
under Contract NAS9-17900 



IVI/NSA 

National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration 



1991 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Paae 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

LIST OF TABLES . i i i 

LIST OF FIGURES i v 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS v 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS _ v i 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1 

1.0 INTRODUCTION 3 

2.0 METHOD 7 

2.1 Subjects 7 

2.2 Apparatus and Stimuli ___„ 7 

2.3 Experimental Task „ 8 

2.4 Procedure "I 

3.0 RESULTS 1 1 

3.1 Indicator State Analysis, 11 

3.2 Response Time Analysis 1 4 

3.3 Subjective Rating Analysis 1 6 

3.4 Correlation Analysis __ 18 

4.0 INDICATOR DESIGN DISCUSSION _ 1 9 

4.1 Reverse Video Indicator ,_ 19 

4.2 Color Indicator .. 20 

4.3 Reverse Video with Check Indicator 21 

5.0 OVERALL DISCUSSION 2 1 



TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont.) 

Page 

6.0 REFERENCES 2 3 

7.0 APPENDIX 24 

7.1 Indicator Rating Forms 25 

7.2 General Questionnaire 27 



1 1 



LIST OF TABLES 



TABLE PAGE 

1. Response frequency as a function of 

indicator design. 1 3 

2. Mean response time (RT) as a function of 
indictor design and display background. 1 5 

3. Mean subjective rating as a function of 
indicator design and display background. 1 7 



1 1 1 



LIST OF FIGURES 



FIGURE 




PAGE 


1. 


Example of an indicator display. 


5 



Example of a query display. 9 

Mean response time (RT) as a function 

of indicator design and display 

background. 1 6 

Mean subjective rating of the indicator 

designs by display background. 1 8 



IV 



ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

ANOVA Analysis of Variance 
HCI Hum an -Computer Interface 

LESC Lockheed Engineering & Sciences Company 

NASA National Aeronautics and Space 

Administration 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This research was supported by Contract No. NAS9-17900 from the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and conducted in the 
Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory, Johnson Space Center, Houston, 
Texas. The authors wish to thank Dr. Marianne Rudisill, the NASA 
technical monitor, for her extensive review of the document. Her 
comments were invaluable. 



VI 



THE EFFECT OF ON/OFF INDICATOR DESIGN ON STATE 
CONFUSION, PREFERENCE, AND RESPONSE TIME 

PERFORMANCE 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

An important Human Factors design challenge is the translation 
of human-machine interfaces from primarily hardware systems to 
primarily software systems. Environments such as aircraft cockpits, 
automobile instrument panels and manufacturing control panels have 
become increasingly software-based. The hardware buttons, switches 
and lights used in the past are being replaced with on-screen software- 
based graphical representations (icons) of these hardware objects. 

This hardware-to-software conversion offers both advantages 
and disadvantages within the human-computer interface (HCI). In the 
present study, the HCI challenge is the display of objects that do not 
lend themselves easily to graphical representation (e.g., indicator 
lights). This study investigates five designs of software-based ON/OFF 
indicators in a hypothetical Space Station Power System monitoring 
task. The hardware equivalent of the indicators used in the present 
study is the traditional indicator light that illuminates an "ON" label or 
an "OFF" label. Coding methods used to represent the active state (i.e., 
"ON" or "OFF") were reverse video, color, frame, check or reverse video 
with check. Display background color (i.e., black, white) was also 
varied. Subjects made judgments concerning the state of indicators 
that resulted in very low error rates and high percentages of agreement 
across indicator designs. Response time measures for each of the five 



indicator designs did not differ significantly, although subjects 
reported that color was the best communicator. The impact of these 
results on indicator design is discussed. 



THE EFFECT OF ON/OFF INDICATOR DESIGN ON STATE 
CONFUSION, PREFERENCE, AND RESPONSE TIME 

PERFORMANCE 

1.0 INTRODUCTION 

With the increasing computerization of traditionally mechanical 
systems, environments such as aircraft cockpits, power plant control 
panels and even automobile instrument panels have become increasingly 
software-based. While providing many advantages such as flexibility 
and conservation of space, this modernization of interfaces may be a 
mixed blessing. Little is known about translating a hardware interface 
to a software representation. Although there has been a reasonable 
amount of human factors research dedicated to investigating the 
perception and use of status indicators, this research has been focused 
primarily on hardware implementations (e.g., lights, knobs, and dials), 
and not the software representation of this information. One analog to 
this problem does exist and has received some attention: the 
conversion of hard copy textual information into a software 
representation. 

Shneiderman (Ref. 4) has listed the advantages and disadvantages 
of making technical manuals available on the computer, as opposed to 
traditional hard copy manuals. Advantages of the computerized display 
of information include the capability to easily update information, the 
capability to present information graphically or through animation, and 
the compactness of the physical area required for the information 



display (i.e., monitor size). Disadvantages of computer-based displays 
include the comparatively poorer readability of display screens over 
hard copy, and the lower amount of information available per unit 
(display screen versus printed page). 

A challenge specific to the conversion from hardware to software 
displays is the software representation of objects or attributes that 
are not readily representable in a graphical computer display. This 
challenge may take the form of the conversion of hardware ON/OFF 
lights that represent system status to the software representations of 
these indicator lights. Hardware ON/OFF lights generally consist of one 
of three designs: (1) two separately labeled indicator lights (one 
labelled "ON" and one labeled "OFF"), (2) one indicator light that 
represents "ON" when illuminated and "OFF" when unilluminated, and (3) 
one indicator light with two areas, one labeled "ON" and one labeled 
"OFF". The advantage to the last design is that it provides for quick and 
easy scanning. Position differences and the overall pattern formed by 
the lights make the identification of off-nominal situations less 
difficult (illustrated by the ON/OFF indicators shown in Figure 1). 

Lights that are turned "ON" are generally represented two- 
dimensionally on hard-copy paper versions through the use of color or 
reverse video (as in Figure 1). Is this solution a viable one for the 
software-based display of indicator lights, or should the display 
designer adopt a non-traditional solution (e.g., use of checks or frames) 
in lieu of attempting to replicate the hardware design? These are the 
kinds of design questions facing display designers of interfaces for 
systems that have traditionally been hardware-based. 



DATE: 1 -DEC- 1999 
TIME: 19:00:00 



DMS NETWORK 

DMS OFF 

GN&C OFF 

C&T OFF 

EPS OFF 



D&C TESTBED 

D&C MPAC ON 

ADS DRIVER OFF 

DADS DRIVER OFF 

EF MODEL OFF 

ACTIVE MODEL OFF 

PUMA STATUS OFF 

IRIS STATUS OFF 



GEPDC - NOMINAL MONITORING 



] 



Array 


Payload Consumption 


v 
Port 


v 
Stbd 










OFF 




ON 

D 




OFF 






PL- 1 




PL -2 




PL -3 





c 



STATION 



TCS - TEMP 



j 



ON 



OFF 



Figure 1. Example of an indicator display. 



An example of the hardware-to-software interface migration 
problem is the design of the human-computer interface for Space 
Station Freedom. All past and present spacecraft interfaces have been 
primarily hardware-based. For example, the Space Shuttle workspace 
consists of approximately 2,000 switches and indicators. The 
interface for Space Station Freedom will be almost entirely software- 
based. Controls that have traditionally been switches to be manually 
flipped will now be software switches or buttons that will be 
activated via a direct manipulation control device (e.g., trackball). 
Indicators that have been represented by a bank of lights will now be 



represented in a software display. The design of these types of 
software indicators is the challenge addressed in the present study. 

The criticality of optimal coding for ON/OFF indicators is 
obvious. If a binary indicator (e.g., "ON", "OFF") is misinterpreted, a 
conclusion in direct opposition to the truth is made. At best, a 
misreading of the indicator may result in lost time and wasted effort; 
at worst, such a confusion of indicator state may result in costly, 
possibly dangerous decisions and actions. Crew member judgments or 
assessments about the health of a system rely on the correct 
interpretation of these indicators. The importance of optimal coding in 
these situations cannot be overstated. For this reason, standards exist 
in the space program as well as in other settings regarding binary 
coded indicators (e.g., Ref. 2). Unfortunately, although most standards 
documents maintain that binary coding must be unambiguous, the 
method for achieving this is often unspecified. 

The impetus for the present work was a noted difference in 
individuals' perception of a software display showing the ON/OFF state 
of indicators coded with reverse video (the typical paper 
representation). Several reviewers of a preliminary Space Station 
prototype display expressed confusion over the actual state (i.e., ON or 
OFF) of indicators in which the active state was coded with reverse 
video. This confusion had not been noted with preliminary paper 
versions of the displays. The goal of the present work was to 
determine if the reverse video coding was actually a problem and, more 
globally, which of a number of ON/OFF indicator designs' is optimal for 
communicating status information on a software display. Display 



background color was examined in conjunction with the indicator 

designs. 

Since this study was spawned from subjective report, and there 
is evidence in the human performance literature that subjective report 
of performance does not always match actual objective performance 
(Ref. 3), subjective ratings of indicator ability to communicate were 
collected for analysis in addition to the traditional response and 
response time measures. This allowed measurement not only of 
preference for the particular indicators studied, but also allowed 
comparison of the objective and subjective reports of performance. 

2.0 METHOD 

2.1 Subjects 

Ten Lockheed Engineering & Sciences Company (LESC) employees 
voluntarily participated in the study. All subjects had experience with 
a computer and a mouse. 

2.2 Apparatus and Stimuli 

The experiment was conducted on a Macintosh llx with a 13-inch 
color monitor. The experiment was programmed in Supercard. Stimuli 
consisted of five displays, one for each of the five ON/OFF indicator 
designs. The indicators were embedded in a hypothetical Space Station 
monitoring display (see Figure 1). The indicators all contained the 
central rectangular ON/OFF components, but varied in the highlighting 



method used to show activation (i.e., "ON" or "OFF"). The five methods 
(illustrated in Appendix 7.1) included: (1) frame, (2) check, (3) color 
(cyan blue), (4) reverse video, and (5) reverse video with check. The 
frame and check display methods represent non-traditional coding 
while the color and reverse video display methods represent the more 
traditional coding methods used on paper. The reverse video with check 
was investigated for a redundancy advantage. All indicator designs 
were typical representations used in engineering software displays. 

Each design was presented on both a black display background and 
a white display background, creating a total of ten different display 
stimuli. In the reverse video condition, the highlight was the color 
opposite the background color. For example, on the white background 
trials, black was used as the highlight, while on the black background 
trials, white was the highlight. 

2.3 Experimental Task 

The experimental task involved the presentation of an initial 
display querying the status of a particular ON/OFF indicator, followed 
by a Space Station Power System monitoring display on which the 
subject was to make a response. The first display contained a question 
such as, "What is the current status of the PL-2 indicator?". 
When the subject had read the question and was ready to view the 
display, the subject clicked on a "Ready" button located below the 
question. Figure 2 shows an example of the query display. When the 
"Ready" button was clicked, the monitoring display appeared. The task- 
relevant portion of the display consisted of a section of three ON/OFF 

8 



What is the current status of the PL- 2 indicator? 

READY 



Figure 2. Example of a query display. 

indicators labelled "PL-1," "PL-2," and "PL-3" with various 
combinations of ON/OFF states represented (i.e., sometimes all "ON," 
sometimes all "OFF," sometimes a mixture of "ON" and "OFF"). Subjects 
were told that any combination of the indicators could be "ON" or "OFF" 
during any trial. The placement of the highlights on the three 
indicators was controlled such that each pattern formed by the three 
highlights occurred on an equal number of trials. 

Two response buttons labeled "ON" and "OFF" were located at the 
bottom of the display. After scanning the display for the status of the 
queried indicator, subjects clicked on the "ON" or "OFF" button as 



quickly as possible. No feedback was provided to subjects during the 
experiment concerning the correctness of their response. In order to 
reduce the motor component of the response time, subjects were 
instructed not to move the mouse after clicking on the "Ready" button 
of the query display until they were prepared to answer the indicator 
question. Leaving the cursor on that point placed the cursor midway 
between the ON/OFF response buttons. After responding to the 
indicator screen, the next query display appeared. 

2.4 Procedure 

In addition to written instructions, subjects were given a 
practice session consisting of ten trials in order to gain familiarity 
with the indicator displays and the experimental procedure. Two of 
each of the five indicator designs were randomly presented during the 
practice session. After training, subjects began the experimental 
session and were told to respond as quickly and accurately as possible. 

Subjects completed two blocks (240 trials) of performance 
separated by a rest break. Trials were blocked by background color so 
subjects received 120 trials on a black background and 120 trials on a 
white background. The order of the blocks was randomly assigned. 
Within each background block, subjects received 24 instances of each 
of the 5 indicator designs. Query displays and indicator designs varied 
randomly within a block. 

After each block, subjects completed an indicator design rating 
scale for the particular display background (see Appendix 7.1). The 
rating scale asked subjects to rate the capability of each indicator to 

10 



communicate ON/OFF status. At the end of the experiment, subjects 
completed a general questionnaire that queried preferences for display 
background color and previous experience with hardware and ON/OFF 
indicators (see Appendix 7.2). Subjects were debriefed and any 
questions were answered. 

3.0 RESULTS 

Three measures of indicator display effectiveness were analyzed: 
(1) indicator state responses, (2) response times to indicate the state, 
and (3) subjective ratings of the effectiveness of the indicators. 
Because the initial impetus for the study involved confusion over 
indicator state, responses were evaluated for degree of agreement. 
Response times and subjective ratings served as usability measures. 
An additional analysis was performed to determine the correlation 
between subjective rating and performance with each indicator display 
design. 

3.1 Indicator State Analysis 

The capability to analyze response data depends upon an 
objective, operational definition of what constitutes an ON state 
versus an OFF state. Therefore, when reference is made to an ON 
indicator or an indicator that is coded as "ON," the reference implies 
that the portion of the indicator labeled "ON" has been enhanced with a 
method of highlighting (e.g., coded with reverse video, colored, 
enhanced with a check, frame, or reverse video and check). Thus, 

1 1 



"actual". ON/OFF status refers to the experimental manipulation (i.e., 
addition of highlighting to the "ON" or "OFF" label) and "perceived" 
ON/OFF status refers to the state that the subject perceives, which 
may or may not reflect the intent of the experimenter's coding. Thus, 
the measure of interest is the percentage of agreement among the 
subjects regarding indicator state. 

The indicator state response analysis compared frequency of 
responses (i.e., "ON" or "OFF") across the five indicator designs. 
Collapsed across display background, subjects had been presented with 
120 indicators highlighting an ON state and 120 indicators highlighting 
an OFF state for a queried indicator (i.e., PL-1, PL-2, PL-3). In the 
absence of indicator state confusion, there should be consistency 
within and across subjects regarding the reported indicator state (i.e., 
subjects should consistently choose the ON option for all indicators 
which highlight the ON state and should chose the OFF option for those 
trials in which the indicator's OFF state is highlighted). 

"Confusion" was defined by the number of responses to the non- 
highlighted indicator option, divided by the number of displays in which 
the opposite indicator state was highlighted. For example, indicator 
design confusion was defined as (1) the number of ON responses made 
to an OFF-highlighted design, divided by the total number of OFF- 
highlighted displays presented, and (2) the number of OFF responses 
made to an ON-highlighted design, divided by the total number of ON- 
highlighted displays presented. 

Overall, subjects were consistent in their selections. Across all 
indicator display designs, when the highlight was applied to the ON 
section of the indicator, only 1.33 % of the total responses were OFF 

12 



responses. Similarly, when the OFF option was highlighted, the ON 
option was selected only 1.83 % of the time. 

Table 1 reports the response frequency pattern for the five 
indicators, collapsed across the two display backgrounds. The reverse 
video with check indicator resulted in the least overall state confusion 
(1.04 %). The highest overall rate of state confusion was obtained with 
the check indicator (2.29 %). 

Table 1. Response frequency as a function of indicator design (collapsed across 
display background color). 













Percent 










Percent 


Overall 


Indicator 


State 






State 


State 


Design 


Highlighted 


Subject Response 


Confusion 


Confusion 






ON 


OFF 






Frame 


CM 


237 


3 


1.25 






OFF 


3 


237 


1.25 


1.25 


Check 


CN 


238 


2 


0.83 






OFF 


9 


231 


3.75 


2.29 


Color 


CN 


239 


1 


0.42 






OFF 


5 


235 


2.08 


1.25 


Reverse Video 


CN 


232 


8 


3.33 






OFF 


2 


238 


0.83 


2.08 


Reverse Video 


CN 


238 


2 


0.83 




with Check 


OFF 


3 


237 


1.25 


1.04 



Comparisons of the two display backgrounds show that the 
overall confusion of indicators was identical (1.59 %) for both the 



13 



black and the white display backgrounds. Formal statistical analyses 
of the state response data were not undertaken due to the small cell 
sizes. In summary, the indicator state response summary revealed 
virtually no measurable state confusion for any of the indicator 
designs. With minimal exposure and training, all designs communicated 
state information effectively. 

3.2 Response Time Analysis 

Response time reflects the delay (in seconds) between the onset 
of the display being monitored and the "ON" or "OFF" response given by 
the subject. Mean response times as a function of indicator display 
design and display background are shown in Table 2. The fastest 
response time was obtained for the color coded indicator, while the 
slowest was found for the check indicator. Note that response times 
are slightly faster for black backgrounds than for white backgrounds. A 
2 (Background Color) x 5 (Indicator Display Design) within-subjects 
ANOVA revealed that neither the display background color differences 
nor the indicator design differences were significant (£ (1,9) * 1.59, p_ < 
.24 and E (4,36) = 1.59, p_ < .20 respectively). 



14 



Table 2. Mean response time (RT) as a function of indicator design and display 
background. 





Display Backc. 






Indicator Desian 
Frame 


Black 


White 


Overall Mean RT 


2.14 


2.12 


2.13 


Check 


2.10 


2.18 


2.14 


Color 


2.06 


2.13 


2.09 


Reverse Video 


2.09 


2.16 


2.12 


Reverse Video 








with Check 


2.03 


2.17 


2.10 


Overall Mean RT 


2.08 


2.15 





Note . Mean response times are reported in seconds. 

The interaction between the two factors was significant (F (4,36) 
= 2.63, p_ < -05). This interaction is shown in Figure 3. Simple main 
effects of indicator design at display background, and display 
background at indicator display, were not significant (p_ < .05). 

The significant interaction may possibly be explained by response 
time patterns associated with the frame and reverse video with check 
indicator designs. The fastest response times under one display 
background were associated with slow response times in the other 
display background for these indicators. Also, although responses to 
indicators on black backgrounds were slightly faster than responses to 
indicators on white backgrounds, the opposite pattern occurred with 
the frame design. 



15 




White Background 
H Black Background 



Frame Check Color RV RV/Check 

Indicator Design 

Figure 3. Mean response time (RT) as a function of indicator design and display 
background. 

3.3 Subjective Rating Analysis 

Following each block of performance, subjects were asked to rate 
the effectiveness of each indicator to communicate the ON/OFF state. 
The scale ranged from 1 (low level of communication) to 10 (high level 
of communication), with verbal anchors of "low", "medium", and "high" 
(see Appendix 7.1). The mean ratings of display background and 
indicator design combinations can be seen in Table 3. Although 
indicators on white backgrounds were generally judged to be more 
effective communicators than indicators on black backgrounds (mean 
subjective judgement: white = 7.01, black = 6.59), the main effect of 
display background was not significant (£ (1,9) = 2.24, d_ < .17). 



16 



Table 3. Mean subjective rating as a function of indicator design and display background 
(the rating scale ranged from 1 [low ability to communicate indicator status] to 10 [high 
ability to communicate]). 





Displav Background 




Indicator Design 


Black 


White 


Overall Mean Ratina 


Frame 


5.80 


5.90 


5.85 


Check 


5.00 


4.70 


4.85 


Color 


8.85 


9,20 


9.02 


Reverse Video 


6.30 


7.45 


6.88 


Reverse Video 








with Check 


7.00 


7.80 


7.40 



Overall Mean Rating 6.59 7.01 

The main effect of indicator design was significant, (F (4,36) = 
10.36, p_ < 0001). A Student-Newman-Keuls post-hoc test of indicator 
design collapsed across display background color reveals that the color 
indicator resulted in significantly higher ratings (mean = 9.02) than any 
of the other indicator designs. The reverse video with check indicator 
design was rated significantly higher (mean » 7.40) than the frame and 
check indicator designs (means = 5.85 and 4.85, respectively), but was 
not significantly different from the reverse video indicator design 
(mean - 6.88). The reverse video indicator was not different from the 
frame indicator, but was rated significantly higher than the check 
indicator. The least preferred indicator designs, the frame and the 
check, were not significantly different from each other. 



17 



The Indicator Design X Display Background interaction was not 
significant (£ (4, 36) = 1 .27, p_ < .30). Mean subjective rating of the 
indicator designs by display background is shown in Figure 4. 



■ Black Background 
E2 White Background 




Frame Check Color RV RV/Check 

Indicator Design 

Figure 4. Mean subjective rating of the indicator designs by display background. 

3.4 Correlation Analysis 

The following analyses were conducted in order to determine 
whether indicator preference was related to response time differences. 
Because the background color did not differentially affect either 
response time or preference, the correlation analyses were collapsed 
across background color. None of the correlations between indicator 
rating and corresponding response time for each of the indicators were 
significant at the p_ < .05 level. The relationship between performance 
and preference was greatest for the frame indicator (i - .29), but the 
remainder of the indicators had very low correlations between 



18 



response time and preference rating (color, i - - .07; check, £ = - .06; 
reverse video with check, i = .03; reverse video, i = .02). 

4.0 INDICATOR DESIGN DISCUSSION 

All of the present data indicate that variations on basic ON/OFF 
indicator design matters little to actual task performance. The designs 
in the present study were representative of typical engineering display 
designs. It appears that any design that reasonably highlights the 
appropriate state will yield acceptable performance without state 
confusion. It is also clear that subjective rating of an indicator does 
not correlate with performance. Three of the indicators merit 
individual discussion. 

4.1 Reverse Video Indicator 

Although the present study was initiated as a result of an 
anecdotal report of indicator state confusion with the use of reverse 
video indicators, the empirical results do not support the hypothesis 
that this type of indicator coding results in state confusion. In the 
present study, while performance with the reverse video condition had 
the second largest number of confusion errors, this number was 
virtually insignificant (10 out of 480 judgments). The reverse video 
indicator fell in the middle range of indicators in terms of response 
time performance. In terms of the ability to communicate status 
information, the reverse video indicator was rated next to last in 
effectiveness. Although significant detriments with the reverse video 

19 



coding were not found in this experiment, the trends are in agreement 
with other human factors literature on reverse video coding. For 
example, Donner, McKay, Gillan and Rudisill (Ref. 1) found reverse video 
to be a poor highlighting technique in a search task. In that study, 
response times to items on complex alphanumeric displays highlighted 
by reverse video were significantly slower than response times to 
flashing and color-highlighted items. Present results do not justify a 
recommendation against the use of reverse video but do suggest 
cautious, judicious use of this display design. 

4.2 Color Indicator 

The subjective preference for color without a performance 
benefit that was found in this study is consistent with other research 
on color. A study by Tullis (Ref. 5) concluded that color coding was no 
more beneficial than achromatic shape coding to performance; however, 
color was viewed by subjects to be pleasing or stimulating. In the 
present experiment, color was subjectively rated as a better 
communicator than the other indicator designs, although performance 
in the color condition was equal to performance in all other indicator 
design conditions. It is worth noting also that the color coding 
associated with the indicators was the only use of color on the entire 
display. Consequently, any effect of color found in the experiment 
would likely be artificially elevated due to the saliency of the color 
code. The subjective ratings of the helpfulness of color may have been 
influenced by its saliency in the present context. In typical real-world 



20 



displays, color is often used throughout the display, diluting the 
attention-attracting value of color. 

4.3 Reverse Video with Check Indicator 

The expected overall redundancy advantage for the reverse video 
with check condition was not found. In addition, it is unclear why there 
would be a redundancy effect for the black background and not for the 
white background. In terms of subjective preference, the reverse video 
with check condition was rated in the middle range of effectiveness as 
an indicator. 

This redundant indicator may be of value in situations where 
there are multiple uses of reverse video on the display. In general, 
however, given the extra display "real-estate" needed for this 
indicator, there is little justification for recommending it over and 
above the other indicators. 

5.0 OVERALL DISCUSSION 

The environments that incorporate ON/OFF indicators into their 
human-computer interface are typically those in which emphasis is 
placed on the accuracy of judgments and actions rather than on the 
speed of judgments and actions. Consequently, the reliability of 
perception of an ON/OFF indicator is of utmost importance. State 
confusions of binary indicators can have especially grave consequences. 
The present data reveal that all of the indicators presented, including 
those that mimic the hardware/paper equivalent and those that do not, 

21 



produce equal user performance. With the minimal training given in 
this experiment, subjects had no trouble interpreting the state of the 
indicators and performed status decisions with equal speed. There 
still remains the possibility that more performance differences would 
have been seen with increased task difficulty. The present task was 
extremely simple, required little training and was basically a one-step 
recognition task. If several such recognitions or complex decisions 
based on the indicators were required, it is possible that greater 
performance differences among the indicator designs would have 

emerged. 

In addition, it is possible that a highly colorful and/or dense 
display would either negate the benefit of the single color highlight or 
dilute the salience of the indicators and alter the results found in the 
present study. One hypothesis for failing to support the anecdotal 
reports of state confusion could be related to variations in brightness 
level. During subsequent review of the Space Station prototype display 
which was the impetus for the present study, it was noted that the 
white ON/OFF highlight seemed noticeably brighter than the other 
colors. It is unclear whether this effect was caused by such factors as 
facility lighting or display monitor settings. Under these conditions, 
the anecdotal reports of confusion of indicator state may be attributed 
to conflicting highlighting (e.g., brightness coding of the white 
highlight competing with the black and white reverse video coding). 
This would result in the reported state confusion and could be another 
reason to be cautious about the use of reverse video. 

Unfortunately, display design is generally taken for granted until 
there are catastrophic errors or complaints from the users. With the 

22 



growing number of software interfaces that represent hardware 
components, the problem of representing hardware components via 
software will become increasingly pervasive. Much more research 
needs to be performed on the design of software representations of 
hardware. The present research is one step in that direction. 

6.0 REFERENCES 

1. Donner, K. A., McKay, T., Gillan, D. J., & Rudisill, M. (1990, April). 
The effects of display format, highlighted item and highlighting 
technique on search/identification tasks. Interactive Poster 
presented at the CHI '90 Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, Seattle, WA. 

2. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. (October, 1989). 
Man-systems integration standards (NASA-STD-3000, Vol. 1, 
Revision A). Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. 

3. Schwartz, D. R. (1988). The impact of task characteristics on 
display format effects. Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting 
of the Human Factors Society, 352-356. 

4. Shneiderman, B. (1987). Designing the user interface: Strategies 
for effective human-computer interaction. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley. 

5. Tullis, T. S. (1981). An evaluation of alphanumeric, graphic, and 
color information displays. Human Factors, 23, 541-550. 



23 



7.0 APPENDIX 



24 



7.1 Indicator Rating Forms 

Black Display Background 



|0n a scale of 1 to 1 0, rate the ability of each indicator to communicate 
the 'ON/OFF' status. NOTE: These indicators are on a black background. 



OFF v/^^J OFF 



J_l I I L 



1234 56789 10 
low ^^^^^■medium^^^^^Hhighl 

J I I L 



1234 56789 10 
How ^^^^^■mediurn^^^^HhTghl 

I 1 I I I I I 



234 56789 10 
llow^^^^^^^rrJediurn^^^^Bhigh] 



ON ^^H UN 

EB BO 



234 56789 10 
low ^^^^^■rnedium^^^^^Hhigh| 

J I I I I 



1234 56789 10 
How ^^^^^■medium^^^^^Hhigh] 



25 



ORIGINAL PAGE 
COLOR PHOTOGRAPH 



White Display Background 



On a scale of 1 to 1 0, rate the ability of each indicator to communicate 
the 'ON/OFF' status. NOTE: These indicators are on a white background. 



s/ 



ON 


n/ 


ON 


n/ 


ON 


OFF 


OFF 


OFF 



n/ 




ON 



v/ 



OFF 



n/ 




ON 





OFF 



ON 





OFF 




OFF 



ON 




ON 




ON 


OFF 


OFF 


OFF 




OFF 



ON 




J I L 



J L 



1234 56789 10 
low medium high 

L_J I I I I I I I I 

1234 56789 10 

low medium high 

I 1 I I I I I I I I 

1234 56789 10 

low medium high 



1 1 


1 


, 


1 1 1 


, 


1 , 


1 2 


3 


4 


5 6 7 


8 


9 10 


low 
1 1 


I 


1 


medium 

1 1 1 


1 


high 
1 1 


1 2 


3 


4 


5 6 7 


8 


9 10 


low 






medium 




high 



26 



ORIGINAL PAGE 
COLOR PHOTOGRAPH 



7.2 General Questionnaire 



General Questionnaire 



Subject Number: 
Sex: 



Which display screen background color do you prefer? Black 



White 



Have you ever seen or used a computer display with 'On'/'Off' 

indicators? 

Yes 



No 



What kind of computer do you typically use? IBM 



Macintosh 



Can you think of any other indicators that could communicate 'On'/'Off 
state information? 



27 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 



Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 



Public reporting burden for this collection of Information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
m»Tn1»Z« the data needed and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of Information. 
S£ su gg «t1ons foT^udng thr^den. ?o W«hTgt n Headquarters Services. Directorate for information Operations and Reports. 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway. Suite 1204. Arilngton. VA 
22202^1302, and to the Office of Management and Budget. Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0 188). Washington. DC 20503. 



1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 



2. 



REPORT DATE 

March 1991 



REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Contractor Report 



4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE . „ _, . n , . 

The Effect of On/Off Indicator Design on State Confusion, 
Preference, and Response Time Performance 



6 Kimberly A. Donner (LESC), Krltlna L. Holden (LESC), and 
Meera K. Manahan (LESC) 



7 PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Lockheed Engineering and Space Company 
2400 NASA Road One C95 
Houston, Texas 77058 



9 SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory 
Johnson Space Center 
Houston, Texas 77058 



5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

NAS9-17900 



PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

LESC 29239 



10. SPONSORING /MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

CR 185662 



11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES „.,,,, IP n^ 

Technical monitor - Marianne Rudisill/SP34 



12a. DISTRIBUTION /AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Unlimited/Unclassified 



12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 



13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) ..__ ,,..._ ._ 

This study Investigates five designs of software-based ON/OFF indicators In a 
hypothetical Space Station Power System monitoring task. The hardware equivalent of the 
indicators used in the present study 1s the traditional Indicator light that illuminates 
an "ON" label or an "OFF" label. Coding methods used to represent the active state 
(1 e., "ON" or "OFF") were reverse video, color, frame, check or reverse video with 
check. Display background color (I.e., black, white) was also varied. Subjects made 
judgments concerning the state of indicators that resulted in very low error rates and 
hiqh percentages of agreement across Indicator designs. Response time measures for each 
of the five indicator designs did not differ significantly, although subjects reported 
that color was the best communicator. The Impact of these results on indicator design 
Is discussed. 



14. SUBJECTTERMS ,,.„.,, 

Human-Computer Interface (HCI) 

Human Factors 

Indicators 



17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 



Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std 239-18 



18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 



19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 



15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

35 



16. PRICE CODE 



20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

Unlimited 



