NASA Technical Memorandum 83605 


Operating System for a Real-Time 
Multiprocessor Propulsion 
System Simulator 


Gary L. Cole 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland , Ohio 


Prepared for the 

Summer Computer Simulation Conference 
sponsored by the Society for Computer Simulation 
Boston, Massachusetts, July 23-25, 1984 


fW\SA 


OPERATING SYSTEM FOR A REAL-TIME MULTIPROCESSOR 


PROPULSION SYSTEM SIMULATOR 


Gary L. Cole 


National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 


ABSTRACT 

The NASA Lewis Research Center is developing 
and evaluating experimental hardware and software 
systems to help meet future needs for real-time, 
high-fidelity simulations of air-breathing propul- 
sion systems. Specifically, the Real-Time Multi- 
processor Simulator project focuses on the use of 
multiple microprocessors to achieve the required 
computing speed and accuracy at relatively low 
cost. Operating systems for such hardware configu- 
rations are generally not available. This paper 
describes the Real-Time Multiprocessor Operating 
System (RTMPOS) that has been developed at NASA- 
Lewis. The RTMPOS provides the user with a versa- 
tile, interactive means for loading, running, 
debugging and obtaining results from a multipro- 
cessor-based simulator. A front-end processor (FEP) 
serves as Che simulator controller and interface 
between the user and the simulator. These functions 
are facilitated by the RTMPOS which resides on the 
FEP. 

The RTMPOS acts in conjunction with the FEP's 
manufacturer-supplied disk operating system that 
provides typical utilities like an assembler, link- 
age editor, text editor, file handling services, 
etc. Once a simulation is formulated, the RTMPOS 
provides for engineering-level, run-time operations 
such as loading, modifying and specifying computa- 
tion flow of programs, simulator mode control, data 
handling artd run-time monitoring. Run-time moni- 
toring is a powerful feature of RTMPOS that allows 
the user to record all actions taken during a simu- 
lation session and to receive advisories from the 
simulator via the FEP. The RTMPOS is programmed 
mainly in PASCAL along with some assembly language 
routines. The RTMPOS software is easily modified to 
be applicable to hardware from different 
manufacturers . 

INTRODUCTION 

Simulations of complex dynamic systems require 
a versatile interface between the user and the simu- 
lation computer. In order to maximize the useful- 
ness of the simulation as an engineering tool, the 
interface should provide a user-friendly means of 
programming, interacting with and obtaining results 
from the simulation. In the past, different types 
of computers have satisfied some but not all of 
these requirements. For example, the use of analog 
computing equipment provides immediate results and 
an extremely versatile user/simulator interactive 
capability. But programming and changing of the 
program can be difficult. On the other hand, digi- 
tal computers are more easily programmed but their 
operating systems are generally not designed to pro- 
vide the interactive capabilities needed for many 
simulation tasks. 


Simulations are becoming more sophisticated in 
terms of the complexity of the systems being modeled 
and in the level of model details being sought. 
Therefore, the computer hardware and associated 
operating systems that are needed to support these 
simulation efforts, in real time, are also becoming 
more complex. An example is the Real-Time Multipro- 
cessor Simulator (RTMPS) being studied at the NASA 
Lewis Research Center. The objective of the RTMPS 
project is to develop and evaluate experimental 
hardware and software systems for real-time inter- 
active simulation of air-breathing propulsion sys- 
tems. The RTMPS project is focusing on the use of 
multiple microprocessors to achieve the required 
computing speed and accuracy at low cost relative to 
hybrid and main frame digital computers. 

University grant and contract efforts related 
to the RTMPS project are described in Refs. 1 to 4. 
These include investigations of computer architec- 
ture and related hardware requirements (l), 
approaches to partitioning simulation models for 
solution on multiple microprocessors (2,3) and 
requirements for high-level programming languages 
for multiple processor systems (4). 

The NASA-Lewis m-house efforts, to date, are 
documented in this paper and m Refs* 5 and 6. The 
general multiprocessor simulator concept is 
described in Ref. 5. The experimental hardware con- 
figuration now in use at Lewis is described in this 
paper and m Ref. 6 Reference 6 also describes a 
high-level Real-Time Multiprocessor Programming Lan- 
guage (RTMPL) developed at NASA-Lewis. 

Although the RTMPS hardware is complex, it is 
anticipated that the desired user/simulator inter- 
face capabilities can be achieved through proper 
design of the operating system. The purpose of this 
Daper is to give an overview of the design and capa- 
bilities of the Real-Time Multiprocessor Operating 
System (RTMPOS). The RTMPOS is designed to allow 
highly-interact ive , engineering-level programming 
and operation of multiprocessor systems. It is 
designed to be expandable and to minimize dependence 
on specific manufacturer hardware. In the case of 
the Lewis experimental RTMPS, the RTMPOS provides 
special system tasks that operate in conjunction 
with a standard, manufacturer-supplied disk oper- 
ating system (DOS). This paper describes the multi- 
processor architecture that is supported by the 
RTMPOS, the general programming and operational 
functions that are provided, and the RTMPOS struc- 
ture that supports those functions. 

GENERAL SIMULATOR CONFIGURATION 

The Real-Time Multiprocessor Programming Lan- 
guage (RTMPL, ref. 6) and the Real-Time Multipro- 
cessor Operating System described in this paper are 



designed to support the general simulator configura- 
tion shown in Fig. 1. The primary elements in this 
configuration are the multiple simulation channels 
(1 to n), the Front-End Processor (FEP), and the 
Real-Time Interface. The Real-Time Interface pro- 
vides for communications between the simulator and 
external devices (e.g. strip-chart recorders and 
controls) . 

The FEP serves as the simulator controller and 
the interface between the user and the simulator. 
These functions are facilitated by the RTMPOS which 
resides on the FEP. Data are transferred between 
the FEP and the simulation channels via the Inter- 
active Information Bus. The RTMPOS provides for 
simulator run-time operations such as program load- 
ing and modification, simulator mode control, and 
data handling. The FEP also services the simulator 
peripherals (terminals, disk drives, printers, 
etc.). A manufacturer-supplied DOS provides typical 
utilities like an assembler, linkage editor, text 
editor, file handling services, etc. The resident 
DOS has a multi-tasking capability (i.e. permits 
many tasks to run concurrently in a time-slice 
mode). This capability is essential to the RTMPOS 
concept since the RTMPOS includes several tasks that 
permit the simulator to send advisories to the user 
via the FEP while the simulation is being run. 

Each simulation channel (fig. 1) consists of 
two processors — a computation processor (COMP) and a 
preprocessor (PREP) . Each COMP executes its 
assigned portion of the simulation (an RTMPL pro- 
gram) and serves to interface its channel to the 
FEP. The PREP's also execute RTMPL programs and 
provide for distribution of information from the 
COMP's to the other channels via the Real-Time 
Information Bus. Communication between the COMP and 
PREP is accomplished through a shared memory. Each 
simulator processor contains specially-designed 
firmware (software burned into EPROMs) that facili- 
tates communication between the FEP and the COMP's 
and between the COMP's and The PREP's. The firmware 
performs such functions as initialization and check- 
out of the processor memory, data transfer, setting 
the execution mode of the processors, sending inter- 
rupts out to the FEP and, in some cases, timer 
control . 

One of the simulation channels (1 to n) is dif- 
ferent from the others. It serves as a real-time 
extension of the FEP. Its COMP is available to per- 
form any real-time analysis required by the user to 
support the simulation. For example, it may be used 
to gather and process data from the other channels 
which are then uploaded to the FEP by means of the 
RTMPOS. The real-time PREP is used to distribute 
data on the Real-Time Information Bus and serves as 
controller for that bus. It is also responsible for 
all timing and control of simulator operations. 

The communication paths that are available in 
the general simulator configuration provide a high 
degree of programming flexibility. As a result, the 
RTMPS implementation may be used to emulate a vari- 
ety of multiprocessor systems. This flexibility 
also means that the RTMPOS design can be viewed as 
generic to a variety of multiprocessor systems that 
are subsets of the general configuration shown in 
Fig. 1. 


Figure 2 is a photograph of the current NASA- 
Lewis RTMPS experimental hardware, the FEP, and the 
peripheral equipment. The NASA-Lewis RTMPS uses a 
Motorola EXORmacs* Development System as the FEP and 
the resident DOS is Motorola's VERSAdos (7)*. The 
FEP and simulator processors are based on the 
Motorola MC68000 microprocessor with an 8 MHz clock. 

FORMULATING A SIMULATION 

An RTMPS simulation is formulated using the 
RTMPL utility (6). The RTMPL allows the user to 
program the various elements of the general simula- 
tor configuration in a high-level, engineering- 
oriented language. As shown in Fig. 3, the output 
of the RTMPL is assembly language source program 
files (one for each processor that is being used in 
the simulator) and a set of simulation data base 
files that relate the simulation implementation to 
the RTMPL source programs. 

Each assembly source program includes items 
such as executives, tasks, variables, constants, and 
argument groups. Executives and tasks define the 
executable part of the simulation. An executive is 
like a main program that directs the computational 
flow of that processor's simulation program. Tasks 
are used like subroutines to partition a program to 
improve its readability and versatility. An execu- 
tive may perform tasks itself. Each program must 
have at least one executive but tasks are not 
required. Constants and variables are elements in 
the simulation equations that are to be executed in 
the program. Variables are typically time-dependent 
variables such as would appear in a differential 
equation. Because of the parallel nature of the 
solution, some variables must be transferred to/from 
other processors. An argument group is a set of 
constants and/or variables that are grouped under a 
single name for ease of reference. Argument groups 
provide for large-volume data transfers between the 
FEP and the simulator. One application would be to 
periodically pass an argument group to a sampling 
routine to obtain simulation results. 

The program load modules that are loaded into 
the simulator processors are generated by passing 
the source programs through the FEP-resident assem- 
bler and linkage editor. 

The data base files that are generated by the 
RTMPL are files of records that are read by the 
RTMPOS. These files contain all information about 
the simulation that is necessary for the RTMPOS to 
support interactive execution of the simulation. 
There are files of information relative to each pro- 
cessor program as well as files of globally-defined 
items that can be referenced by all simulation pro- 
grams. The kind of information typically included 
m the data base is illustrated by the constant 
record shown m Fig. 4. Constants are stored in 
linked lists (hence the pointer "next") of records 
that include the constant's name (ID), location in 
processor memory (LOG) , and its DTP — data type 
(scaled fraction or integer) and precision (number 
of words in memory). This information allows the 
user to reference a constant (or other item) by name 
and allows the RTMPOS to reference it in memory. 


*EXORmacs and VERSAdos are trademarks of Motorola 
Inc. 


2 



All RTMPL data base and program source/object- 
code/ load -module files are saved on disk files that 
can be manipulated by the RTKPOS, Once the simula- 
tion has been formulated, the RTKPOS provides the 
following general programming and operational 
functions * 

• Program Control 

• Data Base Management 

• Simulator Control 

• Run-Time Monitoring 

• Simulation Results Management 

• Miscellaneous 

DESCRIPTION OF RTMPOS FUNCTIONS 
Data Base Management 

The first step in a simulation session is to 
load the data base from the RTMPL-generated disk 
files into the FEP memory. The RTMPOS then uses the 
data base to allow the user to interactively modify 
and execute the simulation. The data base manage- 
ment functions provide for 

• Loading 

• Editing 

• Saving 

• Listing 

of the data base. Editing refers to making changes 
to the simulation at run time such as displaying/- 
changing values of constants and initial condition 
(IC) values of variables. Advisory messages may be 
changed and additions, deletions or changes to items 
contained in argument groups may be made. The data 
base may be edited before or after the simulation 
program load modules have been loaded into the sim- 
ulator. In either case the simulation programs are 
automatically updated by the RTMPOS to be consistent 
with the changes m the data base. The original 
data base and load modules on the disk files remain 
unmodified. An edited data base may be saved by the 
user either by overwriting the original disk files 
or by creating a new set. 

The RTMPL utility generates a listing of the 
entire data base. Once the data base is loaded into 
the FEP, the user has the option of listing all or 
selected portions of the original or edited data 
base . 

Program Control 

At run time the RTMPOS program control func- 
tions are used for loading the program load modules 
from the disk files into the desired simulator chan- 
nels, activating the desired executive in each pro- 
gram, and enabling or disabling tasks in the execu- 
tive. The use of executives and tasks in struc- 
turing a simulation program can provide the user 
with a great deal of flexibility at run time. The 
status of program executives and tasks can be 
reviewed and changed by the user at any time. 

Simulator Control 

The user controls the simulator in much the 
same manner as an analog computer. Three modes of 
execution are available 


• STOP 

• RUN 

• HOLD. 

In the STOP mode the simulator is halted and 
simulation execution is suspended. Changes to the 
data base are allowed only in STOP. While in STOP, 
the user can specify which simulation variables are 
to have their IC or hold values set. IC and hold 
values are specified in the data base and they can 
be changed by using the data-base editing commands. 

In the RUN mode all simulation programs execute 
repeated update cycles. The simulator stays in RUN 
until the user executes the STOP command or the 
simulation itself issues a halt advisory. The halt 
advisory may be a user generated message such as 
"SIMULATION HALT.* MAX TEMPERATURE EXCEEDED" or a 
system advisory such as "SIMULATION HALT! DIVIDE BY 
ZERO IN CHANNEL 2 PREP". All advisories are dis- 
played on a user-defined message device (e.g., a 
printer) . 

In the HOLD mode, user-selected simulation 
variables in each program are held at the specified 
values. After selecting the variables, the user 
specifies the number of update cycles to be exe- 
cuted. The simulation executes the update cycles 
and then returns to the STOP mode and issues a "HOLD 
MODE COMPLETE" advisory to the user. 

Simulator control also includes initialization 
of simulator hardware and user-specification of 
timer intervals that control the execution of the 
simulation (e.g., update time). 

Run-Time Monitoring 

This function allows a user to receive advi- 
sories via interrupts from the simulator and to 
record all commands that are executed and the 
resulting actions that are taken during a simulation 
session. The advisories can be user or operating- 
system messages or they can be requests to read data 
from the simulator. The messages are displayed on 
the message device. The read advisories are built 
into the simulation by the user. They are transpar- 
ent to the user at run time and are automatically 
serviced by special RTMPOS tasks. 

A powerful feature of rur-time monitoring is 
the self-documenting session history — a disk text 
file that saves all user commands and resulting 
prompts and messages from the RTMPOS. Any advisory 
messages that occur are automatically entered into 
the session history, as are user-generated com- 
ments. The session history may be listed and edited 
using the manufacturer-supplied utilities that are 
resident on the FEP. Furthermore, a session history 
may be executed by the RTMPOS. That is, commands 
can be input to the RTMPOS from a session history 
file rather than being entered manually from the 
keyboard. This allows the user to quickly bring a 
simulation to a previously obtained condition by 
executing the session history from that session. 

The user may also create a file with the text editor 
that can be used to execute the routine parts of a 
simulation session (e.g., loading a data base and 
the simulator load modules). After the execution of 
the session history is completed control is returned 
to the user at the keyboard. 


3 



Results Management 

Simulation results are obtained by means of the 
read advisory that was mentioned m the previous 
section. The user includes requests for sampling of 
argument groups in the RTMPL source program. When 
the simulation is running and a read advisory is 
encountered, an interrupt is sent out to an appro- 
priate RTMPOS task. Each channel has its own task. 
The RTMPOS task transfers the argument group data 
from the simulator to an auxiliary memory block in 
the FEP. Whenever the simulator enters the STOP 
mode, the RTMPOS converts the data to the proper 
units using data base information, enters the data 
with identification into a user-defined text file, 
and clears the auxiliary memory. The data are coor- 
dinated with the session history file by means of a 
run number and an RTMPOS comment in the session his- 
tory that indicates the number of data records that 
were saved. The data may be listed using the FEP- 
resident list utility. 

Future enhancements in the results management 
area are expected to include graphical display of 
data and user-defined means for data analysis. 

Miscellaneous 

Once the RTMPOS has been invoked by the user 
there are two ways to exit from it. One command 
results in all RTMPOS tasks being permanently termi- 
nated. A different command allows the user to tem- 
porarily suspend the RTMPOS command task, perform 
other tasks such as editing and listing a text file 
and then resume the RTMPOS at the point that the 
user left off. In the latter case, the simulator 
can continue to run with any advisory messages out- 
put to the message device to keep the user informed 
of the simulation's progress. A "help" command is 
also available that permits the user to view the 
RTMPOS commands and a brief description of their 
functions . 

RTMPOS STRUCTURE 

A rather complex software structure is required 
to provide all of the RTMPOS functions that have 
been described. The overall RTMPOS structure and 
its relationship to the FEP/simulator is shown in 
Fig. 5. As explained earlier, the RTMPOS resides on 
the FEP (EXORmacs) and operates in conjunction with 
VERSAdos. The RTMPOS interacts with the EXORmacs 
utility software and with the peripheral equipment 
by means of the file-handling (FHS) and the rnput/- 
output (IOS) services. The RTMPOS block of Fig. 5 
is shown in more detail in Fig. 6 to illustrate the 
multi-task design of the RTMPOS. The major RTMPOS 
tasks are the Command task and the tasks associated 
with servicing the advisory interrupts that come 
from the simulator. An auxiliary memory (131k 
bytes) is used to provide a communication link 
between the tasks as well as storage for advisory 
messages and simulation-data results. 

The RTMPOS command task processes all of the 
user-entered commands. The user enters a command 
for the desired function and is then prompted by the 
RTMPOS for subsequent inputs. This task consists of 
mostly PASCAL procedures with some assembly language 
routines. The assembly language routines are used 


mainly for moving information between the command- 
task memory and other (auxiliary and COMP) mem- 
ories. The assembly routines are specific to the 
MC68000 microprocessor but should be easy to adapt 
to other manufacturers' hardware. The PASCAL proce- 
dures are generic except for the naming of files 
(VERSAdos-specif ic) . These procedures should also 
be easy to adapt to other manufacturers' file- 
handling systems. The PASCAL structured approach to 
programming facilitated the design of the RTMPOS and 
should also facilitate any additions and/or modifi- 
cations to the RTMPOS. The present version of the 
RTMPOS command task requires approximately 210k 
bytes of memory. This includes the memory required 
to support the data base for a relatively small 
3 -channel simulation. 

As shown in Fig. 6, each channel is assigned an 
interrupt service task (l.5k byte), a message advi- 
sory task (5k byte) and a read advisory task (lk 
byte). After receiving an interrupt, the interrupt 
task determines the advisory type and then initiates 
the appropriate advisory task. Each of these tasks 
is written in assembly language and is specific to 
the MC68000 microprocessor. 

Enough auxiliary memory is reserved for 95 mes- 
sages. If the allotted memory is exceeded the user 
is notified by a system message and the oldest mes- 
sages are overwritten. One hundred twenty-nine 
kilobytes of auxiliary memory are reserved for 
data. This is sufficient to save approximately 2500 
argument group records, each containing 20 single- 
precision items. If the allotted memory is exceeded 
the user is notified by a system message. The simu- 
lator continues to run but no additional data 
records are saved. 

One additional task that is not shown in Fig. 6 
is a small (500 byte) assembly routine that is used 
to temporarily suspend operation of the command 
task. The user can then use the FEP for other pur- 
poses (with or without the simulator running). The 
user can resume operation of the RTMPOS command task 
and interactive operation of the simulator at any 
time . 

At the present time the RTMPOS is designed to 
accommodate a maximum of 10 simulator channels. The 
NASA-Lewis experimental RTMPS hardware contains only 
3. For a 10-channel system the RTMPOS would consist 
of 32 tasks requiring a total memory capacity of 
approximately 0.5 megabytes, including the memory 
required for a large data base and the auxiliary 
memory . 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 

The RTMPOS described in this paper meets the 
goals of providing a user-oriented, interactive pro- 
gramming and operations environment for a real-time 
multiprocessor simulator. The RTMPOS acts in con- 
junction with a manufacturer-supplied disk operating 
system to provide the desired capabilities. A simu- 
lation is first formulated using a high-level pro- 
gramming language. The RTMPOS then provides for 
run-time operations such as loading, modifying and 
specifying computational flow of programs, simulator 
mode control and run-time monitoring. Run-time 
monitoring includes communication of simulator 


4 



advisories to the user and recording of a session 
history file. The session history file is a power- 
ful feature that records all user commands, perti- 
nent RTMPOS prompts and messages and advisory mes- 
sages from the simulator. The user can use the ses- 
sion history file to review a session's progress 
without having to take notes and to input commands 
to the RTMPOS rather than entering them manually 
through the keyboard. 

The RTMPOS functions that are described in this 
paper represent an initial design that has been pro- 
grammed and debugged. Testing of this design with 
the experimental RTMPS hardware was about to begin 
at the writing of this paper. It is expected that 
enhancements and additions will be made m the 
future to allow user-defined data analysis routines 
and graphical display of simulation results. Since 
the RTMPOS is part of a research project, the 
required improvements and their implementation will 
depend upon the experience gained during the testing 
phase. The PASCAL structured approach to program- 
ming of the RTMPOS should allow modifications and 
additions to be made with relative ease. 

REFERENCES 

1. O' Grady, E. Pearse and Wang, Chung-Hsien, 

"Multibus-Tiased Parallel Processor for Simula- 
t ion , " Proceedings of the 1983 Summer Computer 
Simulation Conference , Society for Computer 
Simulation, La Jolla, CA, 1983, pp. 371-375. 


2. Daniele, Carl J. and McLaughlin, Peter W. , "The 

Real-Time Performance of a Parallel, Nonlinear 
Simulation Technique Applied to a Turbofan 
Engine," Modeling and Simulation on Micro - 
computers » 1984 , edited by Ray Swartz, Society 

for Computer Simulation, La Jolla, CA, 1984, 
pp. 167-171. 

3. Makoui, Ali and Karplus, Walter J-, "Data Flow 
Methods for Dynamic System Simulation A 
CSSL-IV Microcomputer Network Interface," Pro - 
ceedings of the 1983 Summer Computer Simulation 
Conference , Society for Computer Simulation, La 
Jolla, CA 1983, pp. 376-382. 

4. Collins, W. Robert and Feyock, Stefan, "The Use 
of ADA in Distributed Simulations," Proceedings 
o f the 1983 Summer Computer Simulation Confer - 
ence , Society for Computer Simulation, 

La Jolla, CA, 1983, pp. 364-370. 

5. Blech, Richard A. and Arpasi, Dale J. , "An 
Approach to Real-Time Simulation Using Parallel 
Processing," NASA TM-81731, 1981. 

6. Arpasi, Dale J., "RTMPL A Structured Program- 
ming and Documentation Utility for Real-Time 
Multiprocessor Simulation," NASA TM- , 1984. 

7. Glaser, Jay G. , "The VERSAdos Operating Sys- 
tem," Microprocessor Operat ing Systems , edited 
by John Zarrella, Microcomputer Applications, 
Suisun City, CA, 1981, pp. 9-1 to 9-20. 


5 



Figure 1. - 



simulator configuration. 












Figure 2. - NASA -Lewis RTMPS experimental hardware. 


DATA BASE FILES 



PROGRAM \ 
LOAD \ 
MODULE FILES- 


Figure 3. - RTMPL - generated simulation files. 






NEXT: POINTER; 

ID : NAME; 

LOC: STARTING MEMORY LOCATION; 

MEM: NUMBER OF MEMORY LOCATIONS; 

DTP: DATA TYPE AND PRECISION; 

SF: SCALE FACTOR (IF SCALED FRACTION); 

PRM: PARAMETER (ADJ. OR FIXED) T OR F; 

SIZE: ARRAY DIMENSION; 

VAL: POINTS TO VALUE RECORD 

Figure 4. - Details of data-base constant record. 


FEP 



Figure 5. - Overall FEP /simulator software structure. 









RTMPOS 


SIMULATOR 



Figure 6. - RTMPOS task structure. 















1. Report No 


1 2. Government Accession No 


3 Recipient’s Catalog No 


NASA TM-83605 


4 Title and Subtitle 

5 Report Date 

Operating System for a Real-Time Multiprocessor 


Propulsion System Simulator 

6 Performing Organization Code 

505-40-5B 

7 Authors) 

Gary L. Cole 

6 Performing Organization Report No 

E-2023 

10 Worti Unit No 

9 Performing Organization Name and Address 


National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research Center 

11 Contract or Grant No 

Cleveland, Ohio 44135 

13 Type of Report and Period Covered 

12 Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 

Technical Memorandum 

National Aeronautics and Space Adminstration 
Washington, D.C. 20546 

14 Sponsoring Agency Code 

15 Supplementary Notes 

Prepared for the Summer Computer Simulation Conference sponsored by the Society 
for Computer Simulation, Boston, Massachusetts, July 23-25, 1984. 


16 Abstract 


The NASA Lewis Research Center is developing and evaluating experimental hardware and software 
systems to help meet future needs for real-time, high-fidelity simulations of air-breathing pro- 
pulsion systems. Specifically, the Real-Time Multiprocessor Simulator project focuses on the use of 
multiple microprocessors to achieve the required computing speed and accuracy at relatively low cost. 
Operating systems for such hardware configurations are generally not available. This paper describes 
the Real-Time Multiprocessor Operating System (RTMPOS) that has been developed at NASA-Lewis. The 
RTMPOS provides the user with a versatile, interactive means for loading, running, debugging and 
obtaining results from a multiprocessor-based simulator. A front-end processor (FEP) serves as the 
simulator controller and interface between the user and the simulator. These functions are facil- 
itated by the RTMPOS which resides on the FEP. The RTMPOS acts in conjunction with the FEP's 
manufacturer-supplied disk operating system that provides typical utilities like an assembler, link- 
age editor, text editor, file handling services, etc. Once a simulation is formulated, the RTMPOS 
provides for engineering-level, run-time operations such as loading, modifying and specifying com- 
putation flow of programs, simulator mode control, data handling and run-time monitoring. Run-time 
monitoring is a powerful feature of RTMPOS that allows the user to record all actions taken during a 
simulation session and to receive advisories from the simulator via the FEP. The RTMPOS is pro- 
gramed mainly in PASCAL along with some assembly language routines. The RTMPOS software is easily 
modified to be applicable to hardware from different manufacturers. 


17. Key Words (Suggested by Authors)) 

Operating systems; Multiprocessors; 
Real-Time simulation; Interactive 
simulation; Simulators 

18. Distribution Statement 

Unclassified - unlimited 
STAR Category 62 

19. Security Classlf (of this report) 

Unclassi fied 

20 Security Classlf. (of this page) 

Unclassified 

21 No of pages 

22 Price* 


For sale by the National Technical Information Service. Springfield. Virginia 22161 






















National Aeronautics and special fourth class mail 

Space Administration book 

Washington, D.C. 

20546 


Official Business 

Penalty for Private Use. $300 



Postage and Fees Paid 
National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 
NASA-451 


NASA 


POSTM ASTFR : 


If Undeliverahle (Section I5H 
Postal Manual) Do Not Return 


