@ Rapid Calculation of Spacecraft Trajectories Using Efficient 
T aylor Series I ntegration 

Software greatly accelerates the calculation of spacecraft trajectories. 

John H . Glenn Research Center, Cle/eland, Ohio 


A variable-order, variable-step Taylor 
series integration algorithm was imple- 
mented in NASA Glenn'sSNAP (Space- 
craft N-body Analysis Program) code. 
SNAP is a high-fidelity trajectory prop- 
agation program that can propagate 
the trajectory of a spacecraft about vir- 
tually any body in the solar system. The 
Taylor series algorithm's very high 
order accuracy and excellent stability 
properties lead to large reductions in 
computer time relative to the code's 
existing 8th order Runge-Kutta 
scheme. Head-to-head comparison on 
near-Earth, lunar, Mars, and Europa 
missions showed that Taylor series inte- 
gration is 15.8 times faster than Runge- 
Kutta on average, and is more accurate. 
These speedups were obtained for cal- 
culations involving central body, other 
body, thrust, and drag forces. Similar 
speedups have been obtained for calcu- 
lations that include J2 spherical har- 
monic for central body gravitation. 
The algorithm includes a step size se- 
lection method that directly calculates 


the step size and never requires a re- 
peat step. 

High-order Taylor series integration al- 
gorithms have been shown to provide 
major reductions in computer time over 
conventional integration methods in nu- 
merous scientific applications. The objec- 
tive here was to directly implementTaylor 
series integration in an existing trajectory 
analysis code and demonstrate that large 
reductions in computer time (order of 
magnitude) could be achieved while si- 
multaneously maintaining high accuracy. 

This software greatly accelerates the 
calculation of spacecraft trajectories. At 
each time level, the spacecraft position, 
velocity, and mass are expanded in a 
high-order Taylor series whose coeffi- 
cients are obtained through efficient 
differentiation arithmetic. This makes 
it possible to take very large time steps 
at minimal cost, resulting in large sav- 
ings in computer time. The Taylor se- 
ries algorithm is implemented prima- 
rily through three subroutines: (1) a 
driver routine that automatically intro- 


ducesauxiliary variablesand setsup ini- 
tial conditionsand integrates; (2) a rou- 
tine that calculates system reduced de- 
rivatives using recurrence relations for 
quotients and products; and (3) a rou- 
tine that determines the step size and 
sums the series. The order of accuracy 
used in a trajectory calculation is arbi- 
trary and can be set by the user. The al- 
gorithm directly calculates the motion 
of other planetary bodies and does not 
require ephemeris files (except to start 
the calculation). The code also runs 
with Taylor series and Runge-Kutta 
used interchangeably for different 
phases of a mission. 

T his work was done by James R . Scott and 
Michael C. Martini of Glenn Research Cen- 
ter. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (seepagel). 

Inquiries concerning rights for thecommer- 
cial use of this invention should beaddressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Innovative 
Partnerships Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleve- 
land, Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-18445-1. 


@ Efficient Kriging Algorithms 

Goddard SpaceFlight Center, Greenbdt, Maryland 


More efficient versions of an interpo- 
lation method, called kriging, have been 
introduced in order to reduce its tradi- 
tionally high computational cost. Writ- 
ten in C++, these approaches were tested 
on both synthetic and real data. 

Kriging is a best unbiased linear esti- 
mator and suitable for interpolation of 
scattered data points. Kriging has long 
been used in the geostatistic and mining 


communities, but is now being re- 
searched for use in the image fusion of 
remotely sensed data. Thisallowsa com- 
bination of data from various locations 
to be used to fill in any missing data 
from any single location. 

To arrive at the faster algorithms, 
sparse SYMMLQ iterative solver, co- 
variance tapering, Fast Multipole 
Methods (FMM), and nearest neigh- 


bor searching techniques were used. 
These implementations were used 
when the coefficient matrix in the lin- 
ear system is symmetric, but not neces- 
sarily positive-definite. 

This work was done by Nargess 
M emarsadeghi of Goddard Space Flight Cen- 
ter. For further information, contact the God- 
dard Innovative Partnerships Officeat (301) 
286-5810. GSC-15555-1 


@ Predicting Spacecraft T rajectories by the WeavE ncke M ethod 

Lyndon B. Johnson SpaceCenter, Houston, Texas 


A combination of methods is proposed 
of predicting spacecraft trajectories that 
possibly include multiple maneuvers 
and/or perturbing accelerations, with 
greater speed, accuracy, and repeatability 
than were heretofore achievable. The 


combination is denoted the WeavEncke 
method because it is based on unpub- 
lished studies byjonathan Weaver of the 
orbit-prediction formulation of the noted 
astronomer Johann Franz Encke. Weaver 
evaluated a number of alternatives that 


arise within that formulation, arriving at 
an orbit-predicting algorithm optimized 
for complex trajectory operations. 

In the WeavEncke method, Encke's 
method of prediction of perturbed or- 
bits is enhanced by application of mod- 


NASATech Briefs, January 2011 


37 


