ARNIE library but is not necessary for 
the execution of the software. 

This program was written by Nathalie 
Mathe and James Chen of Ames Research 
Center. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to the Patent Counsel, Ames Research Center, 
(650) 604-5104. Refer to ARC-14136. 


© Software for Simulating a 
Complex Robot 

RoboSim (Robot Simulation) is a com- 
puter program that simulates the poses 
and motions of the Robonaut — a devel- 
opmental anthropomorphic robot that 
has a complex system of joints with 43 de- 
grees of freedom and multiple modes of 
operation and control. RoboSim per- 
forms a full kinematic simulation of all de- 
grees of freedom. It also includes inter- 
face components that duplicate the 
functionality of the real Robonaut inter- 
face with control software and human op- 
erators. Basically, users see no difference 
between the real Robonaut and the simu- 
lation. Consequently, new control algo- 
rithms can be tested by computational 
simulation, without risk to the Robonaut 
hardware, and without using excessive 
Robonaut-hardware experimental time, 
which is always at a premium. Previously 
developed software incorporated into Ro- 
boSim includes Enigma (for graphical dis- 
plays) , OSCAR (for kinematical computa- 
tions), and NDDS (for communication 
between the Robonaut and external soft- 
ware). In addition, RoboSim incorporates 
unique inverse-kinematical algorithms for 
chains of joints that have fewer than six 
degrees of freedom (e.g., finger joints) . In 
comparison with the algorithms of 
OSCAR, these algorithms are more read- 
ily adaptable and provide better results 
when using equivalent sets of data. 

This program was written by S. Michael 
Goza o/Johnson Space Center. Further in- 
formation is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 
MSC-23602 


Software for Planning 
Scientific Activities on Mars 

Mixed-Initiative Activity Plan Gener- 
ator (MAPGEN) is a ground-based 
computer program for planning and 
scheduling the scientific activities of 
instrumented exploratory robotic vehi- 
cles, within the limitations of available 
resources onboard the vehicle. MAP- 
GEN is a combination of two prior soft- 
ware systems: (1) an activity-planning 
program, APGEN, developed at 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory and 
(2) the Europa planner/scheduler 
from NASA Ames Research Center. 
MAPGEN performs all of the follow- 
ing functions: 

• Automatic generation of plans and 
schedules for scientific and engineer- 
ing activities; 

• Testing of hypotheses (or “what-if” 
analyses of various scenarios) ; 

• Editing of plans; 

• Computation and analysis of re- 
sources; and 

• Enforcement and maintenance of con- 
straints, including resolution of tem- 
poral and resource conflicts among 
planned activities. 

MAPGEN can be used in either of two 
modes: one in which the planner/ sched- 
uler is turned off and only the basic 
APGEN functionality is utilized, or one 
in which both component programs are 
used to obtain the full planning, sched- 
uling, and constraint-maintenance func- 
tionality. 

This program was written by Mitchell Ai- 
Chang, John Bresina, Ari Jonsson, Jennifer 
Hsu, Bob Kanefsky, Paul Morris, Kanna 
Rajan, and Jeffrey Yglesias of Ames Re- 
search Center and Len Charest and Pierre 
Maldague of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to the Patent Counsel, Ames Research Center, 
(650) 604-5104. Refer to ARC-15053. 


Software for 

Training in Pre-College 

Mathematics 

The Intelligent Math Tutor (IMT) is 
a computer program for training stu- 
dents in pre-college and college-level 
mathematics courses, including funda- 
mentals, intermediate algebra, college 
algebra, and trigonometry. The IMT 
can be executed on a server computer 
for access by students via the Internet; 
alternatively, it can be executed on stu- 
dents’ computers equipped with com- 
pact-disk/read-only-memory (CD- 
ROM) drives. The IMT provides 
interactive exercises, assessment, track- 
ing, and an on-line graphing calcula- 
tor with algebraic-manipulation capa- 
bilities. The IMT provides an 
innovative combination of content, de- 
livery mechanism, and artificial intelli- 
gence. Careful organization and pre- 
sentation of the content make it 
possible to provide intelligent feed- 
back to the student based on perfor- 
mance on exercises and tests. The 
tracking and feedback mechanisms are 
implemented within the capabilities of 
a commercial off-the-shelf develop- 
ment software tool and are written in 
the Unified Modeling Language to 
maximize reuse and minimize develop- 
ment cost. The graphical calculator is 
a standard feature of most college and 
pre-college algebra and trigonometry 
courses. Placing this functionality in a 
Java applet decreases the cost, provides 
greater capabilities, and provides an 
opportunity to integrate the calculator 
with the lessons. 

This program was written by Robert O. 
Shelton of Johnson Space Center and 

Travis A. Moebes and Scot Van Alstine of Sci- 
ence Applications International Corp. For 
further information, contact the Johnson 
Commercial Technology Office at (281) 483- 
3809. 

MSC-23150 


18 


NASA Tech Briefs, October 2003 


