
AM A A N96- 16592 

I* 

AIAA-95-0298 



CONTROL OF EXPERIMENTAL 
UNCERTAINTIES IN FILTERED RAYLEIGH 
SCATTERING MEASUREMENTS 

J.N. Forkey, N.D. Finkelstein, W.R. Lempert, and R.B. Miles 



PRINCETON UNIVERSITY 

Dept. of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering 

Princeton, New Jersey 08544 U.S.A. 



33rd Aerospace Sciences 
Meeting and Exhibit 

January 9-1 2, 1 995 / Reno, NV 



For permission to copy or republish, contact the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20024 



CONTROL OF EXPERIMENTAL UNCERTAINTIES IN 
FILTERED RAYLEIGH SCATTERING MEASUREMENTS 

J. N. Forkey, N. D. Finkelstein,* W. R. Lempert,t and R. B. Miles^ 

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY 

Princeton, New Jersey 08544 U.S.A. 

609/258-5131 



ABSTRACT 

Filtered Raylcigh Scattering is a technique which allows 
for measurement of velocity, temperature, and pressure in 
unseeded flows, spatially resolved in 2-dimensions. We 
present an overview of the major components of a 
Filtered Rayleigh Scattering system. In particular, we 
develop and discuss a detailed theoretical model along 
with associated model parameters and related 
uncertainties. Based on this model, we then present 
experimental results for ambient room air and for a Mach 
2 free jet, including spatially resolved measurements of 
velocity, temperature, and pressure. 



1. INTRODUCTION 

Filtered Rayleigh Scattering (FRS), a recently 
developed flow diagnostic technique, 1 - 2 achieves large 
suppression of background scattering for whole field flow 
visualization, and obtains quantitative measurements of 
velocity, temperature and density, in unseeded gaseous 
flows. 

This technique makes use of Rayleigh scattering 
from molecules in the flow, and is driven by a high 
power, injection seeded laser. By imaging the scattered 
light onto a CCD camera, one may obtain an image of 



*Graduate Student, Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, 
Student Member, AIAA 

i Research Scientist, Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, 
Member, AIAA 

Professor, Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, 
Senior Member, AIAA 

Copyright © 1995 by the American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved. 



flow density. In order to filter out unwanted background 
scattering from stationary objects in the field of view, the 
laser is tuned in frequency to coincide with an atomic or 
molecular absorption line. A cell containing the atomic 
or molecular species is then placed between the camera 
and the flow. If the cell temperature, pressure, and length 
are set appropriately, the absorption line can be made 
optically thick, so that the cell acts as a notch Filter, 
absorbing all scattering at the laser frequency. Because 
the flow is moving, the Rayleigh scattering is Dopplcr 
shifted, and therefore, passes through the atomic or 
molecular filter, and is imaged on the camera. 

In order to extend the technique to make quantitative 
measurements, one must take advantage of the fact that 
the amount of light reaching any resolution clement of the 
camera is a function of the total intensity of the Rayleigh 
scattering (flow density), as well as the overlap of the 
Rayleigh scattering profile with the filter absorption 
profile. This overlap is a function of the central 
frequency of the Rayleigh profile, which is determined 
by flow velocity (Doppler shift), and the spectral shape of 
the Rayleigh profile, which is a function of the flow 
temperature and pressure. In order to uniquely determine 
the parameters, v, T, and P experimentally, it is necessary 
to collect data (resolution element intensity) for varying 
conditions. A minimum of three data points are required 
to capture the three parameters. By imaging the 
scattering through multiple filters with different 
absorption profiles, or by observing the scattering from 
several different angles simultaneously, or by monitoring 
intensity at the camera while tuning the frequency of the 
laser, it is possible to determine the pertinent parameters 
of the Rayleigh scattering profile, and, therefore, the 
velocity, temperature, and pressure at each resolution 
element. 

Previous work has been concentrated into two areas. 
The first is the use of this technique for background 
suppression when visualizing flows, and the second is for 
the measurement of velocity. The background 



suppression feature of Filtered Rayleigh Scattering has 
been used to image flow fields that otherwise would be 
completely obscured by the strong scattering from wind 
tunnel surfaces. We have used this technique to image 
the flow field inside a Mach 3 inlet, and to generate 
volumetric images of the crossing shocks and boundary 
layers present.- 1 Elliot and coworkers 4 have also used this 
technique to observe structures in compressible mixing 
layers. Measurements of velocity have been investigated 
by a number of workers. The measurement of velocity in 
a seeded compressible mixing layer was performed by 
Elliot, 5 and velocities over a delta wing in a seeded air 
flow were measured by Meyers, et. al. 6 using a technique 
similar to Filtered Rayleigh Scattering, called Doppler 
Global Velocimetry. The use of Filtered Rayleigh 
Scattering in unseeded flows for measuring mass flow has 
been investigated by Winter and Shirley, 7 and velocity 
measurements in an unseeded Mach 5 flow have been 
made by our group. 

Current work utilizes laser scanning to obtain a 
complete Rayleigh scattering spectrum for each 
measurement point. This method of data collection offers 
the advantage of many data points for model fitting; 
however, such a method yields time averaged results. 
The work reported here makes use of two laser/filter 
pairs. The first consists of a frequency doubled, injection 
seeded, Nd:YAG laser, along with a molecular iodine 
absorption cell and the second consists of a frequency 
tripled, injection seeded, Ti:Sapphire laser along with an 
atomic mercury filter. 

In this paper, we continue the development of 
Filtered Rayleigh Scattering as a tool for measuring 
velocity in unseeded flows, by discussing the major 
sources of systematic uncertainties in FRS experiments, 
and by discussing techniques that have been developed to 
minimize these. Although temperature and pressure are 
measured during an unseeded experiment, these will be 
discussed only briefly and qualitatively in the results 
section of this paper; future work will concentrate on 
quantifying the measurements of these parameters more 
fully. Our discussion begins with a theoretical model of 
the scattering and detection processes, which can be used 
to determine flow parameters from camera intensity 
values. This is followed by discussions of each of the 
three major components of a Filtered Rayleigh Scattering 
experiment — laser, filter, and camera — along with 
corresponding analyses of the major sources of 
uncertainties, and techniques used to control them. We 
then demonstrate the utility of FRS by presenting 
experimental measurements along with a detailed error 
analysis of the velocity data obtained from an unseeded 
flow facility and Nd:YAG/iodine filter pair. Two sets of 
experimental conditions yield velocity fields spatially 
resolved in two dimensions. We conclude with a 
discussion of the development of ultraviolet FRS utilizing 
a frequency tripled Ti:Sapphire laser and a mercury 
absorption filter. Although the discussions here focus on 
measurements made using molecular Rayleigh scattering, 



many of the considerations arc directly applicable to 
experiments which make use of particle scattering. 

2. THEORETICAL MODEL 

Accurate measurement of flow velocity, temperature 
and pressure from raw experimental data requires 
complete understanding of the processes occurring. 
Furthermore, it is necessary to have an accurate model 
describing experimental data in order to deduce the 
measurements of interest. For a Filtered Rayleigh 
Scattering experiment, the pertinent raw data consists of 
grayscale value, S, at a particular resolution clement of 
the camera. Our model, therefore, predicts this signal 
level for any experimental configuration. 

When a laser pulse with energy per unit area of Ej, 
lincshape profile 1(d) and central laser frequency of \>\ y 
relative to some reference frequency, is incident on a 
region of flow with pressure P, and temperature T, the 
Rayleigh scattered energy, Er at frequency t> relative to 
the reference frequency, scattered from an interrogation 
volume V, into the solid angle dQ, is given by the 
convolution of the laser lineshape l(t>) and the Raylcigh- 
Brillouin scattering profile g(\)): 



_ , , _ PV da . _ 

E D (u) = E, dO. 

R ' kT dQ 



(1) 



Jl(u-(D 1 +\> D )--u')g(\>')d\)' 



da 



Here, k is equal to Boltzmann's constant, and ^ is the 

differential Rayleigh scattering cross section. The laser 
lineshape I(t>) is centered at v>i and shifted by the Doppler 
shift t) D : 



2v . (Q 

= T s,n U 



J D 



(2) 



where v is the flow velocity in the direction to which the 
experimental system is sensitive (i.e. v is the velocity 
component in the direction which bisects the angle 
between the vector extending from the scattering center to 
the camera, and the vector pointing opposite the laser 
propagation vector). X. is the absolute laser wavelength 
and 9 is the scattering angle. The Rayleigh - Brillouin 
scattering profile, g(tj), is characterized by the Y 
parameter which is a measure of the ratio of the scattering 
wavelength to the molecular mean free path. 8,9 This 
parameter is a measure of the relative contribution of the 
central Rayleigh scattering peak, and the two side bands 
corresponding to Brillouin scattering. A Y parameter 
much greater than one corresponds to strong Brillouin 
components, while a Y value much less than one 
corresponds to Rayleigh scattering only. The Y parameter 



can be expressed as a function of flow parameters and 



scattering angle: 



Y= 0.2308 



7~(<r)+ 110.4 
T 2 (k) 



r{atm)h\tim) 



(3) 



In addition to the useful Rayleigh signal, there will 
also be some stray clastic scattering which has total 
energy per pulse of K and the same spectral profile and 
frequency as the laser. 



E E (U)= Kl(u- u,) 



(4) 



When the Rayleigh energy, E R , and the stray 
scattering energy, E E , arc passed through the absorption 
filter, detected by an intensified CCD camera, and 
converted into a grayscale value by a frame grabber, the 
final signal level, S (0-255), for one resolution element is 
given by: 



S = C 



J E R (\))i(u)d\> + [ E E (t))t(\))du 



(5) 



where t(t)) is the transmission of the filter at frequency "0, 
and C is a constant which takes into account transmission 
of the focusing optics, quantum efficiency of the camera, 
gain of the microchanncl plate, and analog to digital 
conversion of the video signal performed by the frame 
grabber. This equation assumes that the camera gain, and 
frame grabber A to D conversion are linear and that a 
value of zero for S corresponds to values of zero for E R 
and E E . 

Equations 1 through 5 can be summarized to show 
explicitly the parameters which influence S: 



simultaneous measurements of scattering through 
different absorption profiles (i.e. different cells). Varying 
G corresponds to using cither multiple laser angles, or 
multiple viewing angles and collecting through identical 
filters. Varying v\ corresponds to collecting signals at 
various different laser frequencies. Using multiple 9's, or 
multiple cells with different t(u)'s, yields instantaneous 
information about flow parameters. For the work 
reported in this paper, however, we chose to measure time 
averaged How parameters by tuning the laser frequency 
while monitoring camera signal levels. The main 
advantage of a time averaged measurement is that high 
signal levels may be achieved by averaging signal levels 
from several laser pulses. This minimized the statistical 
uncertainties caused by shot noise to a negligible level, so 
that systematic uncertainties could be evaluated and 
minimized. Additionally, fitting the data to our 
theoretical model is improved by collecting information 
at 1 10 different frequencies. 

The raw data obtained in such a frequency tuning 
experiment consists of plots of resolution element 
intensity, S, versus laser frequency, Uj. These plots, one 
for each image resolution element, are then fit to equation 
6 with v, T, and P taken as fitting parameters. In order for 
such a fit to yield accurate results, all fixed parameters in 
equation 6 - X, 0, R, and B -- must be known, or 
independently measured. The laser lineshape, \(v) and 
the filter cell absorption profile, t(u), must also be known 
or independently measured. Any errors in these four 
parameters or two profiles will propagate into systematic 
errors in the final values obtained for v, T, and P. Finally, 
the accuracy of the fit will also depend on the accuracy 
with which the individual measurements of S and v\ are 
made. Any systematic error in S or U| will again result in 
uncertainties in v, T, and P. 

3. MODEL PARAMETERS 



S(A,0, R.B.v.P.T, u, ) = R 



T 



\ I Jl(u-[u,+o D (..i.«)]-u , )g(Y(p.T.«),u')du'»(«)dtJ (6) 
+B fl(u-u,)t(u)du 



Here, R and B are the products of constants in equations 
1, 4 and 5, and in most experiments may be considered 
calibration parameters. X is the absolute wavelength of 
the laser and is necessary only for calculating the Doppler 
shift and the Y parameter; it is known precisely from the 
literature, v, P, and T are the unknowns in the 
experiment. Since these arc three independent unknowns, 
at least three measurements of S must be made while 
varying t(i)) or at least one of the remaining two 
parameters : 9, or x>\. Varying t(i)) corresponds to 



Each of these four parameters, X, 9, R, and B, two 
profiles, l(t>) and t(t>), and two measurement quantities, S 
and Ui, along with uncertainties in each is discussed in the 
following four sections. 

Filter 

Stability and accurate characterization of the 
absorption filter are required for the transmission profile 
l(v) to be accurately known. The filter used in recent 
experiments consists of a glass cell 2 inches in diameter 
and 4 inches long, with 2 inch diameter sleeves extending 
2 inches beyond each of the two windows (figure 1). A 
few iodine crystals were placed in the sealed and 
evacuated cell. The temperature of the cell is measured 
and controlled by a temperature controller (stable to 
within ±0.5 °C), an RTD element cemented onto the cell 
wall, and heating tape, which covers the entire cell body 
and sleeves. The pressure of the cell is set by accurately 
controlling the temperature of a side arm 'cold tip' which 



is kept at a lower temperature than the cell body. The 
side arm is enclosed in a water jacket, and water 
temperature is controlled by a water bath with a specified 
temperature accuracy of ±0.01 "C. 

In order to characterize the transmission profile of the 
filter, it is necessary to have a means of accurately 
measuring the frequency of the interrogation laser relative 
to some absolute, stable reference. There is also a need to 
make similar measurements of the laser frequency, V[, 
while performing an actual Filtered Rayleigh Scattering 
experiment. To this end, we have made use of a 
heterodyne technique which measures frequency relative 
to the peak of a Doppler broadened iodine absorption line 
at 18789 cm" 1 which corresponds to the P142(37,0) 
transition in the B-X electronic manifold. The 
experimental setup used to characterize the absorption 
filter is shown in figure 2. The laser used as the absolute 
frequency reference is a Lightwave model 124-1064-50-F 
narrow linewidth (5 kHz), cw, 50 mW, Nd:YAG laser. A 
small portion of the infrared light from this laser is 
frequency doubled using a KTP crystal. The green, 
frequency doubled light is separated from the infrared 
light, and passed through a 0.5 inch diameter iodine 
reference cell of similar construction as the filter cell. 
The main body of this reference cell is held at a 
temperature of 80 °C and the sidearm at a temperature of 
45.7 "C. The light passed through this reference cell is 
detected with an amplified photodiode. A standard first 
derivative nulling technique 10 is used to lock the 
frequency of the doubled beam of the reference laser to 
the P142(37,0) absorption peak of the reference cell. The 
residual infrared laser light from the reference laser is sent 
through a fiber optic onto a high speed detector (New 
Focus model # 1434). A second, narrow linewidth, 40 
mW, cw, Nd:YAG laser is used to interrogate the original 
iodine filter cell. This laser beam is also passed through a 
KTP crystal to generate a frequency doubled beam, 
which is used to measure transmission through the filter. 
The residual infrared light from the interrogation laser is 
passed through the same fiber optic onto the high speed 
photodetector, where it interferes with the reference laser 
beam. The interference generates a signal at a frequency 
equal to the difference between the frequencies of the 
reference laser and the interrogation laser. A Hewlett 
Packard microwave frequency counter with accuracy 
better than 1 MHz measures this heterodyne signal. The 
frequency difference between the frequency doubled 
beams is then twice the measured frequency difference 
between the infrared beams. This system allows for 
frequency measurements of the frequency doubled beam 
over a range of 80 GHz. 

A computer model of iodine absorption 2 indicates 
that with a reference cell main body temperature stability 
of 1°C and side arm temperature stability of 1 "C, the 
peak of the PI 42(37,0) transition is stable to within 1 
MHz. In order to determine the stability of the frequency 
of the reference laser, the sensitivity of the feedback 
electronics must also be considered. To demonstrate the 



short term stability, the heterodyne beat frequency was 
monitored while the reference laser was manually 
detuned, and allowed to re-lock. Because the short term 
(seconds) stability of the measurement laser is 75 kHz, 
the change in the beat frequency over this short time 
period is due solely to the change of the reference laser 
frequency. As shown in figure 3, the reference laser re- 
locks to within ± 1MHz of its original frequency. This 
measurement along with the stability of the reference 
iodine cell demonstrates the short term frequency stability 
of this reference signal to be within ±2 MHz. However, 
in an environment without temperature stabilization, the 
long term (days) frequency has been observed to shift by 
as much as a few tens of MHz. This shift is apparent 
when the system resides in a lab where the temperature 
cycles through as much as 5 °C in 24 hours. This 
sensitivity to ambient temperature is probably caused by 
the particular scheme used to generate the frequency 
modulation needed for the locking technique. A new 
frequency modulation scheme with reported sub-MHz 
stability 10 is currently being assembled. Currently, this 
long term drift is accounted for by measuring cell 
transmission versus laser frequency immediately before 
running a Filtered Rayleigh Scattering experiment, and 
determining the frequency shift of the reference laser 
relative to its frequency at the time of the original filter 
characterization. 

Using this frequency measurement technique, the 
setup in figure 2 was used to determine the transmission 
profile, t("u), of the iodine cell. A scan with a resolution 
of 10 MHz extending over 42 GHz is shown in figure 4. 
The absorption region used by the current experiments is 
enlarged in figure 5. The maximum uncertainty on the 
transmission measurements made with this setup is 
estimated to be ±0.5%. The maximum uncertainty on the 
frequency measurements, as discussed above, is estimated 
to be ±2 MHz. This does not include the long term drift 
which is accounted for with a calibration experiment at 
the time of the Filtered Rayleigh Scattering experiment. 
Three transmission profiles, analogous to figure 4, were 
taken in a temperature stabilized environment for analysis 
of FRS data. During data analysis, each of the three 
spectra were used independently for fitting experimental 
data to equation 6. The resulting differences in v, T, and 
P, due to the iodine reference scan that was used were 
negligible. 

Laser 

The interrogation laser used in the current 
experiments is an injection seeded, frequency doubled, 
pulsed Nd:YAG laser. In order to use equation 6 to 
analyze experimental data, the absolute wavelength, X, of 
the laser, the instantaneous center frequency of the laser, 
M\, relative to the reference laser, and the laser lineshape, 
1(\)), must all be known, or independently determined. 

The wavelength of the laser can be determined from 
the wavelength of the iodine absorption line used as the 



filter. As measured by Gcrstcnkorn and Luc," this line is 
located at 18788.4509 cm" 1 with an uncertainty of ± 
0.002cm" 1 . During the Filtered Rayleigh Scattering 
experiment, the frequency of the laser is tuned over 
approximately 5 GHz, which corresponds to a change in 
wavelength of 0.005 nm. Conservatively, the laser 
wavelength, X., which is used to calculate the Dopplcr 
shift, equation 2, and the Y parameter, equation 3, may be 
taken to be 532 nm ± 0.5 nm. This overestimate in the 
uncertainty of wavelength has negligible effects on the 
accuracy of measurements of velocity, temperature, and 
density. 

In order to determine the central frequency of the 
pulsed laser, a small portion of the infrared, cw seed laser 
is split off from the main beam and combined with the cw 
infrared beam from the reference laser described above. 
The same heterodyne system that was used to characterize 
the filter, is then used to determine the frequency 
difference between the seed beam and the reference laser. 
If the central frequency of the pulsed laser is precisely 
determined by the seed beam, then it is accurately 
measured by the heterodyne signal. In order to determine 
how well the pulsed laser frequency matches that of the 
seed beam, one must know the particular mechanism by 
which the pulsed laser is locked to the seed laser. For 
most available lasers, including the laser used in the 
current experiments, locking is achieved through Q- 
Switch Buildup Time Reduction (BUTR). This feedback 
system varies the oscillator cavity length of the pulsed 
laser while monitoring the time between the firing of the 
Q-switch and laser emission. When the Q-Switch buildup 
time is minimized, the pulsed laser is well seeded, and its 
frequency is very close to that of the seed beam. This 
feedback system requires that the pulsed oscillator cavity 
length be continuously dithered, so that even when the 
pulsed laser is well seeded, its frequency may still 
oscillate over a small range due to frequency 'pulling' of 
the output pulse with respect to the seed frequency. 12 
This frequency dither is specified by the manufacturer to 
be less than ±10 MHz at 532 nm. For Filtered Rayleigh 
Scattering experiments, such as those reported below, that 
determine flow parameters by fitting data obtained from 
many laser pulses, the effect of this dither should be 
negligible, since, on average, half of the laser pulses will 
have a central frequency up to 10 MHz higher than the 
measured seed laser frequency, and half will have a 
central frequency up to 10 MHz lower. For instantaneous 
measurements, however, this frequency dither must be 
taken into account if one is to attain accurate velocity 
measurements. 

In addition to this frequency dither, one must also 
consider the effects of frequency tuning on injection 
seeding. Scanning of the high power laser is 
accomplished by stepping the temperature of the seed 
laser crystal. This changes the crystal length and index of 
refraction, and therefore, the frequency of the seed laser. 
By monitoring the frequency of the seed laser after its 
temperature is changed, it has been determined that the 



seed laser requires roughly 10 seconds to rc-stabilizc. 
Simultaneously, measurements of the feedback voltage to 
the piezoelectric crystal controlling the cavity length of 
the pulsed laser show that its frequency has also stabilized 
after 10 seconds (figure 6). In the experiments reported 
below, frequency tuning was accomplished by changing 
the seed laser temperature by discrete steps, and allowing 
10 seconds after each step before collecting data. New 
laser systems currently under development make use of 
different seeding and tuning techniques, and so the next 
generation of tunable lasers should be capable of 
frequency tuning on a shot to shot basis. An alternative 
locking scheme is further developed in the discussion of 
future work. 

Characterization of the laser frequency profile, I(i)), 
is also necessary for analysis. A small portion of the 
pulsed laser beam was passed through the filter cell, and 
transmission was monitored as a function of laser 
frequency. The resulting profile is a convolution of the 
filler profile t(v>), determined as described above, and the 
laser frequency profile, I(u). Assuming first a purely 
Lorcntzian laser frequency profile, and then a purely 
Gaussian profile, a number of data sets were each fit. 
These fits yielded laser linewidths, for the Lorcntzian 
case, which were much narrower than the frequency 
transform limit of approximately 150 MHz (based on an 
infrared laser pulse length of 6 ns). The Gaussian fit, 
however, yielded more reasonable linewidths between 
100 MHz and 200 MHz. An example of this test data and 
a fit using a Gaussian laser lincshape arc shown in figure 
7. Although this suggests that the use of a Gaussian 
lineshape is appropriate, it does not rule out the 
possibility that some small Lorcntzian component is 
present. In any event, the linewidth of the Rayleigh - 
Brillouin scattering profile, g(t)), will generally be much 
broader than the laser linewidth, and so a small 
discrepancy in the laser lincshape will not introduce a 
significant error in the flow parameters determined when 
data is fit to equation 6. 

In many laser based diagnostics experiments, it is 
desirable to continuously monitor the laser intensity, in 
order to filter out any change in signal due to drift or jitter 
in laser power. A simple photodiode and boxcar 
integrator monitoring the intensity of a small portion of 
the laser beam yielded intensity measurements with 
uncertainties larger than the small jitter and drift of the 
laser intensity itself. While a more precise intensity 
monitoring system may be used in the future, for the 
experiments reported here, the laser intensity was not 
continuously monitored, and any small jitter or drift was 
accounted for in the estimated uncertainties on the 
parameters R and B as described below. 

Camera 

The discussion above, outlining the theoretical 
model, assumes the camera and frame grabber are linear 
in their response, i.e. that C in equation 5 is independent 



of signal level. In order to test the linearity of the 
imaging system, a cw HcNe laser at 632.8 nm was used to 
illuminate an index card which was beyond the object 
plane of the camera. This yielded a temporally stable 
signal level across the entire CCD chip. With the camera 
and frame grabber parameters set to the values used in the 
Filtered Raylcigh Scattering experiments, the camera gate 
time was reduced in discrete steps, each equal to one 
tenth the initial value. For an ideal, linear system, this 
would result in a 10% decrease in signal level at each 
resolution clement with each step. For a very non-linear 
system response, a calibration experiment such as this 
could be used to pre-process the signal levels from each 
resolution element in order to remove non-linearities 
before the fitting of the data to equation 6. Because the 
non-linearities appear to be small in this particular camera 
- frame grabber pair, the current work has not included 
such pre-processing. However, based on experimental 
results presented below, this assumption has come to be 
questioned, especially with regard to threshold values. 

The model discussed above, also assumes that the 
collection solid angle subtended by the camera lens, d£J, 

do; 
is small enough to consider jf^ , U D , g(l)), and t(\)), 

constants over the entire solid collection angle. In order 
to determine the conditions for which this assumption is 
valid, a computer model which does not make this 
assumption (one which corrects for variation in angle and 
path length across the imaging lens) was developed, and 
its results compared to the model above. For this 
theoretical study, an idealized Mach 5 flow, with velocity 
equal to 721 m/s, static temperature equal to 50 K, and 
static pressure equal to 40 torr was assumed. The laser 
sheet was assumed to have a propagation direction 45° 
relative to the How, and the camera was assumed to 
image at a nominal angle of 90° to the sheet. Filter 
transmission versus frequency plots were calculated for 
the point in the center of the Field of view, using this more 
detailed model, assuming various collection f numbers 
(distance from lens to laser sheet / diameter of lens). 
These plots were compared to similar plots made using 
the simpler theory discussed above. As can be seen in 
figure 8, a very small collection f# results in very 
different curves for the two models. This is to be 
expected, since the scattering angle 0, varies significantly 
across the solid collection angle dQ, resulting in large 
variations in Doppler shift t) D , and scattering profile g(x>). 
As the collection f# increases, the variation of across 
the solid collection angle decreases, and so the 
discrepancy between the two models also decreases. For 
a collection f# greater than about 10, this discrepancy is 
small enough to be considered negligible. 

For the experiments discussed below, the collection 
f# was approximately 15, so the variation in across the 
solid collection angle was neglected. It was still 
necessary, however, to determine the value of 
accurately in order to obtain v, T, and P with low 



uncertainties. The difficulty with the measurement of this 
angle is that there exists no convenient marker for the 
camera observation direction. In order to address this 
problem, a HeNe laser at 632.8 nm was positioned so that 
the beam was coincident with the central camera 
observation ray. The center of the camera lens, and the 
center of the field of view uniquely define this ray. By 
placing an index card in the HcNe beam at various 
locations, a spot was observed on the CCD chip. When 
the index card was in the object plane of the camera lens, 
the laser spot appeared as a small, focused spot; when the 
card was behind or in front of the object plane, the spot 
appeared as a much larger unfocused spot. The position 
and angle of the HcNe laser beam were varied until the in 
focus spot and out of focus spot were both centered on the 
central pixel of the CCD chip. At this point the HeNe 
laser precisely overlapped the main camera ray, and was, 
therefore, an accurate indicator of the observation 
direction. The scattering angle, 0, was then measured by 
observing, on a protractor, the angle between the incident 
Nd:YAG laser beam and the HcNe beam. The accuracy 
of this technique was limited by the accuracy with which 
the protractor could be read, and was estimated to be ± 1°. 
In larger facilities this same technique could be used to 
obtain much more accurate angle measurements since a 
triangulation scheme could be used, where the lengths of 
three sides of a triangle composed of the Nd: YAG beam, 
the HeNe beam, and a line between them could be 
measured with small relative uncertainty. 

Other Parameters 

In the discussion of the theoretical model presented 
above, it was shown that uncertainties in the fitted flow 
parameters v, T, and P arc dependent on the uncertainties 
in four fixed model parameters, X, 0, R, and B, two 
profiles, l(u) and t(v>), and two measurement quantities, S 
and x>\. The previous three sections have discussed all of 
these uncertainties with the exception of the two model 
parameters R and B. Both of these parameters depend 
critically on the particular experimental setup, and, 
therefore, cannot be predicted with even marginal 
accuracy from theoretical considerations. Although they 
could be taken as two additional fitting parameters, this 
would decrease the certainty with which v, T, and P could 
be determined from the fit. Therefore, pre and post 
experiment calibrations were used to measure these two 
values to within some range. Two calibrations were 
performed, both with the filter cell removed from the 
front of the camera, thereby allowing for a t(Tj) profile of 
1 (i. e. the absence of the filter cell is equivalent to the 
presence of a filter cell with 100% transmission at all 
frequencies). In the first calibration, the camera imaged 
an evacuated test section. With P equal to zero, and t(t)) 
equal to 1, equation 6 becomes: S=B. For the second 
calibration, the camera imaged the test section at 
atmospheric conditions. In this case, P was assumed to be 
equal to 760 torr, and T was approximately 293 K (T was 



measured with a thermocouple for each calibration run). 

P 

Equation 6 now becomes S = — R + B, and since B is 

T 

known from the first calibration, R can be determined. 

Typical values and uncertainties for R and B arc 600± 20 

and 40 ± 5, respectively. 

4. MEASUREMENTS 
Experimental Set-Up and Data Collection 

In order to demonstrate the measurement capability 
of the Filtered Raylcigh Scattering technique, we have 
performed experiments under two test conditions. The 
first condition consists of ambient air at room temperature 
and pressure (nominally 20°C and 760 torr). Although 
the air is not moving, this test is still a good indicator of 
the accuracy of the velocity measuring capabilities of 
Filtered Raylcigh Scattering for the given temperature 
and pressure conditions, since the major uncertainties on 
the velocity measurement are expected to be absolute, not 
relative. The second test condition consists of a Mach 2 
free jet pressure matched to ambient atmospheric 
pressure. 

The experimental setup for these experiments is 
shown in figure 9. The frequency doubled, injection 
seeded, pulsed laser described above was used as the laser 
source. The beam was focused into a sheet and passed 
through the 6 inch by 6 inch vertical test section of a 
laboratory scale wind tunnel, at an angle of roughly 50 
degrees to the vertical. The intensified CCD camera and 
zoom lens, captured scattered light at 90 degrees to the 
laser sheet. The iodine cell discussed above was placed 
between the camera lens and the flow to be used as the 
absorption filter. The first test condition of ambient room 
air was achieved by temporarily removing the windows 
on the test section before the experiment was performed, 
and by leaving opened a valve between the test section 
and the surrounding laboratory during the experiment. 
For the second test case, compressed atmospheric air was 
passed through a nozzle contoured to produce a Mach 2 
flow which is pressure matched to atmospheric pressure. 
The stagnation pressure was held at lOOpsig, and the 
stagnation temperature was measured to be 258 K. 
Isentropic calculations predict that the free stream 
velocity, static temperature, and static pressure at the exit 
of this jet should be 480 m/s, 143 K, and 753 torr. In 
order to achieve a significant Doppler shift, the Nd:YAG 
beam crossed the flow at an angle of 50°. This required 
that the measurement region in the flow be some 12 mm 
to 22 mm (or 2 to 4 nozzle diameters) downstream of the 
nozzle exit in order to keep the laser beam from hitting 
the nozzle. RELIEF experiments 13 performed along a 
line 19 mm from the nozzle exit yielded velocities 
varying from 477 m/s to 497 m/s. This variation indicates 
the flow in the FRS test region has already interacted with 
the shear layers, and so velocity, temperature, and 



pressure values are not expected to be uniform, nor 
identical to the isentropically calculated values. 

For each of the two test conditions, the experimental 
procedure consisted of first running calibrations, then 
taking experimental data, and concluding with calibration 
runs. Measurements of resolution element intensity, S, 
were taken when the test section was evacuated, and 
again when filled with air at atmospheric pressure and 
temperature. These data determined values for R and B, 
as discussed above. Additionally, during the calibration 
runs, a portion of the laser beam passed directly through 
the iodine absorption cell in order to determine a 
transmission versus frequency profile. This profile was 
then used to determine any long term frequency offset of 
the reference laser frequency, which may have occurred 
since the filter cell was characterized. The same profile 
was used to determine the laser linewidth as discussed 
above. Next, the filter was placed in front of the camera, 
and the How was imaged at 110 different laser 
frequencies. Fifty frame averages were stored at each 
frequency. Finally, calibrations were again performed in 
order to detect any drifts in R, B, frequency offset, or 
laser linewidth during the run. The average of two values 
determined for each of R, B, frequency offset, and laser 
linewidth were subsequently used when analyzing the 
data. 

Data analysis consisted of binning the camera pixels 
into 10 pixel by 10 pixel resolution elements, which 
correspond to roughly 300 micron by 300 micron points 
in the flow. The size of these resolution elements was 
determined by previous work which indicated that the 
resolution of the microchanncl plate was effectively 5 
pixels by 5 pixels on the CCD chip. 14 At each resolution 
clement, an intensity versus frequency curve was 
generated, and then fit to equation 6 using parameter 
values, X, 0, R, and B, and lineshape profiles, t(l)) and 
1(1)), all of which were determined either during the 
calibration scans, or measured before the experiment as 
described in the sections above. Such data, S versus x>\, 
and the associated final fit to the model for a particular 
resolution element of the ambient air test conditions is 
shown in figure 10. These fits, one at each resolution 
element, yielded values for v, T, and P at each point in the 
flow. 

Uncertainty Analysis 

In order to estimate the uncertainties associated with 
the final measurements of velocity, the uncertainties in 
the parameters X, 0, R, and B, and the uncertainties in the 
lineshape profiles t(t)) and l(u) were all taken into account 
for one test point in the field of view for each of the two 
test measurement configurations. It is possible to 
independently calculate uncertainty measurements for 
velocity, temperature, and pressure at every point in the 
field of view. However, here, we present only a sample 
analysis of velocity uncertainty estimates at a point in the 
center of the field of view for the two conditions, ambient 



air and a Mach 2 jet. Each of the individual uncertainties 
in the four parameters X, 9, R, and B propagates into 
uncertainties in velocity, in the following manner, 
analogous to: 15 



Av = ^A9 



(7) 



Here, the uncertainty in velocity, Av, due to an 
uncertainly in angle, A9, is given. The uncertainty in X is 
determined as discussed ahovc. The uncertainly in 9 was 
estimated when it was measured. The uncertainties in R 
and B arc estimated based on the variations between the 
pre and post calibration measurements at the various 
points in the test region. 

In order to take into account the uncertainty of 
velocity due to uncertainty in the lincshapc 1(tj), the 
following equation is used: 



AV: 



3v 



A(Sv) 



(8) 



where 8\) is equal to the linewidth of the laser profile l(t>) 
of the assumed Gaussian lincshape, which is obtained 
from the fits to the pre and post calibration experiments. 
Finally, systematic uncertainties in V\ arising due to 
uncertainty in the amount of the long term drift of the 
reference frequency were accounted for with equations of 
the form: 



A dv A 

Av = At> r 



(9) 



where here, \) r , is the reference frequency. The 
uncertainty in linewidth, 5i), and the long term drift of the 
reference frequency U r , are estimated based on pre and 
post calibration values for a number of experiments. All 
of the partial derivatives in equations 6 through 8, except 

dv 

— — , are calculated numerically by fitting the data with 



96 



,h 



the appropriate parameter changed slightly. — — is 

do 
calculated analytically, by using equation 2. In order to 
combine all of the individual contributions to the 
uncertainty in velocity, we assumed the individual 
uncertainties were uncorrected, and took the square root 
of the sum of the squares 15 as the total systematic 
uncertainty. Table 1 summarizes the uncertainties in each 
of the parameters and profiles, shows the relevant partial 
derivatives at the test point for the first set of test 
conditions, and the uncertainty in velocity attributed to 
the uncertainty in each of the parameters and profiles. 
The final estimated uncertainty in velocity is 4 m/s. 
Table 2 shows the same data for the second test case 
(Mach 2 free jet). The final estimated uncertainty for this 
case is 5 m/s. 



par 


X 
(nm) 


e 

(ueg) 


R 


B 


5u 
(MHz) 


(MHz) 


Total 

Unccr 

ainty 


up- 
value 


532. 


91 


600 


40 


150 


— 




Apar 


0.5 


1 


20 


5 


50 


5 




A 


0.013 


0.011 


0.008 


0.25 


0.002 


0.65 




(?( par ) 


Av 
(m/s) 


0.007 


0.011 


0.16 


1.25 


0.1 


3.25 


3.5 



Table 1: Uncertainties for velocity measurement in 
ambient air 



par 


X 
(nm) 



(deg) 


R 


13 


5u 
(MHz) 


^r 
(MHz) 


Total 

Unccr 

aintv 


typ. 

value 


532. 


91 


600 


40 


150 


— 




Apar 


0.5 


1 


20 


5 


50 


5 




rX 


0.38 


0.41 


0.004 


0.91 


0.002 


0.44 




<?(par) 


Av 
(m/s) 


0.19 


0.41 


0.08 


4.55 


0.1 


2.2 


5.1 



Table 2: Uncertainties for velocity measurement in Mach 
2 jet. 

These tables demonstrate, in both cases, that velocity is 
most sensitive to variations in B, the background 
scattering level, and v r , stability of the frequency 
reference. Now that these parameter uncertainties have 
been reduced to acceptable levels, experiments can focus 
on identifying error sources that had been previously 
masked. 

Ex p erimen tal Results 

Results from the first test case are shown in color 
figure 1. This plot shows velocity, in the direction of 
sensitivity, as a function of downstream and spanwise 
location. The background here has been artificially set to 
a very low velocity delineated by dark red. The actual 
data is shown throughout the laser sheet which extends 
from the top right of the plot to the bottom left. Measured 
velocity values within the sheet range from -12 m/s to 31 
m/s. The errors in these velocity measurements are 
considerably larger than the predicted uncertainty in 
Table 1. Because the uncertainties associated with the 
parameters listed in Table 1 are small, the larger errors 
must be due to other factors. A comparison of color 
figure 1 with color figure 2, which shows the calibration 
parameter R, indicates that the variations in measured 
velocity are correlated with variations in the magnitude 



of R. However, the variation in R is caused primarily by 
the spatial profile of the laser. This correlation suggests 
the measured velocity depends on the recorded laser 
intensity. This is probably an artifact of the non-linearity 
of the detection system, which was neglected in the 
original analysis. The observed correlation between 
measured velocity value and laser intensity suggests that 
even a small amount of non-linearity in the detection 
system causes uncertainties in the velocity measurement. 
Once this non-linearity is accounted for, a variation in 
measured values closer to the predicted value of ±4 m/s 
can be expected. In particular, the region at the top of the 
laser sheet, with low laser energy (less than 75% of the 
peak), accounts for most of the distribution in measured 
velocity. Neglecting this small portion of the laser sheet 
yields a measured velocity range between -12 m/s and 10 
m/s. 

Velocity values obtained with the Mach 2 free jet arc 
shown in color figures 3 and 4. In these figures, the 
values in the region outside of the laser beam have been 
artificially set to m/s (yellow). The core of the jet can 
clearly be seen as the violet region, while the shear layers 
are apparent on either side of the core, extending from the 
violet region near 200 m/s to the yellow zero values. It 
should be emphasized that the measured velocity is the 
velocity component along the direction of sensitivity, 
which is determined by the laser propagation direction, 
and the camera observation direction. Points outside of 
the flow, but still within the laser sheet were analyzed and 
assigned their measured velocity values, all of which 
were close to m/s, as evidenced by the fact that the laser 
sheet cannot be differentiated from the background, 
outside the jet. The velocity measurements within the 
core of the jet vary from 192 m/s to 221 m/s. Again, 
some of this distribution in velocity is generated by the 
variation in laser intensity across the laser sheet. 
However, much of it is probably due to a real variation in 
velocity at this point in the flow. Evidence of such 
variations have been observed previously during RELIEF 
experiments performed with a tag line at 1 9mm from the 
nozzle exit. These RELIEF experiments yielded values 
for free stream velocity. After correcting for a slight 
difference between stagnation temperature, the RELIEF 
experiments predict free stream velocities ranging from 
477 m/s to 497 m/s. 

In order to project from the velocity in the direction 
of sensitivity of the Filtered Rayleigh Scattering 
experiment, to the velocity in the free stream direction, 
the angle between the direction of sensitivity and the free 
stream must be measured. For an angle of 65.5°, the 
Filtered Rayleigh Scattering velocities would be in 
precise agreement with the RELIEF velocities. During 
the FRS experiment, this angle was measured by 
assuming that the free stream direction was perpendicular 
to the flat top of the nozzle exit. All angles were 
measured, therefore, with the flat nozzle top being taken 
as a reference. Using this technique, the angle between 
the direction of FRS sensitivity and the free stream was 



determined to be 62.7° ± 0.7°. The 2.0° to 3.4° 
discrepancy between this angle and the required 65.5°, is 
probably due to a slight deviation between the free stream 
direction and the direction perpendicular to the flat top of 
the nozzle exit. It should be emphasized that the 
difficulty in measuring the angle between the direction of 
velocity sensitivity and the free stream velocity is not 
unique to Filtered Rayleigh Scattering. This issue will be 
important in any technique that measures Doppler shift to 
determine one component of velocity. 

Although the temperature and pressure data obtained 
from the Filtered Rayleigh Scattering experiments has not 
yet been fully analyzed, we present here preliminary plots 
of this data for the Mach 2 conditions. Color figures 5 
and 6 show 3-D plots of temperature and pressure. Both 
show behavior of the parameters as expected. The 
pressure of the free jet appears to be the same as that of 
the ambient surroundings, as expected, although the 
pressure values vary significantly across the entire region 
of interest. The temperature of the free jet is seen in color 
figure 6 to be significantly lower than that of the ambient, 
also as expected. Although the variation of measured 
temperature across the jet is ± 17 K, the average value of 
142 K matches the isentropically calculated value well. 

5. FUTURE WORK 

This work has emphasized control of experimental 
uncertainties to minimize the systematic uncertainties 
associated with Filtered Rayleigh Scattering. However, 
statistical uncertainties must also be considered. Signal to 
noise limitations arise primarily due to shot noise. In 
order to reduce this statistical uncertainty to below 1 %, it 
is necessary to collect 10,000 photo-electrons per 
resolution element. Earlier discussions 16 for realistic 
conditions, using the Nd:YAG/iodine FRS paradigm, and 
f5 optics, conclude that a CCD camera generates 64 
photo-electrons per resolution element per laser pulse. 
This yields measured intensity variation of 1 part in 8, or 
12.5%. Time averaging, however, allows for the 
collection of a larger number of photons. By averaging 
160 laser pulses, or 16 seconds at 10 Hz repetition rate, at 
each measurement point, the shot noise is reduced below 
1%. However, this scheme prevents instantaneous 
measurements. Because the Rayleigh scattering cross- 
section increases dramatically in the ultraviolet, due to the 
frequency, i) 4 , and index of refraction, (n-1)^, scaling, it 
is possible to collect in excess of 600 photo-electrons per 
laser pulse at 253.7 nm for the same experimental setup. 
The single pulse shot noise is reduced to an uncertainty of 
2.4%. 

Applying the Titanium:Sapphire/Hg Filter paradigm 
to FRS, yields noticeable improvements both because of 
the laser and filter characteristics. Current efforts to 
complete a high power, narrow linewidth, tunable 
ultraviolet laser system are underway. By injection 
seeding a pulsed Ti: Sapphire, and frequency tripling the 
tunable infrared output, we achieve in excess of 10 mJ of 



tunable, narrow lincwidth, ultraviolet light. To insure 
single mode operation while the laser is frequency tuned, 
efforts to complete injection locking of the pulsed Ti: 
Sapphire arc underway. To avoid the necessarily slow 
tuning rate of the BUTR injection locking technique of 
the Nd:YAG, a novel method of injection locking via a 
fringe locking technique is being developed in 
collaboration with Schwartz Electro-Optics, Inc. 17 The 
implication of such a locking technique is that the 
feedback is given on an instantaneous basis, rather than 
on the shot to shot basis of the BUTR. Feedback to the 
locking system is given between laser pulses, and thus, 
tracking by this system offers a frequency agile laser. 
Tuning may be faster, take discontinuous jumps, or dither 
over a wide range, without fear of unlocking. 

The development of a novel atomic vapor filter for 
FRS, using mercury, allows for a variety of 
improvements, as well. Because of the strong absorption 
and high atomic weight of mercury, achieving very high 
optical depth is attainable. Model fits to experimental 
transmission scans of a 5 cm length mercury vapor filter, 
suggest optical depths in excess of 1000. ' 7 A detailed 
scan of the Hg 202 line for a sidcarm temperature of 23 C 
(figure 1 1), demonstrates the nearly ideal characteristics 
of a mercury vapor filter. The high optical depth 
translates into an ability to suppress very strong elastic 
scattering, while transmitting weaker Doppler shifted 
signals, as would be desirable for imaging air flow over a 
model ( or imaging a boundary layer). Mercury does not 
suffer the background absorption difficulties of iodine. 
As a result, it is possible to dramatically vary the width of 
the absorption profile of the filter. This leads to the 
tailoring of filters to an appropriate experiment and to the 
use of multiple filters for instantaneous measurement of 
T, P, v. As previously mentioned, iodine experiments to 
date relied on scanning laser frequency; however, 
multiple Hg filters may be used with varying transmission 
profiles, to extract the same information on an 
instantaneous basis. Alternately, it may be possible to 
affect the mercury cell linewidth with an applied 
magnetic field. Then, a single cell could be rapidly 
'scanned' to achieve multiple measurements for instant 
calibration, and achieve several data points for varying 
absorption profiles, t(t)). 

6. SUMMARY 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We would like to thank Professor Tenti, University of 
Waterloo, for making available to us his program for 
calculating Raylcigh Brillouin profiles. 

This work was conducted under the support of the Air 
Force Office of Scientific Research, NASA-Langley, 
NASA-Lewis, and Small Business Innovative Research 
Programs under M.L. Encrgia, Inc. and Schwartz Electro- 
Optics, Inc. 

REFERENCES 

1. R.B. Miles and W.R. Lcmpcrt, "Two Dimensional 
Measurement of Density, Velocity, and Temperature, in 
Turbulent High Speed Air Flows by UV Raylcigh 
Scattering," Applied Physics B . Vol. 51. pg. 1, 1990. 

2. R.B. Miles, J.N. Forkey, and W.R. Lcmpcrt, "Filtered 
Rayleigh Scattering Measurements in Supersonic/ 
Hypersonic Facilities," 7th Aerospace Ground Testing 
Conference, Nashville, TN, July 1992. AIAA-92-3894 

3. J.N. Forkey, W.R. Lempert, S.M. Bogdonoff, 
G.Russell, and R.B. Miles, "Volumetric Imaging of 
Supersonic Boundary Layers Using Filtered Rayleigh 
Scattering Background Suppression," 32nd AeroSciences 
Meeting and Exhibit. Reno, NV, Jan. 1994. AIAA 94- 
0491. 

4. G.S. Elliot, M. Samimy, and S.A. Arnett, "A Study of 
Compressible Mixing Layers Using Filtered Rayleigh 
Scattering, " 30th AeroSciences Meeting and Exhibit. 
Reno, NV, Jan. 1992. AIAA 92-0175. 

5. G.S. Elliot, M. Samimy, and S.A. Arnett, "Details of 
A Molecular Filter Based Velocimitry Technique," 32nd 
AeroSciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno, NV, Jan 1994. 
AIAA 94-0490. 

6. J.F. Meyers, "Development of Doppler Global 
Vclocimetry," 18th Aerospace Ground Testing 
Conference, Colorado Springs, CO, June 1994. AIAA 
94-2582. 



The major components of a Filtered Rayleigh Scattering 
experiment have been examined and sources of 
systematic uncertainty have been identified and controlled 
to acceptable levels. With these sources of uncertainty 
reduced, current experimental results may now be used to 
determine other sources of uncertainty which had 
previously been masked. Work continues on the 
development of an UltraViolet Filtered Rayleigh 
Scattering system which will allow for reduction of 
statistical uncertainty. 



7 M. Winter and J. A. Shirley, "Air Mass Flux 
Measurement System Using Doppler Shifted Filtered 
Rayleigh Scattering, " 31st AeroSciences Meeting and 
Exhibit. Reno, NV, Jan. 1993. AIAA 93-0513. 

8. G. Tenti, CD. Boley, and R.C. Desai, "On the 
Kinetic Model Description of Rayleigh-Brillouin 
Scattering From Molecular Gasses, " Canadian Journal of 
Physics . Vol. 52, pg. 285, Feb. 1974. 



10 



9. H. Shimizu, S.A. Lcc, and C.Y. She, "High Spectral 
Resolution Lidar System with Atomic Blocking Filters 
for Measuring Atmospheric Parameters, " Applied Optics . 
Vol. 22, pg. 1373, 1983. 

10. A. Aric, M.L. Bortz, M.M. Fcjer, and R.L. Beyer, 
"Iodine Spectroscopy and Absolute Frequency 
Stabilization with the Second Harmonic of the 1319-nm 
Nd:YAG laser," Optics Letters . Vol. 18, pg. 1757, 1993. 

11. S. Gcrstcnkorn, and P. Luc, Atlas du Spectre 
d'Absorption de la Molecule Diode, Part 3 , pg. 53, 1978. 

12. Y.K. Park, G. Guiliani, and R.L. Beyer, "Unstable 
Singlc-Axial-Modc Operation of an Unstable Resonator 
Nd:YAG Oscillator by Injection Locking, " Optics 
Letters . Vol. 5. pg. 96. 1980. 

13. R.B. Miles, J. Connors, E. Markovitz, P. Howard, 
and G. Roth, "Instantaneous Supersonic Velocity Profiles 
in an Under Expanded Sonic Air Jet by Oxygen Flow 
Tagging, " Physics of Fluids A . Vol. 1, pg. 389, 1989. 



FIGURES 



cell windows 



hoaling tapo 
(temperature 
control) 




water bath 

(vapor prossure control) 

sido, 
arm 



\J 



RTD elomont 

(lomporaluro moasuromonl) 



14. personal communication: Kyritsis, D., Engine Lab., 
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department, 
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ. 



Fig. 1: Iodine absorption cell. 



15. see, for example, P.R. Bevington Data Reduction and 
Error Analysis for th e Physical Science . Mc Graw Hill, 
1969. 

15. R.B. Miles, J.N. Forkey, N.D. Finkelstein, and W.R. 
Lempert, "Precision Whole-Field Velocity Measurements 
with Frequency Scanned Filtered Rayleigh Scattering," 
7th International Symposium on Application of Laser 
Techniques to Fluid Mechanics, Lisbon, Portugal, July 
1994. 

16. N.D. Finkelstein, J.Gambogi, W.R. Lempert, R.B. 
Miles, G.A. Rines, A. Finch, and R.A. Schwarz, 
"Development of a Tunable Single Frequency Ultraviolet 
Laser Source for UV Filtered Rayleigh Scattering" 32nd 
AeroSciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno, NV, Jan. 
1994. AIAA 94-0492. 



6 



\- 



KTP frequency 

daubing cryiui 

»nd Mid 



KTP firquency 
(toubkng ciyllit 



S 



/- 



I 



fit>«r optic 
coupfcng 

(CAlNtefW) 
liber optic p" 



wel it»Mied 

Kxhne CcO 



nghipteri |L 
phot ode tec l o» I l j 

highipeed, 1— . 

frequency 

counter J 



"/ 



high tenvttvtr 
photodetectar 



phot ode I act or 

(l/»n limited 
«gn*0 



J praModelector 

1 (hteraWy 
i«(a«tnc«) 



' PL 



(.tin acini HI ton 

and iior*ge) 



Fig. 2: Experimental setup used to characterize iodine 
cell. Frequency reference is on the right, and the 
transmission measurement setup is on the left. 
Abbreviations are: BS - beamsplitter, 
HBS - harmonic beam splitter, M - mirror 



11 





uu 








N 
















1 
















~. 


40- 












































































a 
















a 
















BO 


?()- 














c 
















v: 
















■j 










V 

















\ 








0- 










w_ 















. , 


















/ : 






u 










/ : 






> 










/ i 1 






~ 


-20- 








] j 








- 














~ 


- 












u 






























40 
















mi 


MM 


M M i 1 


Mill 










100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 
time (sec) 



-50 -40 -30 -20 -10 

frequency relative to reference (GHz) 



Fig. 3a: Demonstration of re-locking of reference laser 
after manual de-tuning. 



Fig. 4: Transmission profile of iodine filter cell 



2.0 



o 
a 

50 
C 

15 



t 0.0 

o 



u 






-2.0 






200 300 400 500 600 700 
time(sec) 




~i — i — i — i — I — i — i — i — i — r~i i i r 

-20 -19 -18 -17 -16 

frequency relative to reference (GHz) 



Fig. 3b: Enlargement of figure 3a, showing the 
reference laser re-locking to within ±1 MHz. 



Fig. 5: Detail of filter transmission profile 



12 



-S 7.85 

X 

o 

— 7.80 

& 

<u 

<-< 7.75 
i> 

■j 

H 7.70 H 

— - 

u 

o 7.65 



K 7.60 

— 
<E 7.55 



JI^ IPPIII 




20 30 40 50 60 
time(sec) 



-20 -19 -18 -17 -16 -15 

frequency relative to reference (GHz) 



Fig. 6a: Frequency of injection seeder after a discrete 
change in tuning voltage 



Fig. 7: Fit of calibration data (points) to a convolution 
between the Gaussian laser line profile and the filter 
transmission profile (line) 



2.6 



% 2.5 

ha 

<U 

O 

73 2.3- 
c 

Cij 

■a 22 

u 

=§ 2.1 
u 

2.0 




I I I I | I 1 1 I | I I I I 1 'I T T T 'T I' I T T "| - ! T T T 

10 20 30 40 50 60 

time(sec) 




-19 -18 -17 -16 

frequency relative to reference (GHz) 



Fig. 6b: Feedback signal which controls locking of laser 
by changing oscillator cavity length 



Fig. 8a: Response of the iodine filter to scattering from 
an idealized Mach 5 flow, imaged with a collection f# of 
1. The solid curve shows the response predicted for 
narrow linewidth scattering when effects of the solid 
collection angle are neglected. The dashed line includes 
the effects of the solid collection angle, again assuming 
narrow linewidth scattering. The dotted line includes the 
effects of the solid collection angle, as well as the 
Rayleigh-Brillouin scattering profile. 



13 




160 



140 



r: 



sr§ 


120 


C3 C 




3? JLJ 


100 


rt 




•- C 




M O 


80 






>>D 








'5> 9 


W) 


5 a 





40 



20 




frequency relative to reference (GHz) 



-20 -19 -18 -17 -16 -15 

frequency relative to reference (GHz) 



Fig. 8b: Response of the iodine filter to scattering from 
an idealized Mach 5 flow, imaged with collection f# of 5 



Fig. 10: Fit of grayscale data values at one resolution 
clement (points) to S(\)) as given by equation 6 (line). 



frequency dwAUd, 
puli*d. Nd TAG tiMT 



C) 



nt»r optic 

couping 

(GRMtena) 



Di 



MghifMad 
count ir 



□ 



<_L 



KTP frequency 

douMng nyttal 

•ndopUci 



z 



-x 



v.l R.bllrad 
iodtnactl 



HCS 



SlQh MMrtMty 
phModti«ctor 



f.wl 



i 



lotV-h ■mpllW 



A/0 bawd Mrf 

film* '...! J..f 




| I I I I | I I I I | I I I I [ I I I I | I I I I 

-3-2-10123 
relative laser frequency (GHz) 



Fig. 9: Experimental setup for Filtered Rayleigh 
Scattering experiments. Abbreviations are as in fig. 2. 



Fig. 11: Experimental scan of mercury vapor cell 
transmission (dotted) at 253.7 nm for a 5 cm long cell 
with a cell temperature of 48°C, and a side arm 
temperature of 23°C. Fit to theory (solid) yields an 
optical depth of 71. 



14 



