NASA 

Technical Memorandum 101378 


AVSCOM 
Technical Report 88-C-023 


An Expert System for Restructurable Control 


<kASA-TK- 1C 1378) AN iXPfcRl tOH NdS-12309 

i tdlRCCltEAEIi ttt'lBCI (NASA) 9 p C3CL 09b 


Uncias 

G3/63 0174590 


Jonathan Litt 
Propulsion Directorate 

U.S. Army Aviation Research and Technology Activity— AVSCOM 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 


Prepared for 

Space Operations Automation and Robotics (SOAR 88) 
cosponsored by the U.S. Air Force, National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, and Wright State University 
Dayton, Ohio, July 20-23, 1988 





US ARMY 
AVIATION 
SYSTEMS COMMAND 


AVIATION R&T ACTIVITY 




AN EXPERT SYSTEM FOR RESTRUCTURABLE CONTROL 


Jonathan LI tt 
Propulsion Directorate 

U.S. Army Aviation Research and Technology Activity - AVSCOM 

Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 


SUMMARY 

Work in progress on an expert system which restructures and tunes control 
systems on-line Is presented. The expert system coordinates the different 
methods for redesigning and implementing the control strategies due to system 
changes. The research Is directed toward aircraft and jet engine applications 
The Implementation is written in LISP and is currently running on a special 
purpose LISP machine. 


INTRODUCTION 

A restructurable control system has the ability to redesign Itself on-line 
to compensate for a significant change In the system. Restructurabl 1 Ity Is 
important to mission effectiveness because It allows a closed-loop system to 
continue operating In an acceptable manner even after major changes to the sys- 
tem. Here the closed-loop system consists of a controller and plant. Examples 
of systems with major changes are aircraft with battle damage or engines with 
foreign object damage. With an Invariant control system designed for the nomi- 
nal plant, an aircraft that experienced battle damage may now only be able to 
limp home. In the worst case it would be unstable. With a redesigned control 
system for the new, altered plant, the plane Is more likely to return safely 
and It may be able to carry out all or part of Its mission with only slightly 
reduced capabilities. 

Restructurable control Is applicable to systems which experience mechani- 
cal problems such as actuator or control surface failures and where the 
capability lost due to failure is wholly or partially available In some other 
component or components. Most of the redesign strategies in the literature 
work by redistributing the forces and moments of the failed actuators or miss- 
ing surfaces over the remaining redundant components to compensate for the 
lost components. The methods differ in the redesign approach they employ. 

The research by Looze et al . has concent ated on a linear quadratic approach 
to the redesign procedure (ref. 1). Horowitz et al . have applied quantative 
feedback theory to control system reconfiguration (ref. 2). Raza and 
Sllverthorn have used the pseudoinverse of the control matrix and generalized 
input vectors to achieve the desired responses along the orthogonal axes 
(ref. 3). The technique in reference 3 is similar to the control mixer con- 
cept for reconfiguration described by Rattan (ref. 4). 

The goal of this paper is to describe a way to tie together some of 
the previous work in the field so as to achieve a highly survlvable control 
system. A highly survlvable system can successfully restructure in response 
to a multitude of different failures. In general, previous restructurable 
controllers have been specifically designed for a single failure type. 



Each design method used is valid for Its specific application. However, none 
Is "optimal" nor even applicable In all situations. Thus, to achieve a highly 
survlvable system, it Is necessary to identify the current dynamic characteris- 
tics of the system and to determine which of the possible solutions is the 
best In some sense under the given circumstances. To accomplish this decision 
making in an uncertain environment with potentially conflicting mission objec- 
tives, some type of Intelligence will be required. Hence the concept of an 
expert system to coordinate the different redesign strategies Is proposed. 


BACKGROUND 

The Idea of restructurable control has appeared recently, mainly with 
respect to aircraft. Battle damage has been considered a perfect application 
for the research. Commercial airliners are also a possible vehicle for the 
work. Several accidents and near accidents where the pilot was able to recover 
and land the plane after analyzing the problem have been discussed In relation 
to restructurable control (ref. 5). 

Thus this strategy Is very attractive for both civilian and military 
aeronautics and propulsion applications. Creating the ability in a plane to 
restructure Its control system after damage in order to continue at a level of 
performance similar to Its original design specifications Is highly desirable. 
It is also Important to remember that the main Ideas here are not limited to 
airplanes. They can be applied to a wide variety of systems with Inherent 
redundancy. 


EXPERT SYSTEM COMPONENTS 

An expert system consists of three independent parts: a rule base, a 

knowledge base, and an Inference engine. The rule base Is a set of heuristics 
or rules-of-thumb which apply to the type of problem at hand. The knowledge 
base Is a collection of Information specific to the current situation. The 
inference engine is a program which applies the rules to the knowledge base in 
order to glean new information or to determine if an assumption is justified. 
When new information is asserted, it Is stored in the knowledge base. 

An inference engine can work with any appropriately structured knowledge 
base and rule base. This three part structure allows the Inference engine to 
be application-independent while the application-dependent Information resides 
in the knowledge base and rule base. 

The proposed overall structure of the reconfiguration expert system is 
shown In figure 1. It consists of (1) an inference engine, (2) a control 
system restructuring knowledge and rule base, and (3) a controller tuning 
knowledge and rule base. The control system restructurer Is already partially 
Implemented. In the future we plan to incorporate an on-line controller- 
tuning expert system into the overall system. It will share the Inference 
engine with the reconfiguration expert system. 

The Inference engine developed for this application Is capable of perform- 
ing symbolic and numerical calculations required to evaluate certain rules. 

It can also execute generalized rules with previously established facts from 


2 



the knowledge base to Infer new facts. In addition, It has the ability to per- 
form what-lf type reasoning by trying different scenarios If more than one Is 
appropriate. 

The knowledge base of the restructurable control system consists of Infor- 
mation about the plant and Its controller. For a linear system such parameters 
as the system matrices and the original controller gains are stored. There 
are also specifications on the actuators such as linear ranges and nonlinear 
characteristics. Information stored here can change In response to plant 
changes. It is changed or updated as new facts become available. 

The rule base of the control system restructurer contains rules about 
control system design. These range from top-level control design methods to 
low-level details such as definitions of controllability and observability. 

The rules may contain numerical expressions to be evaluated (such as whether a 
realization is minimal) and may contain variables to be given values by the 
Inference engine during the discovery of new facts. 

A separate knowledge base will be required for the tuning system. Follow- 
ing the approach of reference 6, It will contain response characteristics asso- 
ciated with a well-tuned loop of the type In question. It also will have data 
on any previous responses obtained In the tuning process. 

A rule base for controller tuning w'll be created also. The heuristics 
will use the results from previous tuning efforts and other plant information 
for the next tuning attempt. 

Figure 2 shows the Interaction of the expert system with the overall sys- 
tem. A significant change in the identified model of the plant will cause the 
expert system to restructure the control 1 er to compensate for the alteration. 
After the new controller is Implemented, the expert system will adjust the con- 
troller parameters to optimize the performance of the closed loop system. 

SYSTEM CAPABILITIES 

Figure 3 shows the anticipated future setup of the overall system. It 
shows a hierarchy with an expert system receiving Information from a system 
Identifier and a pattern extractor. This Information Is used in the restruc- 
turing and tuning of the controller for the altered plant. In the current 
setup, the plant simulation, the controller, and the expert system are all 
written in compiled LISP running on an LMI Lambda LISP machine. The system 
Identifier and the pattern extractor are not yet Implemented. The simulation 
consists of a realization of a linearized system In the form of matrices 
(A,B,C,D) and the state Is evolved using Euler Integration. Presently the 
expert system uses a model of the plant directly from the simulation. The 
linear model is of the form: 


x = Ax + Bu 


y = Cx + Du 

A change In the model prompts the expert system to analyze and redesign the 
control. The new controller replaces th? old one In the simulation and the 
state continues to evolve. 

3 



The restructuring strategies that the expert system can currently use 
Involve the pseudoinverse of B (refs. 3 and 4). The expert system takes a 
realization (A,B,C) and manipulates It, using the Kalman Structure Theorem for 
Instance, until It Is minimal and B T B has full rank. If the expert system 
can achieve this goal, the equation 

K = (B T B) -1 B T [A - (A Q - BqKq) ] 

Is used to determine the new controller matrix. Here A and B are the 
altered system matrices and (Aq - BqKq) Is the reduced order version of the 
original closed-loop system matrix of the full order model. 

Examples of the heuristics used In the situation described above are: 

(1) If (A,B,C) Is controllable and observable 
then realization Is minimal. 

(2) If B T B Is full rank 

then pseudoinverse of B exists. 

(3) If (A,B,C) Is not minimal and 

<A,B,C) Is minimum phase 
then find a minimal realization. 

(4) If pseudoinverse of B exists and 

realization Is minimal 

then K = (B T B) -1 B T [A - (A Q - BqKq)] 

These rules are typical of the heuristics contained in the rule base. 

A user Interface exists for use In the development stage. In a delivery 
system there will be no need for such an environment as the system will run 
without human Intervention. 

The expert system executes only when invoked, for example when the control 
needs to be redesigned. Currently, It Is Invoked by manually halting the simu- 
lation and typing the command to execute the expert system. The simulation 
must then be restarted. This Is necessary at present because the simulation 
and the expert system both run on the same processor and no system identifica- 
tion scheme has yet been Implemented. In the future the Identifier will 
communicate with the expert system and cause It to start redesigning when a 
significant change in the system matrices occurs. 


CONCLUDING REMARKS 

The expert system Is able to handle a variety of reconfiguration situa- 
tions. For these cases, the new controller is designed and Implemented In a 
matter of seconds. Naturally the redesign time depends on the order of the 
system. 


4 



At present a few of the control design algorithms from the literature have 
been Implemented. More have to be Included In addition to Incorporating any 
other work, both new and existing, that Is deemed necessary for the system to 
work well. 

Some work has been done In the area of controller tuning by pattern recog- 
nition techniques for single-input single-output systems (ref. 6). We Intend 
to extend the methodology to multiple-lnput-multlple-output systems. 

Currently the LISP machine performs the numerical calculations. For 
real-time execution of the system, a special purpose numeric processor, such 
as an array processor, will be required. 

A system Identifier will be Implemented In the future. In the near term 
one might be Implemented on the LISP machine. Eventually a microprocessor- 
based system Identifier should be connected to the plant and signal the expert 
system If a significant change occurs In the model. 

An on-line pattern extractor which will determine the response features 
will also have to be developed. These features will be passed to the knowledge 
base of the tuning expert system. 

The simulation currently residing within the Lambda will be moved to an 
Applied Dynamics AD100 simulation computer. This will allow a nonlinear, 
real-time simulation to be Implemented. When the Interface between the two Is 
completed, the capability will exist to test the expert system In a realistic 
situation. 


REFERENCES 

1. Looze, D.P., et al . : An Automatic Redesign Approach for Restructurable 

Control Systems. Proceedings of the IEEE National Aerospace and 
Electronics Conference, NAECON 1985, Vol . 1, IEEE, 1985, pp. 570-577. 

2. Horowitz, I.; Arnold, P.B.; and Houpls, C.H.: YF16CCV Flight Control 

System Reconfiguration Design Using Quantitative Feedback Theory. 
Proceedings of the IEEE National Aerospace and Electronics Conference, 
NAECON 1985, Vol . 1, IEEE, 1985, pp. 578-585. 

3. Raza, S.J.; and Sllverthorn, J.T.: Use of the Pseudo-Inverse for Design 

of a Reconf 1 gurabl e Flight Control System. AIAA Guidance, Navigation and 
Control Conference, AIAA, 1985, pp. 349-356. 

4. Rattan, K.S.: Evaluation of Control Mixer Concept for Reconfiguration of 

Flight Control System. Proceedings cf the IEEE National Aerospace and 
Electronics Conference, NAECON 1985, Vol. 1, IEEE, 1985, pp. 560-569. 

5. Montoya, R.J., et al . , eds.: Restructurable Controls. NASA CP-2277, 1982. 

6. Lltt, J.: An Expert System for Adaptive PID Tuning Base on Pattern 

Recognition Techniques. Instrumentation In the Chemical and Petroleum 
Industries, vol. 18, Instrument Society of America, 1986, pp. 87-104. 


5 




Figure 1 — Structure of the Expert Systems 


RESTRUCTURABLE CONTROL 



Figure 2 


Expert System Interaction with Overall System 












Figure 3 - Overall Hardware Configuration 


7 






NASA 

National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 


Report Documentation Page 


1. Report No. 


NASA TM- 101378 
AVSCOM TR-88-C-023 


2. Government Accession No. 


4. Title and Subtitle 

An Expert System for Restructurable Control 


3. Recipient’s Catalog No. 


5. Report Date 


6. Performing Organization Code 


7. Author(s) 
Jonathan Litt 


8. Performing Organization Report No. 

E-4433 


10. Work Unit No. 

9. Performing Organization Name and Address 

NASA Lewis Research Center SOS-6? aic 

Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191 UK 

an( j 1 1 . Contract or Grant No. 

Propulsion Directorate 

U.S. Army Aviation Research and Technology Activity— AVSCOM 

Cleveland, O hio 44135-3127 is7 Type of Report and Period Covered 

12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 

XT . . . . _ A , . . Technical Memorandum 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Washington, DC. 20546-0001 14. Sponsoring Agency Code 

and 

U.S. Army Aviation Systems Command 
St. Louis, Mo. 63120-1798 

15. Supplementary Notes 

Prepared for Space Operations Automation and Robotics (SOAR 88), cosponsored by the U.S. Air Force, 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio, July 20-23, 1988. 

16. Abstract ~~ “ ~ 

Work in progress on an expert system which restructures and tunes control systems on-line is presented. The 
expert system coordinates the different methods for redesigning and implementing the control strategies due to 
system changes. The research is directed toward aircraft and jet engine applications. The implementation is 
written in Lisp and is currently running on a special purpose Lisp machine. 


13. Type of Report and Period Covered 
Technical Memorandum 

14. Sponsoring Agency Code 


17. Key Words (Suggested by Author(s)) 

Expert system; Restructurable control; 

Real-time expert systems; Multivariable control; 
System identification 


18. Distribution Statement 

Unclassified — Unlimited 
Subject Category 63 


19. Security Classif. (of this report) 
Unclassified 


NASA FORM 1626 OCT l 


20. Security Classif. (of this page) 

21. No of pages 

22. Price* 

Unclassified 

8 

A02 


*For sale by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161 








