N95- 19758 


/ / ' /v ? 


CHARACTER SELECTING ADVISOR FOR A ROLE-PLAYING GAME 

Carol L. Redfield, Ph.D. 

University of Texas at San Antonio 
6900 North West Loop 1604 West 
San Antonio, TX 78249 
CRedfield@SwRI.edu 
(210) 679-7625 

Felicia Berlanga 
5510 Chancellor 
San Antonio, TX 78229 
(210) 684-8168 


ABSTRACT 

Role-playing games have been a source of much pleasure and merriment for people of all ages. 
The process of developing a character for a role-playing game is usually very, very time 
consuming, delaying what many players consider the most entertaining part of the game. An 
expert system has been written to assist a player in creating a character by guiding the player 
through a series of questions. This paper discusses the selection of this topic, the knowledge 
engineering, the software development, and the resulting program that cuts the time of character 
development from about 4 hours to 30 minutes. The program was written on a PC and an 
Apollo in CLIPS 4.3 and currently runs on the Apollo. 

INTRODUCTION 

The 1993-1994 Independent Study Mentorship (ISM) program through the Northside Independent 
School District in San Antonio started in the Summer of 1993. The ISM program allows 
students to study an area of their own choosing for a whole school year. During the ISM year, 
the student is paired with a mentor from the community who will guide the student in his or her 
studies. At the end of the ISM year, the student must have developed a tangible product utilizing 
the knowledge he or she has acquired throughout the year. The Young Engineers and Scientists 
(YES) program is for ISM students interested in the areas of engineering and applied sciences. 
YES gives students a chance to see what actually is done in careers within the engineering and 
sciences. The YES program consists of two components: a three week intensive study at 
Southwest Research Institute (SwRI) and a one-on-one mentorship through the school year. In 
YES, the mentors are selected from the staff at SwRI, and they mentors are supported financially 
by the NSF grant that funds the YES program. In most other mentorship programs, the 
mentor’s time is provided on a volunteer basis. 

Felicia was a YES program student who was interested in artificial intelligence, specifically 
expert systems, which was Carol’s expertise. Together we designed an expert system to help 
role-players build their characters more efficiently and with much less time required. In this 
paper, the steps taken in developing the system are outlined including product development, 
research, programming, and conclusions. 


296 



PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 


After deciding upon developing an expert system, an appropriate topic had to be selected. Since 
Carol’s Ph.D. work was in game playing and Felicia had an interest in role-playing games, we 
decided to work in the domain of role-playing games. When we looked into the current state 
of the gaming world, we saw that a tremendous amount of time is required in making a 
character for many role-playing games. Role-playing consists of assigning traits according to 
a set of rules to a character which the role-player will use to act out all actions as if the player 
were that character within a story. To make a specific desired character, a player typically takes 
time to make sure the character will be described well on papier and play well during the game. 
We decided to develop an expert system to assist in character development so that the process 
of developing a character would take much less time and would hopefully develop a better 
character with which to play the game. One way to develop a character is by asking a series 
of multiple choice questions of the player. Each response by the player would further develop 
and define the character and would lead to the next set of questions based on the previous 
response. The questions were developed in such a way so as to have the character be one that 
closely matches the qualities and characteristics that the player is picturing about their character. 
This question development is where much of the research was done in addition to determining 
a good way to implement the design of the system. 

RESEARCH 

The White Wolf Storyteller game called Mage was selected because of its popularity and 
availability of experts in playing the game and especially in developing characters. We designed 
our system to be a series of questions of the user to determine the characteristics preferred by 
the player. We first gathered information and performed our knowledge engineering by 
observing games being played and interviewing the players about character generation. A few 
local role-players who knew the game and played it were willing to be our experts. A number 
of multiple choice questions were developed in interviewing the expert game players. 

The Mage character sheet shown on the next page is used in character development and play of 
the game. It is broken up into many sections. The first section consists of the character’s name 
and other components that make up the character’s basic identity. The second section, 
attributes , pertains to the character’s mental, social, and physical characteristics. The third 
section, abilities , defines a character’s talents, skills, and knowledge or the things they can do. 
The fourth section, advantages, deals with the spheres of magic the character can obtain or use. 
The last section contains the character’s health levels, combat weapons, and other characteristics 
that have to do with the character’s longevity. This last section and the advantages section are 
not developed in the expert system. The Mage Character Advisor walks a player through 
selecting the attributes and abilities for the character being developed. 

On the Mage sheet, each circle by a characteristic represents a point for that area when it is 
filled. The point levels indicate how much of that characteristic or ability the character 
possesses, and in turn how many dice can be used in playing the game. Players can lose or gain 
points during the course of a game, and during games the Gamemaster (GM), who is the person 
who runs the game, gives out experience points which can be used to buy more points. 


297 




The Ascension 


Name: 

Essence: 

Tradition: 

Player: 

Nature: 

Mentor: 

Chronicle: 

Demeanor: 

Cabal: 


LmniTnrT^ 


Phy 

sical 



M 


i 

Srreneth 

#0000 

Charisma 

•oooo 

Perffnrinn 


•nnnn 

Dexterity 

#0000 

Manipulation •OOOO 

Intelligence 


- wUUUU 

•onnn 

Stamina 

#0000 

Appearance _ •0000 

Wits ” 


—•0000 

Talents 


Knowledges 

Alertness 

00000 

Drive 

ooooo 

Computer 

ooooo 

Athletics 

00000 

Etiquette 

ooooo 

l ocmnlntru 


Awareness 

00000 

Firearms 

ooooo 

Culture 

uuuuu 

ooonn 

Brawl 

00000 

Leadership 

ooooo 

Enigmas 

ooooo 

Dodee 

ooooo 

Meditation 

ooooo 

InvMrioarinn 

ooonn 

Expression 

ooooo 

Melee 

ooooo 

Law 

UUUUU 

ooooo 

Intuition 

ooooo 

Research 

ooooo 

Linguistics 

OOOOO 

Intimidation 

ooooo 

Stealth 

ooooo 

Medicine 

OOOOO 

Streetwise 

ooooo 

Survival 

ooooo 

Occult 

OOOOO 

Subterfuge 

ooooo 

Technology _ 

ooooo 

Science 

_00000 












Correspondence 

_00000 

Life 

ooooo 

Prime 

_ ooooo 

Entropy 

_00000 

Mind 

ooooo 

Spirit 

ooonn 

Forces 

_00000 

Matter 

ooooo 

Time 

_ OOOOO 



Backgrounds 

00000 

00000 

00000 

00000 

00000 

Combat 

Jn Difficulty | Damage 


Arete 

oooooooooo 

Willpower 

OOOOOOOOOO 

□□□□□□□□□□ 

Quintessence 


Bruised 

Bmt£l 

Injured 


health 


Mauled 

Crippled ~~ ~~ 

Incapacitated 

Experience 


O. O Study Points 

u OD° 

1 1 Paradox | ____ 






298 







PROGRAMMING 


The CLIPS programming language was selected for its relative ease of use, availability, and 
applicability to the problem solution. The program was originally developed on a networked PC 
and later moved to an Apollo Domain 4000 in order to run the 600 rules together. The program 
organization revolves around the characteristics to be developed. One set of questions needed 
to be developed for the attributes, with a subset of questions for each of the physical, social and 
mental attributes. Another set of questions had to be developed for abilities, with a subset of 
questions for determining point values for the various talents, skills and knowledge abilities. 
Finally, a summary or tally of the resulting character development must be given to the user. 

For the attributes, the three areas are prioritized by asking the user which one is most important 
to them and then which one is secondarily important to them. Then according to the rules, 
points are assigned to each choice with First, second, and third receiving seven, five, and three 
points respectively. The user is then asked to work with the first choice and the three divisions 
under it. The divisions represent sub-areas of each attributes such as physical which contains 
strength, stamina, and dexterity. Next a strategy was developed for distributing the points to 
the sub-areas. Since the point amounts are relatively low, one multiple choice question is asked 
of the user where all three sub-areas are possible answers. For the first choice, the user would 
receive seven questions, second would receive five, and third three. Since each of the sub-areas 
would represented in every question, a running total is kept of the number of times a sub-area 
is picked, and when questioning for that choice is done, that number becomes its level. This 
strategy is implemented for all three attribute choices. 

As an example, the following questions are asked to support point distribution in the social 
attributes and a summary is given: 

You have been alloted 7 point* for your first choice: social 
Please answer the next questions as truthfully as possible. 

Which is more important? 

<leading> people, <persuading> them, or <looking-good> for them: leading 
being <smooth>, <eloquent>, or <alluring>: alluring 

Consider these scenarios and type your response. 

At a party, you 

<1> are generally sociable, talking to all, 

<2> grab the center-of -attention, or 
<3> are the trend-setter: 3 

After a concert, 

<1> you talk so well that people think you are in the band, 

<2> are asked backstage by the band personally, or 
<3> you can talk the bouncers into letting you and all of your 
friends backstage: 2 

When going to a job interview, you 
<1» make an excellent first impression, 

<2> ijqpress them with your manners and attitude, or 
<3> convince them how valuable you would be to them: 2 

Which activity are you best -suited for? 

<1> recruitment for clubs and organizations, 

<2> fashion modeling, or 
<3> double- talking: 2 

Due to your answers to the preceding questions, your points 
have been alloted as follows: 

Charisma : 3 "Good: People trust and confide in you.* 

Manipulation : 2 -Average: Others slight believe you.* 

Appearance : 5 'Outstanding: Pi rat reactions are either that of awe. Intense 
jealousy or complete solitude.* 

(You have automatically bean givan one point in each area) 


299 



In the example above, the user is presented with three different types of questions: synonyms 
of the sub-areas names, situations, and best-suited for what-type question. A situation is: 

When going to a job interview, you (1) make an excellent first impression; (2) 
impress them with your manner and attitude; or (3) convince them how valuable 
you would be to them. 

A choice of number one would be a part to the sub-area of appearance, a choice of two would 
be charisma, and a choice of three would be manipulation. Once the questions end, the 
summary comes up with the point totals in each area and a short explanation of what that point 
level means, as given in the Mage handbook. 

For the abilities, the user must again prioritize the three abilities from first to third choice. 
Points are assigned but in different amounts: first choice receives thirteen, second receives nine, 
and third five. More points are assigned because of the greater amounts of abilities a character 
can possess. In this section, the same strategies for point assignment as in the attributes cannot 
be used because of the larger number of points assigned so a new strategy was needed. Since 
it is a player’s choice whether or not to possess any ability, the expert system gives them that 
choice. Instead of multiple choice questions, the questions become yes or no responses that 
describe a type of ability and then gives the choice of having the ability or not. If the ability 
is not chosen the next ability appears for questioning, but if the ability is wanted, the user types 
yes and a second part of the question appears to determine the number of points to assign to that 
ability. Since the user has already selected the ability, one point is automatically assigned in that 
area and one point is subtracted from the point total. All traits on the character sheets are 
ranked from zero to five, but since the character has one point in the area, the area need only 
be ranked from one to five. The second part of an ability question asks the user to rate the 
character in the ability on a scale of one to five. The number typed becomes the character’s 
level in that ability, and that number is also subtracted from the point total. Questioning 
continues until all the points are distributed and each ability is covered. At the end of the 
questioning, a summary appears showing where each point went and what each point level 
means. 

An example of a couple of rules are given showing the code as written by Felicia for the user 
being asked if the character has some science ability in the knowledges area, and the rule on 
dealing with a positive response in order to assign the number of points to science. The 
following page show two rules. For program flow, to go from one question or line of 
questioning to another, it is required that the previously asserted statement be in the conditions 
part of the rule. So for each possible outcome, there is a unique asserted statement and one to 
match it in the appropriate following rule. In the following rule, there are two possible 
outcomes. If the response is yes, the program asserts (abi-kno-thi-sc TRUE), and if no (abi-kno- 
thi-g3 TRUE). 


300 



(def rule abi-kno- thi- q3 -ch2 
?x <- (abi -kno- thi -q2 TRUB) 

?xkno <- ( curptsknow ? curptsknow) 

?xn <- (numqk ? numqk) 

— > 

(retract ?x) 

(printout t "Number of points left : "?curpts)cnow crlf) 

(printout t "Number of questions left: "?numqk crlf) 

(bind ?numqk (- ?numqk 1)) 

(retract ?xn) 

(assert (numqk ?numqk) ) 

(printout t "Do you have a basic understanding of the different applications of 
(printout t "(i.e. physics, chemistry, botany, biology, etc.): *) 

(bind ?sci (read) ) 

(while (fcfc (neq ?sci y) (neq ?sci n) ) 

(printout "y/n: ■) 

(bind ?sci (read) ) ) 

(bind ?sci (lovcase ?sci) ) 

(printout t •" crlf) 

(if (eq ?sci y) 

then (bind ?ptssci 1) 

(bind ?curptsknow (- ?curptsknow ?ptssci)) 

(retract ?xkno) 

(assert (curptsknow ?curptsknow) ) 

(assert (abi-kno- thi- sci TRUE)) 
else (if (eq ?sci n) 

then (retract ?xkno) 

(assert (curptsknow ? curptsknow) ) 

(bind ?levsci 0) 

(assert (levsci ?levsci) ) 

(bind ?meansci "") 

(assert (meansci ?meansci) ) 

(assert (abi-kno- thi- q3 TRUE))))) 

(defrule abi -kno- thi -science -pt 2- ch2 
?x <- (abi -kno- thi -sci TRUB) 

?xkno <• (curptsknow ? curptsknow) 

-> 

(retract ?x) 

(printout t "On a scale of 1 to 5, rate your knowledge in science. ■ crlf) 
(printout t "(Use points carefully): •) 

(bind ?levsci (read) ) 

(while (&& (neq ?levsci 1) (neq ?levsci 2) (neq ?levsci 3) (neq ?levsci 4) (neq 
(printout t "1 to 5: ■) 

(bind ?levsci (read))) 

(assert (levsci ?levsci) ) 

(if (eq ?levsci 1) 

then (bind ?meansci "Student: You can make smoke bombs w / a chemistry set.”) 
(assert (meansci ?meansci)) 

(bind ?ptssci 0) 

(bind ?curptsknow (- ?curptsknow ?ptsscl) ) 

(retract ?xkno) 

(assert (curptsknow ? curptsknow) ) 
else (if (eq ?levsci 2) 

then (bind ? meansci "College: You understand the major theories and a 
(assert (meansci ?meansci)) 

(bind Tptssci 1) 

(bind ? curptsknow (• ? curptsknow ?ptssci)) 

(retract ?xkno) 

(assert (curptsknow ? curptsknow) ) 
else (if (eq Plevsci 3) 

then (bind ?meansci "Masters: You could teach high-school sci 
(assert (meansci ?meansci) ) 

(bind ?ptssin 2) 

(bind ? curptsknow ( - ? curptsknow 7ptssci)) 

(retract ?xkno) 

(assert (curptsknow ?curptsknow) ) 
else (if (eq ?levsci 4) 

then (bind ?meansci "Doctorate: You might win a Nobel 
(assert (meansci ?meansci) ) 

(bind ?ptssci 3) 

(bind ?curptsknow (- ? curptsknow ?ptssci) ) 
(retract ?xkno) 

(assert (curptsknow ? curptsknow) ) 
else (if (eq ?levsci 5) 

then (bind ?meansci "Scholar: Albert Einstein 
(assert (meansci ?meansci) ) 

(bind ?ptssci 4) 

(bind ? curptsknow (• ? curptsknow ?ptssci 
(retract ?xkno) 

(assert (curptsknow 7 curptsknow) )))))) 


301 



CONCLUSIONS 


The subject matter experts actually used the advisor system the day of the ISM Spring 
Presentation as part of the presentation speech. Our experts agreed the system was effective in 
cutting the time usually needed for making a character. They generally liked the results given 
by the system. Although some experts agreed the system worked well, they said they still would 
prefer the old way with paper and pencil for tradition’s sake, but could utilize the advisor as an 
additional tool to assist in character preparation. 

Even though only sixty percent of the entire character sheet for Mage was programmed, the 
testers and experts agreed the system was efficient and solved the problem of character-building 
time consumption. The rest of the character sheet could be easily added the existing program. 
This work shows one potential way for expert systems to move into the entertainment arena, 
gaming in particular. We expect the basic program framework could be generalized for other 
role-playing games. A question bank could be developed from which a GM would select 
questions to be asked of the user in defining the characteristics for use in any role-playing game. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We would like to acknowledge NSF for the funding provided to SwRI, Mrs. Judith Hooper for 
heading up the Northside Independent School District’s ISM program and for being the school 
liaison for the YES program, the San Antonio role-playing gamers, and Sanjeev Venkatesan and 
David Lincoln of SwRI. 

REFERENCES 

Waterman, Donald; A GUIDE TO EXPERT SYSTEMS; Addison -Wesley Publishing Co.; 
Reading, Massachusetts; 1986; Pages 1-39, 127-176. 

Wieck, Stewart; MAGE: THE ASCENSION; White Wolf; 1993; Pages 1-113. 


302 



