
FINAL REPORT 


CONTRACT NO.: DAMD17-91-C-1096 


TITLE: Vasopressin Receptor Signaling and Cycling of Water Channels in Renal 

Epithelia 


PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dr. Abdul J. Mia 

CO-PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dr. Thomas Yorio 


PI ADDRESS: 


REPORT DATE: 

TYPE OF REPORT: 


Division of Science and Mathematics 
Jarvis Christian College 
Highway 80 

Hawkins, Texas 75765 ; ^ ' s 


August 31,1994 


FINAL REPORT 


PREPARED FOR: U.S. ARMY MEDICAL RESEARCH AND 

MATERIAL COMMAND 
FORT DETRICK 

FREDERICK, MARYLAND 21702-5012 


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT: Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 


The views, opinions and/or findings contained in this report are those of the author(s) and should 
not be construed as an official Department of Army position, policy or decision unless so 
designated by other documentation. 


19941208 001 


L 






REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

0MB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
.collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services. Directorate tor Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Highway. Suite 1204. Arlington. VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188). Washington. DC 20503. 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

08/31/94 Final 08/01/91 - 07/31/94 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Vasopressin Receptor Signaling and Cycling of 
Water Channels in Renal Epithelia 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

DAMD17-91-C-1096 

0601102A 

3M161102B515 515/CA 
DA 335934 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Dr. A. J. Mia 

Dr. T. Yorio* 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADORESS(ES) 

Jarvis Christian College 

Highway 80, Hawkins, Texas 75765 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

U.S. Army Medical Research & Development Commanc 
Fort Detrick 

Frederick, Maryland 21702-5012 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

*Department of Pharmacology 

University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth 
_ Fort Worth. _Texas 76107_ 

12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution 
unlimited 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

Water reabsorption and urinary volume regulation are important processes in maintaining normal 
physiological function. Vasopressin (ADH) is the hormone that is responsible for regulating water 
homeostasis and enhancing water reabsorption during dehydration. This process is particularly 
important to soldiers who are subject to excess heat and fluid deprivation in arid environments. We have 
been examining the mechanisms whereby ADH enhances water permeability in renal epithelia so we 
may find measures to enhance the kidney's responsiveness to ADH. Such regimens would maintain the 
water reabsorptive capacity of soldiers facing harsh conditions. Our observations suggest that an 
integral component of the water reabsorptive process by ADH is the enzyme, protein kinase C (PKC) and 
calcium mobilization in addition to ADH's well established actions on cyclic AMP. Using 
immunocytochemical and fluorescent techniques we have identified PKC isozymes that translocate from 
the cytosol to the membrane during activation by ADH or PKC activators. We also have developed in 
vitro cultured cell model that responds to vasopressin that could be used to study transepithelial fluid and 
electrolyte transport and have evaluated various cultured cell filter suports for their transport 
characteristic limitations. 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Transepithelial water flow; Vasopressin; cultured 
kidney cells; Protein Kinase C; filter supports for 
cultured cells, RA3 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF REPORT 

Unclassified 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form 298 (Rev 2-89) 

Prescribed by AN5! Std. Z39-18 
293-102 
























FOREWORD 


Opinions, interpretations, conclusions and recommendations are those of the author and are not 
necessarily endorsed by the US Army. 

X Where copyrighted material is quoted, permission has been obtained to use such 
material. 

X Where material from documents designated for limited distribution is quoted, 
permission has been obtained to use the material. 

X Citations of commercial organizations and trade names is this report do not constitute an 
official Department of Army endorsement or approval of the products or services of these 
organizations. 

X In conducting research using animals, the investigator(s) adhered to the "Guide for the 
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals," prepared by the Committee on Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals of the Institute of Laboratory Resources, National Research Council (NIH 
Publication No. 86-23, Revised 1985). 

N/A For the protection of human subjects, the investigator(s) adhered to policies of 
applicable Federal Law 45 CFR 46. 

N/A In conducting research utilizing recombinant DNA technology, the investigator(s) 
adhered to current guidelines promulgated by the National Institutes of Health. 

N/A In the conduct of research utilizing recombinant DNA, the investigator(s) adhered to 
the NIH Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA Molecules. 

N/A In the conduct of research involving hazardous organisms, the investigator(s) adhered 
to the CDC-NIH Guide for Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories. 


PI - Signature Date 



Accesion For 


NTIo CRA&i 
DTiC TA3 
U. cv-.r- ' ''-cd 
J J-'d. ‘ 0 ' 


□ 


Py. 

f',: - • 


Diet 


w. 


riy Cedes 
cv.d/or 


3 












TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

FRONT COVER: FINAL REPORT.1 

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE.2 

FOREWORD.3 

TABLE OF CONTENTS.N..4-5 

INTRODUCTION.6-10 

MATERIALS.10 

Reagents and Antibodies.10-11 

METHODS .11 

Experimental Tissues.11 

EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL.12 

Whole Bladder Sacs.12-13 

Cell Culture .13 

Scanning and Transmission Electron Microscopy (SEM, TEM) .13-14 

Morphometric Determination of Apical Surface Changes .14 

Immuno-Gold Cytochemistry .15 

Immimofluorescent Cytochemistry Using FITC.15-16 

Freeze Fracture Replica Preparation .16-17 

PKC Assay Using Cultured Epithelial Cells.17 

PKC Determination.17-18 

Transepithelial Water Flow Measurements of A6 Cells 

Grown on Filter Supports.18-19 

Intracellular Ca^^ Concentration Measurements .19-20 

RESULTS .20 

SEM Morphometric Analysis .20-23 

Cytological Studies of Toad Urinary Bladders .23-26 

Role of PKC in Transmembrane Water Transport.27-29 

Analysis of the Distribution of Gold Particles 

Associated with PKC Isozymes.29 

Identification of PKC Isozymes Using Western Blot Analysis.30 

Influence of Filter Supports on Transport Characteristics of 

Cultured A6 Kidney Cells.30-33 


4 






























ADHV, V 2 Interaction.33-34 

Calcium Signaling and the Actions of ADH.34-35 

Retrieval of Water Channels by Endocytosis .35-41 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS.41-50 

REFERENCES .50-57 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT.58 

KEY TO FIGURES.59-68 

RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONS.69-71 

OTHER ACTIVITIES.72-73 

ORIGINAL FIGURE PLATES INCLUDED: 24 


5 
















Vasopressin Receptor Signaling and Cycling of Water Channels in Renal Epitheha 


INTRODUCTION 

Eukaryotic cells in higher vertebrates evolved to perform a variety of complex 
molecular and cellular functions to mamtain electrolyte balance and body homeostasis. 
In the case of kidney, the distal renal cortical and collecting tubule cells have the 
capacity to reabsorb fluid from the external environment into the systemic circulation 
to prevent dehydration, at times of thirst. This process is governed by antidiuretic 
hormone (ADH, vasopressin), which is designed specifically to promote rapid 
transmembrane water flow, across the renal epitheha under an osmotic gradient. 
Vasopressin is also known to exert similar stimulatory effects on fluid transport in 
other renal model epitheha. A tissue that has been extensively utilized as a dynamic 
renal membrane model for studies of transceUular fluid transport is the amphibian 
urinary bladder (Bentley, 1958; DiBona et al., 1969; Hays, 1983; Mia et al., 1983, 
1987,1991a and others). ADH stimulates water reabsorption in this tissue similarly 
to that seen in the mammalian kidney. In the present study this model epithehum was 
used to investigate the ceUular actions of ADH. 

Vasopressin mediated osmotic water transfer in renal epitheha is regulated by 
two receptor subtypes, Vj and V 2 , which are known to be present on the basal (serosal) 
plasma membrane side of the principal (granular) cells. The process whereby ADH, 
through its receptors, changes membrane permeabihty, and the molecular and cellular 
events leading to a rapid osmotic water flow across the apical (mucosal) membrane, are 
not fuhy understood. A schematic presentation is presented in Figure 1 to describe the 
relative biochemical and cellular events that occur in the unstimulated control and in 


6 



the ADH stimulated V 2 and Vj receptor cascades in toad urinary bladder epithelial 
cells. These mechanisms appear to be important to water channel processes of exo- 
and endocytosis. The stimulation of vasopressin V 2 receptors is linked to the activation 
of adenylate cyclase through G proteins, which results in enhanced formation of cAMP 
and the activation of protein kinase A (PKA) (Handler and Orloff, 1973, 1981; 
Schlondorff and Levine, 1985). These biochemical events are associated with the 
process of water channel fusion, and is often called the exocytosis portion of enhanced 
water reabsorption. Such changes are also believed to be accompanied by subcellular 
alterations involving propagation of numerous microvilli on the exposed mucosal 
membrane that form out of a continuous phase of microridges (Davis et al., 1974; 
DiBona, 1978, 1981; Dratwa et al., 1979; Mills and Mahck, 1978; Mia et al., 1983, 
1988a; SpineUi et al., 1975 and others). These morphologic manifestations at the apical 
membrane surface of toad urinary bladder granular cells occur simultaneously with the 
insertion of water channels (aggrephores) at the apical membrane resulting in enhanced 
permeabihty to water. These fusion events seen in freeze-fi’acture rephcas, appear as 
intramembrane particle aggregates with stellar configurations, (Chevaher et al., 1974; 
Gronowiez et al., 1980; Hays et al., 1985; Kachadorian et al., 1978; Mia et al., 1989; 
Wade et al., 1981 and others). What controls and regulates apical membrane fusion 
events is uncertain. The translocation of water channels or aggrephores, through the 
cytoplasm to the apical cell surface for fusion, is thought to be directed by dynamic 
actions of the microtubules and microfQaments (Hays et al., 1982; Taylor et al., 1973; 
Hardy and DiBona, 1982; Pearl and Taylor, 1983; Mia et al., 1991a). The molecular 
mechanisms involving the stimulation of the microtubule and microfQament action for 
the transport process of the water channels (aggrephores) are not quite understood. To 
further characterize these relationships, we investigated hormone actions using cultured 


7 



amphibian kidney cortical A6 cells. It was found that the effects of ADH on 
biochemical parameters correlated with the induction of numerous microvilli from the 
normal stage of microridges that predominate over the surface of control A6 cells, very 
similar to that reported for toad urinary bladder granular cells (Mia et al., 1988a). 
These kidney cortical cells grown on filter supports quickly form a confluent monolayer 
with tight junction suitable for electrolyte transport studies (Perkins and Handler, 1981; 
Candia et al., 1993). 

Vasopressin also increases intracellular calcium and this effect appears to be 
associated with the ADH Vj receptors coupled to phosphoinositide metabolism. The 
cleavage of this membrane lipid through phospholipase C (PLC) results in the 
propagation of myo-inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol. The IP3 causes 
mobilization of intracellular calcium, whereas diacylglycerol activates the phosphohpid- 
dependent enzyme, protein kinase C (PKC) (Ausiello et al., 1987). It is known that 
amphibian urinary bladder epithelia contain a vasopressin Vi receptor coupled to 
phosphoinositide metabolism, with vasopressin acting to stimulate release of inositol 
phosphates (Schlondorff and Satriano, 1985; Yorio and Satumtira, 1989). It is not 
known whether the vasopressin Vj receptor has any role in the augmentation of 
transmembrane water flow or regulating apical membrane fusion of water channels. 
Indeed our recent experimental evidence indicates that the vasopressin Vi receptor 
cascade may play an integral role in the insertion of putative water channels into the 
apical membrane, possibly in association with the activation of PKC. Mezerein (MZ), 
a non-phorbol activator of PKC, when added to the mucosal surface, stimulates 
transmembrane osmotic water flow across the amphibian urinary bladder in a process 
mimicking the actions of vasopressin (Yorio and Satumtira, 1989). In addition, 
scanning electron microscopic studies of the surface of toad urinary bladders, treated 


8 




with MZ, revealed the induction of numerous prominent microvilli over the apical 
plasma membrane surface (Mia et al., 1989a, b), very similar to what was observed 
following challenges of toad urinary bladders with ADH. Immunogold antibody 
localization studies of the toad urinary bladder tissues, following stimulation with ADH 
and MZ, indicated localization of gold particles with cytosohc diffused bodies, as well 
as on apical membranes of the granular cells. Our western blot analysis of PKC 
isozyme I indicated the occurrence of PKC in the dissociated isolated toad urinary 
bladder epithelial cells. These observations suggested that both V 2 and Vj receptors 
could participate in the overall scheme of enhanced water flow following hormone 
stimulation, particularly with regard to the increased permeability of water that occurs 
at the apical membrane of the granular cells. However, the relationship between Vi 
receptor stimulation and PKC activation must be investigated and correlated with 
biochemical events to fully resolve the relative contributions of each receptor subtype 
to the phenomenon of osmotic water transport mediated by vasopressin. 

It has been reported that PKC isozymes upon activation, are translocated from 
the cytosol to the apical membrane surface in several tissue types. Using FITC 
immunofluorescent antibody labeling techniques, PKC translocation has been 
demonstrated in MDBK renal epithelia (Simboli-Campbell et al., 1993), 
ohgodendrocytes (Asotra and Macldn, 1993), human megakaryoblastic leukemic cells 
(Ito et al., 1988), and in cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts (Mochly-Rosen et al., 1990). 
Studies using the fluorescent microscopy and immunoantibody labeling techniques may 
be useful in determining the possible role of PKC isozyme subtypes in the translocation 
process of water channels from cytosol to the apical membrane. Therefore, experiments 
were conducted to correlate our previous morphometric studies of the toad urinary 
bladder tissues with translocation of water channels during enhanced water flow 


9 



mediated by ADH or activation of PKC by MZ, a chemical component known to mimic 
diacylglycerol to activate PKC. Our present studies use the techniques of SEM, TEM, 
and freeze-fracture combined with immunogold localization of PKC subtypes I, n and 
in in toad urinary bladder granular epithelia and cultured cells. These studies would 
help assess the contributions of Vj receptor stimulation in association with PKC 
activation during exocytosis and transmembrane osmotic water flow. Furthermore, we 
also examined the role of PKC during endocytosis following withdrawal of hormonal 
actions and dissipation of osmotic water flow. 

The process of exocytosis as it relates to the insertion of water channels into the 
apical membrane during osmotic water flow is reversed following hormone removal to 
ensure recovery of water channels into the cytoplasm for availabihty as a recycling 
process using endocytotic mechanisms to accomphsh this goal. The coordinated 
mechanisms of exo- and endocytosis in renal and in amphibian model epitheha, as 
induced by ADH, has not been resolved (Coleman et al., 1987; Harris et al., 1986). 
Therefore, studies were carried out to examine what conditions which promote 
endocytosis had on water flow and morphology in toad urinary bladder sacs (Mia et al., 
1993a,b,c, 1994). In addition, the role of PKC in the process of endocytosis in toad 
urinary bladder epitheha was carried out to determine if PKC had any role in the 
process of membrane retrieval. Our preliminary studies indicated that PKC may have 
a functional role in the process of endocytosis (Mia et al., 1994). 

MATERIALS 

Reagents and Antibodies: 

Most reagents and immunochemicals for experimental use were obtained from 
the following sources: Monoclonal antibodies of protein kinase C (PKC) isozymes I(y), 


10 




II (P), and ni (a) anti-rabbit IgG, purified fi’om rabbit brain, were purchased from 
Seikagaku America, Inc. Protein kinase C enzymes used as antigens for isozymes y, 
p, and a, were IgG fractions from rabbit with less than 0.1% cross-reactivity with one 
another and were purchased from Calbiochem. AfiBnity purified fluorescein anti-rabbit 
IgG (H & L) with no free fluorescein and rabbit serum for fluorescent microscopy were 
purchased from Vector Laboratories. Gold particles with a diameter of 5,10 and 20nm, 
conjugated to protein A-gold IgG complex and detectable as electron-opaque granules, 
were obtained from EY Laboratories and Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO. 
Aqueous 8% glutaraldehyde, aqueous 4% osmium tetroxide and L.R. White (medium) 
resin were purchased from Polysciences, Inc. PKC isozyme enzymes, antibodies and 
protein A-gold probes were diluted at a concentration between 1/15 and 1/25 using 
0.1% BSA in normal Ringer's solution (Mia et al., 1992) for use. S-arginine vasopressin 
and mezerein were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO. 

METHODS 

Experimental Tissues: 

Tropical toads, Bufo marinus, purchased from Carolina Biological Supply 
Company, Burlington, NC, were maintained at 23° C in an aquatic environment system 
irrigated with running tap water and were fed hve crickets biweekly. Toad urinary 
bladder epithehal cells, freshly dissociated and collected under sterile conditions, were 
grovm in culture media m the tissue culture incubator in a 5% COj environment at 
28°C. In addition, A6 toad kidney cortical cells and LLC-PKi cells, obtained from 
American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD) were grown similarly in the 
incubator at 28° C and 37°C respectively, for comparative experimental studies to 
evaluate the potential use of these tissues for transmembrane water flow studies. 


11 




EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL 

Whole Bladder Sacs: 

Each experimental urinary hemibladder sac was surgically removed from doubly 
pithed toads. Each urinary bladder sac was then suspended at the end of a glass tube 
as shown in Figure 2 and equihbrated for 30 min in aerated normal Ringer's solution as 
described previously (Bentley, 1958; Mia et al., 1983, 1987, 1991a). The Ringer's 
solution was composed of (in millimoles per liter): NaCl, 111; KCl, 3.35; CaCl 2 , 2.7; 
MgCl, 0.5; NaHCOg 4.0 and glucose, 5.0 with pH adjusted at 8.0 by continuous 
aeration of the buffer solution. Hemibladder sacs from each animal were used as 
control and experimental tissues, and an osmotic gradient was estabhshed prior to any 
experimental procedure with a 1/10 dilution of mucosal Ringer's solution. Antidiuretic 
hormone, arginine 8-vasopressin, at a concentration of lOmU/ml or lOOmU/ml was 
added to the serosal bath, while mezerein, at concentrations between lO"^ M and 10‘^ 
M were added to the urinary sac (mucosal side). The MZ was dissolved in a stock 
solution of DMSO at a concentration of 0.05 M. The concentration of DMSO added 
was < 0.002%. Control and experimental tissues received identical treatments for 5, 
10,15,20,30, or 60 min prior to tissue fixation (Mia et al., 1991a, 1992,1993a, b, c, 
1994). At the conclusion of each experiment, sacs were withdrawn from the 
experimental solution, cut, emptied and dropped into 2% glutaraldehyde in PIPES 
(0.02M) at a pH of 7.2. This fixative was then replaced with fresh glutaraldehyde 
solution and fixation was allowed to continue for 1 hr. Following fixation and buffer 
rinses, each hemibladder sac was cut into four individual segments, with each segment 
reserved for SEM, TEM, freeze fracture and immunogold antibody labeling. Tissues 
retained for SEM and TEM received postfixation in 1% osmium tetroxide for 1 hr, but 
the tissues for freeze fracture replica preparations and immunogold labeling received 


12 




no postfixation with osmium tetroxide. This was particularly important to prevent 
possible loss of antigenic sites for immunogold antibody labeling. 

Cell Culture: 

Toad urinary bladder epithehal cells were dissociated and collected under sterile 
conditions according to procedures described previously (Yorio et al., 1983; Yorio and 
Satumtira, 1989; Mia et al., 1988a). During isolation procedures, all media contained 
antibiotics. These cells were washed and resuspended in Ca^'^- and Mg^^ -firee media 
and transferred to Falcon flasks and petri dishes containing microscope glass cover 
slips for growth and confluence. The culture flasks or petri dishes containing 
supplemented Quimby amphibian culture media (Gibco) were retained in an incubator 
at 28°C in 5% COj environment. The culture media was changed three times/week and 
only primary confluent cultures were used. The toad urinary bladder granular and A6 
amphibian kidney cells, upon transfer to Anocell or ICN filter supports or to glass 
cover shps, form confluent monolayers and tight cellular junctions. These tissues were 
being utilized in SEM studies and in immunofluorescent detection of PKC isozyme 
subtypes. For LLC-PKj cells, Dulbecco's Modified Eagles Medium (DMEU) was used 
and cells were iucubated at 38°C. 

Seaming and Transmission Electron Microscopy (SEM, TEM): 

For SEM preparations, glutaraldehyde fixed and post-osmicated tissue samples 
were processed through exchanges of ethanol and amyl acetate for critical point drying 
in hquid COj in a Polaron drying apparatus. Additional critical point drying was made 
using Peldri 11, for which tissues were dehydrated through graded acetone to transfer 
to hqmfied Peldri II for infiltration and was allowed to solidify by gradually dropping 


13 



the temperature below 23°C. Peldri 11 was then allowed to sublimate for critical point 
drying using a freeze dryer or running fumehood. The dried specimens, mounted on 
clean aluminum stubs with silver paint, were gold coated in an argon environment using 
a Sputter Coater (Mia et al., 1983, 1988a). These specimens were examined in an 
ETEC Autoscan electron microscope operating at 20 KV, and photomicrographs were 
taken under similar magnifications for comparative studies. Post-osmicated tissue 
samples retained for TEM studies were processed through exchanges of graded 
ethanol and propylene oxide, for casting into individual blocks in Luft's epon resin. 
Polymerization was allowed to progress overnight at 60° C in an oven. Ultrathin 
sections prepared with a diamond knife were collected on bare nickel grids, which upon 
drying, were exposed to uranyl acetate and lead citrate for viewing in the TEM. 

Morphometric Determination of Apical Surface Changes: 

For morphometric quantitation, between four and six pictures for each treatment 
were taken at 1500X and 4000X magnifications using SEM. The total number of 
normal and treated cells in each picture image was counted and averaged to show 
results in percentages. The statistical analysis of each treatment group (control versus 
ADH and MZ) was made on a Texas Instruments Professional Computer using the 
Trajectories statistical program (DBI Software, Mount Pleasant, MI). The ANOVA 
and Fischer's PLSD (Protected Least Significant Difference) were performed with 
Stateview (Abacus Concepts, Inc., Berkeley, CA) on an Apple Macintosh Ilsi 
microcomputer. Descriptive statistical data were calculated using between 4 and 6 
images, and the results presented are as mean + 1 standard deviation. Statistical 
analysis of the data involving gold particles for PKC isozymes was also made using 
the same methods. 


14 



Immuno-Gold Cytochemistry: 

For immuno-gold localization of PKC isozyme subtypes, glutaraldehyde fixed 
tissue samples were dehydrated and processed through exchanges of graded ethanol 
and L.R. White and embedded in pure L.R. White resin using gelatin capsules. Tissue 
blocks were allowed to polymerize in closed gelatin capsules for 15 hrs at 60° C in a 
vacuum oven (Mia et al., 1991a, 1992). Ultrathin sections made with a diamond knife, 
were collected on bare nickel grids for PKC antibody and immunogold labeling. 
Ultrathin sections were exposed separately to PKC antibodies I, n and HI isozymes, 
anti-rabbit IgG and then to protein A or G-gold probes (dilution 1/15 or 1/25 using 
0.1% BSA in Ringer's solution) for labeling. Each grid was exposed to a drop of 
monoclonal antibody for 2 hrs, and then washed and labeled with protein A-gold probes 
(5,10 or 20nm) for an additional 2 hrs. Control grids received treatment with antibody 
or 0.1% BSA and protein A-gold probes. Labeling was carried out in a moist chamber 
at room temperature. For localization of two isozymes subtypes I and n in single grids, 
each grid was first exposed to antibody subtype II and 5nm protein A-gold probe, 
followed by exposure to the second subtype I antibody and 20nm protein A-gold probe. 
A 2 hr treatment period for each step was allowed followed by buffer rinses between 
treatments. Air dried grids were exposed to uranyl acetate and lead citrate for staining 
prior to TEM observations (Mia et al., 1991a, 1992). 

Immunofluorescent Cytochemistry Using FITC: 

For immunofluorescent microscopy, glass cover shps containing confluent 
monolayer cells were removed fi-om culture media, rinsed 2X and were then placed in 
isotonic Ringer's solution for performing experimental procedures. Several cover slips 
were maintained in the isotonic Ringer's solution for control tissues, while other cover 


15 




slips were exposed to ADH 100 mU/ml or MZIO'^M for 15 min for stimulation prior 
to fixation. Control and experimental culture cells were then fixed in 3% formaldehyde 
in PBS buffer for 1 hr, and then rendered permeable by plunging in cold methanol 
(Yorio et al., 1985). After 10 min in methanol, the permeabilized cells were rinsed in 
PBS buffer, and then exposed to PKC antibody isozymes (1/15 dilution) for 1 to 2 hr 
at room temperature in a moist chamber. Tissues received a thorough wash in the same 
buffer, were treated with anti-body IgG conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate 
(FITC; 1/16 dilution) for 2 hr in the dark at room temperature. Cells were washed in 
PBS buffer and deionized water to mount on medium containing 9:1 glycerol and PBS 
buffer. Control cells received treatment only with 0.1% BSA and fluorescein 
isothiocyanate (FITC). The preparations were examined in a Nikon Optiphot 
fluorescent microscope equipped with a narrow epifluorescent barrier filter. 
Photomicrographs were recorded on Kodak Tri-X film ASA 400 and developed in a 
solution of Microdol-X developer. 

Freeze Fracture Replica Preparation: 

For fi'eeze fi’acture, small pieces of cryoprotected (in 30% glycerol) tissue 
samples were placed on standard copper holders and then plunged into hquid fireon 
cooled to -190° C in a hquid nitrogen bath. Freeze fincture was performed in a Balzers 
400T apparatus at -100° C with a metal knife cooled with hquid nitrogen. The 
fractured surfaces were shadowed with evaporated platinum at an angle of 35°, and 
then coated with evaporated carbon at a 90° angle. Some freeze fractured tissues were 
ahowed to etch for 5 or 10 min to reveal detailed microstructures. The rephcas upon 
removal from the freeze fracture apparatus were quickly coated with 1% collodion in 
amyl acetate while still frozen. CoUodion coated rephcas were placed in 5.25% Na 


16 



hypochlorite solution which was adequate for tissue digestion, and later washed and 
placed on bare copper grids for TEM studies. 

PKC Assay Using Cultured Epithelial Cells: 

A rapid simple protein kinase C (PKC) assay based on a mixed micelle method 
that can be routinely performed using tissue culture cells was developed by our 
laboratory (Cammarata et al., 1993). Enzyme preparation was performed in membrane 
and cytosolic fractions respectively. The isolation of these fractions followed the 
sequence hsted below. 

PKC Determination: 

Cultured A6 cells were washed in serum-free medium. Cells were exposed to 
Ca^^-and Mg^^-free PBS containing 0.25% trypsin + 1 mM EGTA for 5 min. Isolated 
cells were collected and resuspended in serum-containing or serum-free media. Cells 
were incubated with hormone and/or drugs for a predetermined time. The incubation 
was stopped by adding five-fold cold media and the cells were quickly centrifuged. 
Collected A6 cells were homogenized in 2 ml of buffer (A) containing 20 mM Tris- 
HCl, pH 7.5; 0.5 mM EGTA; and 25 pg/ml each of apotinin and leupeptin. 
Homogenate was centrifuged at 100,000 xg at 4° C for 30 min, yielding a soluble 
(cytosoHc) and particulate (membrane) Auction. The enzyme in the membrane fraction 
was solubilized in 2 ml of buffer (A) supplemented with 0.5% Triton X-100 and 
homogenized. The homogenate was incubated on ice for 30 min, followed by 
centrifugation at 100,000 xg for 30 min. The soluble and membrane-bound extracted 
enzymes were partially purified by chromatography on DEAE-cellulose (DE52) after 
elution with 200 mM NaCl. The eluate from the DE52 column containing enzyme was 


17 



desalted by chromatography on Sephadex G25 and eluted with 20mM Tris-HCl. The 
eluted soluble enzyme or membrane-bound extracted enzyme from the Sephadex G25 
column was used for subsequent PKC analysis. 

The PKC activity was followed by phosphorylation of its substrate (AC-MBP 
4-14, a PKC substrate peptide purchased from Gibco) using ^^P-ATP measured at 30° 
C in an incubation volume of 50ul for 5 min. The assay mixture contained in final 
concentration: ATP, 20|liM; MgCl 2 , lOmM; CaClj, 200 pM; substrate, 25 pM; 
phosphatidyl serine, 516 pM; l-oleoyl-2-acetylglycerol (OAG), 344 pM; enzyme, 5-15 
pg; Tris-HCl, 20 mM, pH = 7.5, with or without 20 pM substrate-specific PKC 
inhibitor (PKC inhibitor peptide 19-36 from Gibco). About 500,000 cpm of ^^P-ATP 
was added to each test tube. The reaction was started by addition of ATP and stopped 
by taking 25pl of assay mixture and spotting onto phosphocellulose paper. Free ^^P- 
ATP and ^^-labelled substrate were separated by washing the paper with 0.85% of 
phosphoric acid for 5 min twice, followed by another two washes with distilled water. 
The radioactivity retained on the phosphocellulose paper after washing was determined 
by counting the paper in lOml of scintillation hquid. PKC activity was determined by 
the difference between the activities in the absence and presence of the PKC substrate 
inhibitor. A unit of PKC activity was defined as incorporation of 1 pmol of phosphate 
into the substrate per min per mg protein. Proteins were determined using the method 
of Bradford (1976). 

Transepithelial Water Flow Measurements of A6 Cells Grown on Filter Supports: 

The morphological SEM observations suggested that A6 cells responded to both 
hormone and MZ, a PKC activator in a similar fashion. To determine if these changes 
were associated with increases in membrane permeability and enhanced water 


18 


transport, osmotic water flow was measured across A6 cells grown to confluency on 
Anocell or ICN Cellagen filter supports. Although there was an apparent 
morphological change following hormone addition, and previous data had shown an 
increase in adenylate cyclase activity, there was no increase in osmotic water flow. 
The reason for this lack of transepithelial water flow is unclear. We determined 
radiolabelled water flow across the filter supports using Our observation 

suggested that these commercial filters may be rate limiting for transepithehal water 
flow measurements (Candia et al., 1993). 

Intracellular Ca^^ Concentration Measurements: 

Cultured A6 and LLC-PKi cells were grown on coverslips (#0, Biophysica 
Technologies, Baltimore, MD) in 6-well plates (Costar). The medium was changed 
into new medium without serum and kept for 24 hours before Ca^^ measurement. On 
the day of the measurement, the cells were incubated for 60 min in HEPES buffered 
medium (NaCl 125 mM, KCI5 mM, CaCl 2 1.8 mM, MgCl 2 ,2 mM, NaH 2 P 04 0.5 mM, 
NaHCOj 5 mM, HEPES 10 mM, glucose 10 mM, bovine serum albumin 0.1%, pH 7.2) 
containing 5 uM of a calcium fluorescent dye, Fura-2AM. The coverslip was then 
rinsed twice with the HEPES buffered medium. 

The coverslip was mounted in a chamber on the stage of a Nikon Diaphot 
microscope. The chamber was filled with 3 ml of HEPES buffered medium and kept 
at 37°C during the experiment. Intracellular fluorescence intensity at 510 nm emission 
wavelength excited by alternating 340 and 380 nm excitation wavelengths was 
measured by a dynamic single cell video imaging method using with Image-1/FL 
Quantitative Fluorescence System (Universal Imaging Co., West Chester, PA). The 
intracellular Ca^^ concentration ([Ca^^]i) was calculated fi’om the intensity ratio of 


19 








fluorescence at these two excitation wavelengths according to the equation of 
Grynkiewicz et al, 1985. 

Three microliters of hormone and/or drugs were added into the chamber. The 
chamber was washed 3 times with HEPES buffered medium between additions of 
agonists. 


RESULTS 


SEMMorphometric Analysis: 

Over twenty five comprehensive experiments were performed involving the 
whole toad urinary bladder tissues, cultured dissociated isolated single toad bladder 
cells and A6 amphibian kidney cortical cells, to analyze the results of exo- and 
endocytosis, and the role of PKC accompanying enhanced water flow process 
mediated by ADH and ML. Previous morphometric and cytological studies associated 
with enhanced transmembrane osmotic water flow using the amphibian urinary bladder 
as a model have contained comprehensive description of the changes of the apical 
membrane surface and cytoplasm of the control unstimulated tissues along with tissues 
stimulated with ADH, calcium ionophore and other agents (Mia et al., 1983, 1987, 
1988a, b). These studies contained httle or no information on the effects of MZ, a non- 
phorbol activator of protein kinase C (PKC), on the morphocytological characteristics 
of the toad urinary bladder granular cells to define the role of PKC through ADH Vi 
receptor interactions in the enhanced transmembrane osmotic water flow. Therefore, 
comprehensive time-dependent ultrastructural studies were carried out using 
unstimulated control, and ADH and MZ stimulated experimental bladder tissues under 
an osmotic gradient for 10, 30 and 60 min. Figures 3, 4 and 5 represent the 


20 









comparative surface substructural details (SEM) of the toad urinary bladder tissues 
following 10 min tissue treatment with ADH and MZ versus the control tissues. Figure 
3 depicts the SEM surface view of such a control tissue as composed of predominant 
microridges, very similar to that reported in earlier studies (Mia et al., 1983, 1987, 
1991a). Although the control tissues under osmotic gradient for 5 or 10 min retained 
predominant microridges network over the apical membrane surface (Fig. 3, arrows), 
few granular cells showed some degree of swelling and the appearance of some 
microvilh. Treatments with either ADH or MZ for the same time periods, altered the 
surface morphology with a dramatic appearance of a large number of microvilh over 
the plasma membranes of the granular cells as shown in Figures 4 and 5 (arrows) 
respectively. However, the size of microvilh at 10 min tissue treatment remained minute 
as they were barely elevated above the apical membrane surface. Tissues treated with 
a variable concentration of MZ ranging between MZ lO'^M and 10"^ for 5 min 
showed little difference in the number of granular cells with the propagation of 
microvilli and their size. However, longer tissue treatments for 30 or 60 min with 
either ADH or MZ caused a significant increase in the number and size of surface 
microvilh of granular ceUs as compared to unstimulated control tissues. Figures 6, 7 
and 8 represent comparative SEM surface images of the control, ADH and MZ 
stimulated tissues respectively for 60 min, showing the relative microstructures of the 
apical membrane surfaces with predominant microvilh associated granular ceUs in ADH 
and MZ treated tissues than in the control tissues. 

A morphometric analysis of the scanning electron micrographs (SEM pictures) 
of the control, ADH and MZ treated tissues for 10, 30 and 60 min was made to 
evaluate the relative increase in the number of granular ceUs with propagated microviUi. 
For this purpose, six scanning electron micrographs were taken from each tissue 


21 



treatment, each at a magnification of X3,000 representing 33 nmVarea, for comparison. 
These results were statistically analyzed and plotted in histograms as in Figure 9. The 
histograms indicated a significant increase in the number of granular cells with 
microviUi in ADH and MZ treated tissues as compared to unstimulated control tissues 
during the corresponding time periods. The control tissues at 10 min (n=6) showed 
13% of granular cells with microvilli in contrast to 53% in ADH (n=6) and 34% in MZ 
(n=6) treated granular cells respectively. The number of granular cells containing 
microvilli increased at 30 and 60 min tissue treatments showing 35% and 44% of 
control granular cells with microvilh as against 68% and 63% in ADH, and 74% and 
64% in MZ treated tissues respectively. There appeared to be a steady time-dependent 
increase in the number of granular cells with microvilh, which seemed to level off at 
30 min. The results of the ANOVA and Fisher's PLSD showed that there was no 
significant difference among the controls, whereas a significant difference at the 5% 
level was seen between the controls, and the ADH and MZ treated tissues. Figure 9 
shows the percent of ADH and MZ induced microvillar granular cells against the 
control tissues. Concurrent water flow measurements indicated an enhanced 
transmembrane osmotic water flow across the toad urinary bladders associated with the 
actions of ADH and MZ compared to control tissues (data not shown). 

A morphometric analysis was also carried out on A6 amphibian kidney cultured 
cells to evaluate the effects of ADH and MZ on the relative increase in the number of 
cells with surface changes vs. control tissues. Individual A6 cells, upon transfer onto 
ICN membrane supports or Anocell filter, undergo rapid growth to confluency to form 
a continuous polarized monolayer. Figure 10 represents a surface view of such 
monolayered control cells (vehicle treated, DMSO 0.002% for 60 min), grown on ICN 
filter supports. The apical membrane surfaces of these control cells, when viewed 


22 




under SEM, revealed the presence of a network of microridges along with distinct 
cellular tight junctions, similar to that seen with control toad urinary bladder tissues. 
When the A6 cells received stimulation by exogenous ADH or MZ for 60 min 
numerous microvilh from the continuous phase of the microridges were observed. The 
transformation of microridges into microvilli was also associated with some tissue 
swelling which resulted in the caving of the cellular junctions and the elevation of the 
apical membranes (Figs. 11,12). Treatment of A6 monolayer culture cells with ADH 
combined with MZ, also resulted in the formation of numerous microvilh and tissue 
swelling (Fig. 13). These results indicated that both ADH and MZ induced propagation 
of microvilh over the apical A6 cultured cells similar to those produced on the 
membrane surfaces of the toad urinary bladder tissues. This suggested that the 
remodeling of the apical membrane surface could involve activation of PKC. 

Cytological Studies of Toad Urinary Bladders: 

Ultrathin sections of the complementary control tissues as used in the SEM 
studies, when examined in the TEM, revealed a cytoplasmic profile with a composition 
of rough endoplasmic reticula, free ribosomes, mitochondria, golgi bodies and 
subapical secretory granules along the iimer edge of the apical membrane (Fig. 14, 
arrows). The apical membrane in control cell contained low elevations of microridges 
representing the TEM sectional views of the microridges seen in the SEM. Freeze 
fracture replica preparations with deep etching, with fracture line passing along the 
membrane surface horizontaUy, also revealed the portions of the microridges very 
comparable to the SEM images. In the TEM sectional views of the control tissues, the 
basolateral membranes between the adjacent granular cells (Fig. 15, short arrow) 
showed tight junctions and desmosomes with radiating tonofilaments and little or no 


23 



expression of membrane indentations. These control granular cells also contained an 
even distribution of dense cytoplasm and oval nuclei with dense heterochromatins 
occurring along the outer boundary of the nuclei (Fig. 14). The exposure of the control 
tissues to an osmotic gradient over a period of 30 min or longer caused a loss in the 
cytoplasmic and nuclear density (Fig. 15). However, the osmotic gradient did not cause 
any visible change in the secretory granules that normally reside beneath the mucosal 
membrane, which remained virtually intact (Fig. 15, arrows). 

Freeze fracture rephca studies of the complementary control tissues also showed 
the distribution of the secretory granules beneath the apical membrane surface (Fig. 

16, arrows) as seen in the TEM ultrathin sections. Although some control tissues 
showed apical microvilli over some granular cells, especially in tissues exposed to a 
prolonged osmotic gradient, they generally lacked cytosolic aggrephores or putative 
water channels when observed using freeze fracture preparations. This may explain the 
lack of apical membrane fusion events in control tissues and the decreased appearance 
of intramembrane particles (Fig. 16). The effect of MZ on the cytoplasmic composition 
of the toad bladder tissues was rather dramatic, especially with tissues treated longer 
than 30 min. However, a 5 min tissue treatment with MZ also produced marked visible 
changes in the composition of the cytoplasm in some granular cells with an apparent 
increase in the distribution of microfilaments, microtubules (short arrows), fragmented 
rough-ER cistemae and swollen mitochondria with altered orientation of cristae (Fig. 

17, long arrows). The effect of MZ may cause additional cellular disturbances 
involving the basolateral membranes which often appeared deeply indented in tissues 
that received exposure to MZ (Fig. 18, long arrow). The secretory granules that 
normally reside beneath the apical plasma membrane also showed a gradual loss in the 
granule contents following a brief MZ treatment (Fig. 18, short arrows). Tissues 


24 





which received treatment with MZ for 30 min or longer, showed a continuation of the 
process of degranulation of the cytosol and at 60 min, degranulation was complete 
showing virtually no sign of granules within the cytosol (Fig. 19). As seen in this TEM 
image mezerein treatment also caused significant tissue swelling, a loss in the density 
of cytoplasm and nuclei, and loosening of the intercellular junctions. Ultrathin sections 
from the ADH challenged complementary bladder tissues, when examined in the TEM, 
showed rough ER profiles with a variety of orientations from parallel to circular, a loss 
in the density of nuclei, as in MZ challenged tissues, but showed no discernible effects 
on the secretary granules as they appeared virtually intact in the subapical region (Figs. 
20, 21, arrows). Parallel and circular profiles of the rough-ER cistemae in ADH 
stimulated tissues as seen in the TEM ultrathin sections may be revealed in the freeze 
fracture rephca preparations as shown in Figure 22 (arrows). ADH treatment may cause 
enlargement off golgi cistemae and enhancement in their activities as golgi associated 
vesicles increased and enlarged (Fig. 23) as compared to control tissues (Fig. 24). This 
finding suggests that golgi bodies stimulated by ADH, could induce active synthesis of 
associated vesicles at the trans-golgi regions. Such images of golgi complexes with 
insipid activity in the control and amphfied activities in the ADH treated tissues were 
often encountered in TEM sections. 

The presence of water channels (aggrephores) in the cytosol and the occurrences 
of the apical membrane fusion events were investigated on control, ADH and MZ 
challenged tissues using the techniques of freeze fracture. In freeze fracture rephcas, 
aggrephores are generally recognized as somewhat conical membrane stmctures 
studded with minute protein particles. Most commonly the aggrephores were reported 
to be present in the subapical region of the cytoplasm with an angular orientation 
toward the apical membrane for possible insertion following tissue stimulation with 


25 



ADH (Mia et al., 1991b). Whereas the fusion events at the membrane surface often 
appear as clusters of particles with a stellar distribution. A description of the particles 
and membrane fusion in toad urinary bladder tissues is provided in the schematic 
illustration in Figure 1. In freeze fracture replicas, the control unstimulated tissues 
showed an apparent lack in the distribution of either the aggrephores or the number of 
apical membrane fusion events, even though the tissues were retained under an imposed 
osmotic gradient for 60 min. However, the toad bladder tissues which were challenged 
with ADH or MZ for 60 min, showed the presence of aggrephores or putative water 
channels and increased fusion events (Figs. 25, 26, arrows). Actual counts of the 
membrane fusion events made from a number of freeze fracture replicas indicated that 
their incidental distribution in the stimulated bladder tissues to be in the order of 2/nm^ 
area in the ADH (Fig. 25) and 2/mn^ area in the MZ treated (Fig. 26) tissues, while in 
control tissues it was < 1/nm^. 

Bladder sacs that received treatment with verapamil, an inhibitor of ADH 
stimulated water flow across the amphibian urinary bladder, caused not only an 
accumulation of numerous secretory granules in the granular cells (Mia et al., 1991a, 
b) but also a concomitant depression in the incidence of cytoplasmic aggrephores and 
membrane fusion events, and therefore, a sparse distribution of intramembrane 
particles. If ADH is added to the incubating media in the presence of verapamil, 
transmembrane water flow response was somewhat restored as well as the incidence 
of aggrephores and membrane fusion events (Fig. 27, arrow), indicating the ability of 
ADH to reverse the actions of verapamil, possibly through increasing intracellular 
calcium. 


26 



Role of PKC in Transmembrane Water Transport: 

In order to evaluate the role of PKC in the actions of vasopressin, we conducted 
a series of experiments to track PKC activation and translocation using 
immunofluorescent and immunohistochemistry techniques. PKC translocation can be 
observed using selective antibodies for PKC isoforms, immunofluorescent labeling and 
FITC (SimboU-Campbell et al., 1993). Since little is known about the actions of PKC 
on vasopressin-mediated water transport process nor its distribution in renal epithelia, 
we carried out immunogold antibody detection labeling of PKC subtypes 1,11 and m 
using specific monoclonal antibodies and protein A or G-gold probes. Indeed, 
immunogold labeling studies showed that gold particles were distributed singularly and 
in discrete isolated clusters in the cytosol as well as in the apical membrane domains 
essentially in tissues which received stimulation with either ADH or MZ. Figures 28, 
29 and 30 are TEM images demonstrating the presence of PKC isozymes subtypes I, 
II and III in MZ (Figs. 28, 29, arrows) and ADH (Fig. 30, arrow) stimulated tissues 
respectively. These isozymes are distributed singly and in clusters within the cytosol 
with a concentration of gold particles over the diffused cytoplasmic bodies. The 
physical appearance of the cytosoUc diffused bodies and the distributional patterns of 
gold particles, regardless of their isoforms, remain remarkably similar in both tissues 
that received stimulation with MZ and ADH. At times, clusters of gold particles in 
diffused cytoplasmic bodies (Fig. 31, short arrow) were found among a large number 
of microfilaments (Fig. 31, long arrows) suggesting a possible association of PKC 
with microfilaments. This association could be important to the translocation process 
of PKC to the apical membrane. Gold particles appearing in association and/or within 
the microvilli (Figs. 32, 33, 34, arrows) also suggested possible migration of PKC 
fi’om the cytosol into the microvilh and perhaps, along with the putative water chaimels 


27 



for apical membrane fusion. Double immunogold labeling, achieved by exposing single 
grids sequentially to PKC subtypes n and I with mtervening exposures to protein A- 
gold (5 and 20 nm) probes respectively, showed that these PKC subtypes localized 
separately in discrete bodies or co-localized in the same cytoplasmic body as well as 
in the apical membrane sites (Fig. 35, arrow) in tissue treated with either MZ or ADH. 
Expression of protein A-gold particles over the dense bodies in the cytoplasm and on 
the apical membrane domains indicated possible translocation of PKC enzymes to the 
apical membrane in a time course that was similar to the insertion of cytoplasmic water 
channels into the apical membrane following hormone addition (Mia et al., 1991b). 
Control tissues exposed only to 0.1% BSA and protein A-gold or protein G-gold 
particles failed to show any appreciable labeling (Fig. 36). Expression of protein G- 
gold involving isozyme HI (a) was seen to be localized in isolated patches rather than 
in discrete diffiised bodies as seen with protein A-gold probes (Mia et al., 1991b). 

Immunofluorescent localization of PKC subtype HI was also performed using a 
specific monoclonal antibody against this PKC isoform and fluorescein isothiocyanate 
(FITC) IgG, to reveal the global distributional pattern of this isozyme subtype in 
cultured renal tubular cells, A6 amphibian kidney cells. The A6 cells, grown on glass 
cover slips quickly formed confluent monolayers and cellular tight jimctions as seen 
under SEM (Figs. 10-13). Phase contrast micrographs of the confluent monolayer on 
glass cover shps demonstrated that these cells form a continuous monolayer sheet (Fig. 
37) and were found suitable for immunofluorescent microscopy. These studies revealed 
the localization of PKC isozyme HI in the cytoplasm and also possibly associated with 
membranes in particulate forms in the ADH and MZ stimulated cells (Figs. 38, 39), 
very similar to the diffused bodies discovered in the toad urinary bladder tissues 
following immunogold antibody labeling of the tissues. Control tissues only exposed 


28 



to 0.1% BSA showed little or no presence of fluorescence (Fig. 40). 

Analysis of the Distribution of Gold Particles Associated with PKC Isozymes: 

Quantitation of the distribution of the gold particles associated with PKC 
isozymes 1,11 and III were made from the control as well as from the ADH and MZ 
challenged toad urinaiy bladder tissues. The gold particle counts were made from 
electron micrographs, involving the control grids BSA (n=26), anti-PKC I (n=10), anti- 

PKC II (n=10), anti-PKC HI (n=7), PKC IH+anti-PKC IE (n=5), ADH grids BSA 

1 

(n=44), anti-PKC I (n=26), anti-PKC 11 (n=ll), anti-PKC HI (n=10), and MZ grids 
BSA (n=9), anti-PKC I (n=32), anti-PKC H (n=10) and anti-PKC HI (n=12). Each 
electron micrograph was taken at X30,000 magnification within an area of 33 
nmVpicture, and at random with greater particle density. Statistical analysis, performed 
on data from gold particle counts were expressed in individual histograms for each 
PKC isoform to evaluate the relative distribution of gold particles. The distribution of 
gold particles, calculated for each PKC isoform, was found to be significantly higher 
in tissues exposed to ADH and MZ compared to the BSA exposed control tissues. The 
histogram in Figure 41 represents the summation of the total gold particle counts for all 
three isozymes involving the control (n=l 11), ADH (n=47) and MZ (n=54) stimulated 
tissues. The distribution of gold particles in ADH and MZ treated tissues was 
significantly higher as compared to the control tissues. Blocking the antigenic sites in 
the control tissue sections with a mixture of PKC isozyme HI and anti-PKC isozyme 
III prior to exposure to protein A-gold probes resulted in no appreciable labeling of 
this PKC isozyme with gold particles beyond that observed for the other control tissue 
sections. 


29 



Identification ofPKC Isozymes Using Western Blot Analysis: 

In addition to immunogold and immunocytochemical approaches to identify the 
various PKC isozymes, we developed procedures to separate cellular proteins from 
both the cytosoHc and membrane fractions of toad urinary bladder dissociated granular 
cells using SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and a BIORAD mini gel system. In these 
studies, we used 10% dissolving and 5% stacking gels for electrophoresis. Following 
electrophoresis, the samples were blotted to nitrocellulose filter paper which was 
blocked by immersion in "Blocking Buffer" (3% skim milk in PBS) for 2 hrs at 8°C. 
The nitrocellulose was washed and incubated with the primary antibody solution for 2-3 
hrs at room temperature. The fQter was then washed several times and incubated in the 
"secondary antibody solution" for 1 hr at room temperature. Following incubation the 
filter was washed in PBS-0.05% Tween 20 for 3-5 min with constant rocking. The 
filter was then washed and developed in freshly prepared alkaline phosphatase 
substrate solution. Figures 42 and 43 represent photographs of the SDS-PAGE gel 
of proteins isolated from the dissociated toad urinary bladder cells, and a western blot 
of this gel respectively showing the presence of PKCa (Fig. 43, arrows) on both the 
membrane and cytosohc fractions of the toad urinary bladder epithehal granular cells. 
Upon stimulation by ADH, there was an increase in PKC-associated enzyme on the 
membrane fraction suggesting the hormone enhanced translocation. 

Influence of Filter Supports On Transport Characteristics of Cultured A6 Kidney 
Cells: 

One of the aims of this project was to develop an in vitro model that can be used 
to assess the water transport processes regulated by vasopressin. Cultured renal 
epithelial cells could provide an alternative "membrane model" system to study 


30 



antidiuretic hormone (ADH) action and transepithelial water transport. Renal epithelial 
cells of native epithelia, like kidney and toad urinary bladder epitheha, rest on their 
natural support. These supports represent a low restriction to the transepithehal 
movements of ions and fluid. Therefore, movement of ions and water across a 
preparation consisting of the epithehum with its connective tissue is mainly dictated by 
the permeability properties of the epithelial layers. We have developed an in vitro 
tissue culture model of amphibian kidney cortical cells (A6 cells), grown on various 
filter supports. Although epitheha grown on permeable filter supports develop 
polarization and tight junctions as indicated by their electrical properties and 
morphology, the rate of transport of ions in these tissues is usually lower than in the 
native tissue. This deficiency was justified as due to the artificial conditions of the 
tissue culture environment in which A6 cells were grown. Despite the large number of 
electrophysiological studies using A6 cells, few have measured unidirectional Na or Cl 
fluxes across the filter supports alone without cell monolayer (Candia et al., 1993). 
A most puzzling finding was the lack of net water flow under an osmotic gradient when 
cultured cells on filters were stimulated with ADH on Anocell (Fig. 44) or Cellagen 
(Fig. 45). This negative water flow response was not due to a lack of functioning 
receptors, as we could demonstrate an increase in the formation of cAMP in these 
cells grown on filter supports (Fig. 46). In addition, these cells grown on either Anocell 
filters or Cellagen filters, responded to ADH with changes in cellular surface 
morphology as shown in our SEM (Figs. 10-13) studies, very similar to that seen in the 
intact tissues. Although bulk flow ehcited by an osmotic gradient (Jv) did not change 
following addition of ADH, changes in diftusional flow (J^J could take place and be 
measured. Therefore, unidirectional tritiated water fluxes (THO) were determined in 
A6 cells grown on Anocell filter supports. The results indicated no change in 


31 






unidirectional THO fluxes with either 50 or 200 mU/ml of ADH (Fig. 47). The 
observed fluxes corresponded to a constant value of of about 1.3 x 10"^ cm/sec. 
This observation, coupled to the findings of no osmotic water flow response to ADH, 
suggested that A6 cells were lacking some critical component essential for the ADH 
transepithehal water flow response. However, because we were observing a constant 
value for we decided to adjust the rate of water flow across the limiting barrier at 
the apical surface by the addition of amphotericin B, a polyene antifimgal agent or by 
administering digitonin, a solubilizer. Neither of these agents, when added to the apical 
surface, were able to enhance unidirectional THO fluxes (Fig. 48). Yet, amphotericin 
B in the same cells increased ion transport while decreasing transepithehal resistance. 
These results suggested that there was an unknown barrier in series with the apical 
membrane limiting water flow. To test if the filter itself represented a barrier for water 
diflhision, THO fluxes were measured across Anocell filters without an associated cell 
culture monolayer. As seen in Figure 49, the THO fluxes of fi-eshly mounted filters 
decreased with increasing time and reached equilibrium at approximately 3 to 4 hrs. 
The decrease in THO flux correlated to a measured increase in filter resistance, which 
also increased with time (Fig. 50). decreased fi’om an initial value of about 35 to 
a stable value of 7 ul/min cm^. More remarkable was the fact that in most individual 
filter preparations, control values of were very stable and changed httle under 
hormone stimulation or other ejq)erimental manipulations. These results suggested that 
the filters were rate limiting to water flow (Candia et al., 1993). Anocell filter supports 
seem to be hydrophihc. Fluid placed on its cupped inner surface does not wet its 
outside surface even after several hrs. Other filters tested also appeared to have a 
limited capacity to pass fluid. Our findings suggested possible limitations of filter 
supports for cultured studies, particularly those involving water flow studies using the 


32 




extracellular matrix on which epithelia perform their physiological functions. 

ADH Vj Versus V 2 Interactions 

Our laboratory showed that MZ mimicked vasopressin in mediating an osmotic 
water response, suggesting that activation of PKC could play a role in regulating 
transepithelial water flow. Recently, Teitelbaum and Straheim (1990) demonstrated that 
rat inner medullary collecting tubule cells contained a vasopressin Vj receptor coupled 
to an increase in phosphinositide hydrolysis, and this response occurred at low hormone 
concentrations below that needed to increase adenylcyclase. Our laboratory 
investigated the relationship between the cAMP effects of vasopressin and its effects 
on calcium mobilization using the A6 amphibian kidney cell hne. These cells, derived 
from the cortical collecting tubule of the amphibian Xenopus laevis, when grown on 
filter supports showed the electrical properties of transepithelial potential difference 
(PD), short circuit current (Isc) and resistance (R) as measured by mounting the filter 
support in a Lucite chamber (Candia et al., 1993) similar to that seen in other renal 
epithelia. Under basal conditions the confluent A6 monolayer of amphibian kidney 
cultured cells showed a PD of 37 mV and a resistance of almost 5 kohms (Fig. 51). 
Following the addition of vasopressin, a decrease in resistance and an increase in the 
Isc was seen. The increase in Isc appeared to be mediated through an increase in 
sodium transport as amiloride, a sodium channel blocker, inhibited the hormonal 
increase in transport. These results demonstrated that these cultured cells were 
responsive to vasopressin, and that they contained an active Vj receptor coupled to 
adenylcyclase activity. To support this observation we measured cAMP formation in 
these cells using adenine labeling method. Vasopressin produced a dose-dependent 
(Fig. 52) and time-dependent (Fig. 53) increase in cAMP formation indicating the 


33 



presence of a functional adenylcyclase enzyme coupled to V 2 receptors (Fig. 53). We 
also investigated the interaction between PKC and activation of adenylcyclase to 
determine if the Vj receptor negatively regulated the Vj response. The PKC activation 
with MZ had no effect on the abihty of vasopressin to stimulate cAMP formation (data 
not shown). 

Calcium Signalling and the Actions of ADH: 

Previous studies in our laboratory suggested that the effects of ADH on the 

it 

activation of protein kinase C appeared to involve vasopressin Vj receptor activation. 
It has been suggested that the release of intracellular calcium may serve as a second 
messenger to activate enzymes essential in the regulation of transepithehal water 
transport. We utilized video image analysis to ascertain the effects of vasopressin on 
intracellular free calcium concentrations. In particular, we attempted to determine 
which of the ADH receptors were responsible for the increase in calcium 
concentrations mediated by AVP. In this study the fluorescent dye, Fura-2AM, was 
used to measure free intracellular calcium in LLC-PKi, cultured kidney cells. We 
selected the porcine cell line to investigate this effect, as the mammahan cortical kidney 
had been shown to contain Vi receptors. Figure 54 represents the SEM surface view 
of the unstimulated control LLC-PK, porcine kidney cultured cells grown on Anocell 
filter supports. It can be seen that these cells possess a distribution of scattered 
microridges with no clearly defined cellular identity off the individual cells as seen from 
the surface. In order to monitor calcium changes, the cells are loaded with the Fura- 
2AM. This dye permeates the cell in its ester form. Once in the cell esterases convert 
the dye to Fura-2 which is free to interact with calcium, where the dye fluorescence is 
proportional to the calcium concentration in the cell. A ratio fluorescence technique. 


34 






using a dual excitation computer controlled video image system allows monitoring of 
intracellular free calcium in real time. 

As can be seen in Figure 55, 10"* M AVP increased intracellular calcium in 
LLC-PKi procine kidney cultured cells. These cells, derived from the porcine kidney 
distal convoluted tubule, are known to be the site of vasopressin actions. Figures 56 
and 57 compare the response of AVP to oxytocin, another peptide that has known 
antidiuretic effects in some kidney models. Oxytocin which also contracts smooth 
muscles by increasing intracellular calcium, acts on receptors which appear to be 
oxytocin receptors, since the increase in calcium by oxytocin appeared to be blocked 
by an oxytocin peptide antagonist (Fig. 58). Surprisingly, the effects of AVP on 
intracellular calcium were blocked by the oxytocin antagonist (Fig. 59). This is 
demonstrated quite readily in Figure 60, where AVP effects before and after the 
oxytocin antagonist are presented. The antagonist completely abolished the actions of 
AVP on calcium mobilization. Additional experiments are planned to test the actions 
of AVP and oxytocin in the presence of a vasopressin antagonist (Vj), to determine if 
the receptor in the porcine kidney cells does not differentiate between these two 
peptides, oxytocin and vasopressin. Therefore we are still uncertain of the receptor that 
is coupled to the calcium signalling process in the kidney, and further experimentation 
is warranted. 

Retrieval of Water Channels by Endocytosis: 

Our studies indicated that an increase in intracellular calcium by PKC activation 
may play an important role in the insertion of water channels following hormone 
activation. What was unclear were the processes that regulate water channel retrieval 
following removal of hormone or following desensitization or down regulation. 


35 



The technique of scanning electron microscopy was used to evaluate the surface 
substructure changes that occur following removal of hormone and mezerein 
subsequent to tissue stimulation with ADH and MZ. The main purpose of this series 
of experimental studies was to understand the mechanism and regulation of membrane 
internalization following withdrawal of ADH and MZ. This process often labelled 
endocytosis, occurs as a means of maximizing water channel recycling. This 
experiment also served to evaluate the role of protein kinase C in apical membrane 
retrieval during endocytosis. 

Apical membrane internalization was induced by stimulating the bladder tissues 
with ADH or MZ for specified times and removing the hormone and/or drug to allow 
for retrieval. Control, ADH and MZ challenged tissues, following incubation for 10 or 
15 min, received two quick fresh buffer rinses to remove the ADH or MZ. These 
tissues were then allowed to recover separately for 5,10, 15, 20, 30 and 60 min. The 
SEM analysis of the apical surface topography revealed that the control tissues, 
regardless of the length of time under an osmotic gradient, showed httle or no sign of 
apical membrane intemahzation in the form of inpocketting of the apical membrane 
during the retrieval period. Many scanning electron micrographs of control tissues, 
representing each stage of 5,10,15, 20,30 and 60 min retrieval periods, were studied 
and found to show a general lack of apical membrane surface changes indicative of 
endocytosis. Figures 61 and 62 are representative SEM images of the apical membrane 
microstructure environment of such a control tissue showing the apical membrane as 
composed of a continuous distribution of microridges. In contrast, comparable tissues, 
following removal of ADH or MZ resulted in apical membrane invaginations coincident 
with the retrieval of water channels by endocytosis. The molecular and cellular 
mechanisms that may interplay to induce this apical membrane remodeling are 


36 



unknown. Figures 63 and 64 depict the surface configuration, as displayed by ADH 
and MZ stimulated tissues, during a 5 min retrieval period. A number of granular cells 
developed prominent invaginations over the mucosal surface area (Figs. 63, 64, 
arrows). The percent of the granular cells showing the loss of surface vilh as an index 
of endocytosis was 3% in the control as opposed to 31% and 4% in the ADH and MZ 
stimulated toad urinary bladder tissues respectively involving 5 min retrieval time 
period (Fig. 65). 

The apical membrane retrieval process in toad bladder tissues, as triggered by 
removal of ADH or MZ, appeared to be progressive. Therefore, various stages of 
endocytosis during time periods post hormonal or drug washout were studied. The 
retrieval process began with several shght surface invaginations each of which 
exhibited elevated margins (Figs. 66, 67, arrows). These invaginations, in most cells, 
were found to coalesce laterally to form a single large invagmation across the entire 
membrane surface of the granular cells. Ultrathin sections also revealed the presence 
of surface invaginations (Fig. 68), analogous to that seen in SEM images (Fig. 67). At 
10, 15 or 20 min following withdrawal of ADH or MZ, the toad urinary bladder 
surfaces were seen to have a large number of endocytotic pits (Figs. 69, 70, arrows). 
Endocytosed pits were smaller in number in tissues exposed to MZ as compared to 
those seen in ADH treated tissues. Cell counts at 10 min retrieval, indicated that 
fewer than 8% of the cells showed surface invaginations and putative endocytosis in 
MZ exposed tissues (n=6), as compared to 45% of the cells in ADH stimulated tissues 
(n=6) (Fig. 65). The incidence of proposed endocytosis in MZ and ADH treated 
tissues differs with time of retrieval. Therefore, at 20 min retrieval, 35% of the MZ 
cells showed endocytosis compared to 17% of the ADH treated cells (Fig. 65). These 
tissues when examined in the TEM using the ultrathin sections, revealed pits as large 


37 




vacuoles (Fig. 71, arrows) essentially localized beneath the apical membranes and not 
associated with the basolateral or basal plasma membrane. In some sections, coated 
vesicles originatmg from the apical as well as from the basal membrane, were seen 
scattered within the cytosol of ADH stimulated tissue (Fig. 72, arrows). Freeze 
fracture and deep etching preparation of bladder tissues stimulated with ADH also 
revealed the presence of coated vesicles attached to the membrane (Fig. 73, arrows) 
very similar to coated vesicles seen in the ultrathin sections in the TEM. Presence of 
large endocytosed vacuoles within the cytosol resulted in the displacement of the 
nuclei against the basal membrane. As a result, the nuclei surrounded by vacuoles may 
assume a variety of shapes (Fig. 71). 

Control tissues, under an imposed osmotic gradient for 15 min, had an average fluid 
loss from the bladder sac of 2 pl/min (n=4), whereas ADH challenged tissues had 41 
|il/min fluid loss (n=4). Apical membrane surface changes in ADH stimulated tissues 
reached a peak at 10 or 15 min into the retrieval period, with a percent of cells involved 
at 46% and 64%, respectively. Whereas in the control tissues, less than 5% of the cells 
were involved (Fig. 65). During the process of the formation of invaginations, apical 
membrane surfaces tend to undergo membrane remodeling with a loss of both microvilh 
and microridges in both ADH and MZ stimulated tissues (Figs. 67, 70, arrows) leaving 
flattened membrane surfaces with no visible microstructure. In ultrathin sections, such 
membranes appear to contain no microridges or microvilli. This phase of membrane 
disposition may represent a membrane transition during transformation of microvilh 
into microridges. These tissues when challenged with MZ, 10"® M for 15 min, and later 
exposed to PKC I antibody and protein A-gold particles using ultrathin sections, 
showed localization of gold particles in association with anti-PKC I, predominantly 
surrounding the coated vesicles as shown in Figures 74 and 75 (arrows). It is not 


38 


01/19/95 07:42 0301 619 2743 

H - 1 S -S WED 1 5 : S 


DTIC-Z'V 


SGRD RMI " ■—- 

J-rtRVIS CHRISXIRM COL_L_eG 


2 : 0 0 2 / 0 0 2 


p , e 2 


known whetlier the coated vesicle originated fi'om the apical membraae, or migrated 
into tlie cytosol during the apical membrane restoration process. However, the 
evidence indicates tliat this may occur as the presence of several of these coated 
vesicles, laced with gold particles, appear to have migrated from the apical membrane 
into the cytosol (Figiu-e 76, aiTOws). This may suggest a possible link between the 
incidence of coated vesicles and the endocytic process for membrane restoration. 
These coated vesiclecs appeared to be associated with membrane cistemae 
suiTOundiiig a central cavity. Coated vesicles were encountered in TEM ultratliin 
sections and freeze fracture preparations (Figures 72 and 73). Also these coated 
vesicles are distinctly different tiliaa the caveolae which are released from tlie 
membrane surfaces of tlie microfilament-rich cells present in toad urinary bladder 
sacs CFig. 77) and also reported by Smart et al., (1994) to occur in other cell types. 

The studies of membrane restoratioii by endocytosis as affected by ADH or MZ 
were extended to include 30 and 60 min periods following removal of hormone or 
drug. In addition, water flow rates were measured from bladders with or witliout 
adjusting the osmotic gradient during tlie 60 min retrieval period, following 
withdrawal of ADH. The recovery of the water channels from the apical membrane 
in ADH or MZ exposed tissues begins soon after tlie removal of the ADH or MZ. 
However, such membrane remodeling processes were seen to be gradual, as not all 
tlie granular cells had undergone a restoration of Uie apical membrane even after 30, 
or 60 min into the retrieval periods following withdrawal of ADH or MZ. Global 
surface views of apical membranes at 30 and 60 min following ADH (Fig. 78) and 
MZ removal (Figs. 79, 80) showed that, although a large proportion of the granular 
cells had restored surface morphology as in die pre-honnone normal state, a few 
granular cells still had some surface microvilli, while other membrane components 

39 



showed the presence of surface remodeling. Closer views are presented in Figures 81, 
82 and 83 to demonstrate the membrane restoration in the granular cells showing 
almost complete reorganizational pattern of the microridges surrounding the 
endocytosed pits. 

The question remained, however, was this surface remodeling consistent with 
changes in transepithelial water flow and was the retrieval of water channels a 
consequence of osmotic gradient changes? Furthermore, will maintaining the osmotic 
gradient sustam the water flow response and support water channel maintenance at the 
apical membrane? Experiments were therefore designed to test the hypothesis that 
continued water permeabihty was dependent, in part, on the osmotic gradient for water 
flow. Bladders were set as sacs and ADH was added after an initial baseline water flow 
measurement. ADH was then removed from both the bladder sacs, and the sacs were 
then allowed to retrieve. During this retrieval period, the osmotic gradient was 
maintained in one sac by replacing the fluid inside the bladder sac with firesh diluted 
Ringer's solution, while the other sac was left with no periodic buffer rinses. These 
results indicated that maintaining the osmotic gradient did not restore or maintain the 
rate of higher flow, rather water flow was found to return to baseline faster if the 
gradient was not allowed to dissipate (Fig. 84). SEM studies also indicated that there 
was httle or no difference in membrane restoration in tissues which received periodic 
adjustments of the osmotic gradient. 

To quantify the extent of endocytosis during retrieval, counts of the endocytosed 
pits were made at 20,30 and 60 min into the retrieval periods (Figure 64). It was seen 
that during the 20 min retrieval period, the number of individual cells showing 
endocytosis in MZ stimulated tissues was 35% as compared to 17% in ADH stimulated 
tissues. During 30 and 60 min retrieval periods, the number of the involved cells in 


40 






ADH stimulated tissues was found to be 27% and 23% versus 22% and 9% in MZ 
stimulated tissues respectively, whereas fewer than 2% of the control cells showed 
signs of endocytosis. The results indicated that MZ stimulated tissues responded to 
endocytosis slower than ADH stimulated tissues, and corresponded with slower water 
loss from the MZ challenged tissues. 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Biological membranes are dynamic cellular structures that are not only 
responsible for limiting the permeabihty of the cell, but also play a role in the regulation 
of a variety of cell functions. Eukaryotic cells, such as those of granular cells in renal 
epitheha and toad urinary bladder, throu^ the process of specialization, have acquired 
complex, yet integrated molecular and cellular processes to recycle plasma membrane 
components and proteins as a means to regulate a variety of crucial cellular fimctions. 
Internal membrane shuttling is an important process for renal cortical cells as a means 
to regulate osmotic water flow, particularly, at times where water reabsorption was 
essential to prevent dehydration. The process of transepithelial water flow in renal 
tissue includes two important biological events involving exocytosis and endocytosis 
for cycling of water channels in vasopressin responsive tissues. A schematic 
presentation of exo- and endocytosis involving ADH V 2 and Vj receptor interactions 
is shown in Figure 1. The second messenger pathways in the normal unstimulated 
cells, and hormone-stimulated toad urinary bladder cells is presented, as well as 
following removal of hormone. The exocytic process occurs as a consequence of ADH 
actions on its receptors and is initiated for selectively packaging water channels 
(aggrephores) for export to the apical membrane for fusion (Kachadorian et al., 1977; 
Wade et al.,1981; Davis et al., 1982; Hays, 1983). Whereas the process of endocytosis 


41 




following removal or suppression of hormone actions occurs in order to recover 
portions of the apical membrane, water channels, likely as coated vesicles, would also 
be returned to the cytoplasm (Pearse and Crowther, 1987; Brodsky, 1988; Schmid, 
1992). Little is known about the fate of these water channels in toad urinary bladders, 
once they are internalized into the cytosol. Therefore, a major challenge in 
transmembrane fluid transport dynamics is to determine the molecular and cellular 
mechanisms of exo- and endocytosis of water channels and the processes of regulation 
for maximizing the reabsorptive capacity of the kidney. Our laboratory has been 
concerned with identifying the key components involved in these dynamic cellular 
processes, and have conducted a series of experimental studies using the toad urinary 
bladders as a renal model to determine both structurally and biochemically the 
characteristics of water reabsorption by vasopressin.. 

Vasopressin stimulation causes rapid transmembrane osmotic water flow in 
renal epithelia as well as in the toad urinary bladder by a process that involves 
exocytosis of water channels. The enhanced water flow is beheved to occur through 
stimulation of ADH Vj receptors coupled to adenylate cyclase, enhanced cAMP 
formation and activation of protein kinase A (Handler and Orloff, 1973; Schlondorff 
and Levine, 1985). These biochemical events are necessary precursors to the insertion 
of water channels (aggrephores) into the apical plasma membrane (Chevalier et al., 
1974; Kachadorian et al., 1978; Hays et al., 1985). The insertion of water channels 
is thought to involve the cytoskeletal system of microfilaments and microtubules (Hays 
et al., 1985; Taylor et al., 1973; Hardy and DiBona, 1982; Pearl and Taylor, 1983; Mia 
et al., 1991a). The apical membrane fusion of water channels results in an increase in 
membrane capacitance following stimulation with vasopressin. This occurs in renal 
epitheha, as well as the amphibian urinary bladder resulting in enhanced osmotic water 


42 




flow. 


The importance of microfilaments in the intracellular transport process has been 
the subject of a recent article (Stossel, 1994), and we anticipate additional studies of 
the role of microfilaments and microtubules in understanding the mechanism of the 
cycling of water channels in transepithelia water transport. 

In the normal unstimulated control tissues, the apical plasma membrane, 
regardless of tissue types, contains a smooth surface configuration with a continuous 
phase of microridges. Intact toad urinary hemibladders as well as the isolated 
dissociated toad bladders granular cells, retained in the Ringer's solution for controls, 
showed a remarkable similarity with that of the cultured amphibian A6 kidney cells, 
and LLC-PKl porcine kidney cells grown on either Anocell or ICM membrane filters 
(Candia et el,1993). Once these cells are exposed to either ADH or MZ or to a 
combination of ADH and MZ, they showed membrane conformational changes 
representative of a conversion of the apical microridges into numerous prominent 
microvilli which were associated with tissue swelling. In the normal unstimulated 
control tissues, the apical membrane of toad urinary bladder granular cells contain 
essentially a smooth surface with a continuous phase of microridges. However, many 
of the control granular cells were also found to have microvilh over the apical 
membrane surfaces, and the villi formation was seen to be progressive with prolonged 
tissue treatment under osmotic gradient. The reason for such transformation of 
microridges into microvilli in control tissues is unknown. It could be due to the 
presence of osmosensitive cellular compartments or a result of the osmotic difference, 
hypertonicity or stretch, or a combination of these factors could stimulate vilh 
formation in amphibian bladder epitheha (Mills and Malick, 1978; Dratwa et al., 1979; 
LeFurgey andTisher, 1981). 


43 








We also demonstrated that MZ, a non-phorbol activator of protein kinase C 
(PKC), increased transepithelial water flow when added to the mucosal surface of toad 
urinary bladder sacs (Yorio and Satumtira, 1989) mimicking the actions of ADH. 
However, when bladders were exposed to MZ for 30-60 min and then challenged with 
ADH, the hormone effect on water flow was attenuated at 30 min and completely 
blocked following 60 min preincubation with MZ. These results suggested that MZ, 
via PKC activation was acting on a pathway similar to that stimulated by hormone. 
Since long incubations (as with 60 min) with PKC activators, hke MZ, are known to 
down regulate PKC activity, PKC activity may be important for water flow to occur. 
Additional studies suggested that activation of PKC by MZ caused premature insertion 
of water channels into the apical membrane prior to the actions of hormone on Vj 
receptors and activation of protein kinase A. It was found that the enhanced water flow 
induced by MZ, similar to ADH action, correlated with the conversion of the apical 
microridges into numerous microvilli. Similarly, water flow, as enhanced by MZ, was 
further found to be correlated with an increased incidence of cytosolic aggrephores 
(water chaimels) and concurrent events of apical membrane fusion in freeze fracture 
preparations (Mia et al., 1989b) similar to that found with ADH stimulated tissues 
(Chevalier et al., 1974; Hays et al., 1982,1985). This suggested that PKC may have 
a functional role in the regulation of the insertion of water channels during enhanced 
transmembrane water flow. 

Protein Kinase C, a calcium and phospholipid-dependent protein kinase, exists 
in various isoforms in a variety of tissues and is known to play a key role in the 
regulation of a variety of intracellular processes, including signal transduction (Yoshida 
et al, 1988). In our studies, we demonstrated the presence of PKC isozymes in toad 
urinary bladder following stimulation with ADH and MZ to indicate that the amphibian 


44 





urinary bladders also contained a hormone-activated PKC pathway probably through 
stimulation by vasopressin of Vi receptors. The stimulation of this receptor results in 
the breakdown of polyphosphoinositides and the formation of inositol trisphosphate and 
diacylglycerol (Yorio et al., 1985; Yorio and Satumtira, 1989). 

In support of the role of the ADH Vj receptor and activation of protein kinase 
C in the augmentation of osmotic water flow, we have shown that mezerein, a non- 
phorbol activator of protein kinase C can enhance osmotic water flow, as well as cause 
apical membrane transformations and remodeling similar to that produced by challenges 
with ADH (Mia et al., 1983, 1987). Further evidence in support of the role of PKC 
was derived from several experiments in which three protein kinase C isoforms were 
localized at the fine structural level using PKC antibodies and immunogold antibody 
labeling techniques in toad urinary bladder tissues. The gold particles occurred singular 
or in association with cytoplasmic dense bodies following stimulation with hormone or 
PKC activation by MZ. Immunogold particles also appeared in the apical membrane 
domain following hormone MZ treatment demonstrating PKC translocation. The 
control tissues seldom showed localization of any of the PKC isoforms in the cytosol 
or in the apical membrane domain. Failure to label the protein kinase C isoforms in 
control tissues of toad urinary bladders by protein A-gold probes may likely be due to 
their presence in soluble forms in the control tissues and/or in a structural form not 
necessarily recognized by the antibodies and the protein A-gold probes. In addition, 
these dense bodies, occurring among the mitochondria, nuclei, rough-ER etc., were the 
only cytoplasmic structures found to be predominantly laced with gold particles, while 
leaving other organelles free of gold particles. The presence of gold particles was not 
found to be associated with any other organelles, including the nuclei as was reported 
for NIH 3T3 cells (Leach et al., 1989). The detection of PKC subtypes alone in the 


45 



granular cells in toad urinary bladder tissues suggest that PKC may be a key player 
in regulating ADH mediated water flow, concurrent with water channel translocation 
following stimulation with hormone. Additionally, the identification of PKC isoforms 
on dense granules prior to translocation may suggest a pathway for enzyme movement 
from cytosol to membrane on discrete PKC carrier proteins or associated water 
channels. 

The physical appearance and the distribution patterns of PKC isoforms are very 
similar to one another, and there appeared to be no apparent difference between the 
difiused bodies labeled with gold particles in tissues stimulated with MZ or ADH. The 
gold particles were found to be distributed singularly and concentrated in diffused 
cytoplasmic bodies or in association with the apical plasma membrane. The diffiised 
cytoplasmic bodies involving the three PKC isozymes, as labeled with gold particles, 
were found only in the granular cells of the toad urinary bladder and not in any other 
cells, including the mitochondria-rich, microfilament-rich and goblet cells. 
Immunofluorescent studies using PKC antibodies and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) 
carried out by other workers indicated that some PKC isoforms occurred in the cytosol 
and in the nuclei in particulate forms following stimulation with phorbol esters (Taken 
et al., 1989) and in the unstimulated cultured MDBK renal epitheha (Simboh-Canpbell 
et al., 1993). We also demonstrated the presence of several PKC subt 5 ^es in toad 
urinary bladder granular cells and in A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells following 
stimulation with ADH and MZ, using PKC antibodies and protein A-gold probes at the 
fine structural level, and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) at the light microscopy 
level, indicating a functional role of PKC in hormone stimulated tissues. 

Several observations prompted our attention to undertake experimental studies 
on the phenomenon of membrane retrieval and membrane remodeling following 


46 



hormone removal. The ceUular events leading to the process of endocytosis have been 
recently investigated and the biochemical characterization of clathrin coated pits 
associated with endocytosis in a variety of tissues has also been described (Brown, 
1989; Pearse and Crowther, 1987; Schmid, 1992). However, little is known about the 
structural and morphological changes that accompany the process of endocytosis. 
Using the techniques of SEM, we examined the surface membrane remodeling of the 
toad urinary bladder granular cells that may be associated with the endocytotic retrieval 
of membrane components, i.e., water channels, following removal of vasopressin 
(Brown, 1989, Brown et al., 1990, Coleman et al., 1987). In addition, it was not 
known if PKC was involved in the retrieval process during endocytosis. The current 
observations suggest that the apical plasma membrane surface of toad urinary bladders, 
passes through stages of membrane remodeling that is coincident with the retrieval of 
water channels prior to the restoration of the membrane to its normal surface 
topography containing microridges. In addition, the processes of exo- and endocytosis, 
with reference to surface fine structure, were not previously evaluated in time-course 
studies using a single tissue system responsive to vasopressin. This is particularly 
relevant to the regulation of these two processes involved in the overall intracellular 
cycling of water channels in ADH responsive tissues. Hence, the current research 
reports on both the processes of exo- and endocytosis using a variety of renal epitheha 
as ADH responsive model membranes. 

The plasma membrane cycling of ADH stimulated water channels in amphibian 
urinary bladder tissues, as well as in the renal cortical cells are accomplished by 
cellular events involving exo- and endocyotsis. The process of exocytosis has received 
adequate attention and appears to involve the export of proteinaceous water channels 
or aggrephores, normally found in the cytosol of the unstimulated bladder tissues, to the 


47 





apical plasma membrane for incorporation as a means to enhance water flow (Humbert 
et al., 1977; Muller and Kachadorian, 1984; Wade, 1978). Enhanced apical membrane 
water permeability by ADH is correlated with a restructuring of the apical membrane 
microridges into numerous microvilli with an increase in membrane surface area and 
capacitance (DiBona et al., 1969; DiBona, 1981; Spinelh et al., 1975; Hays, 1983; Mia 
et al., 1983, 1987, 1988a). Hiese cellular ultrastructural events are thought to occur 
through ADH Vj receptors coupled to the activation of adenylate cyclase, an increase 
in cAMP and the activation of protein Kinase A (Handler and Orlofif 1973, 1981; 
Schlondorff and Levine, 1985). Amphibian epitheha also contain an ADH Vj receptor 
coupled to phosphoinositide metabohsm and inositol triphosphate release (Yorio et al., 
1985; Yorio and Satumtira, 1989), which appears to play a fimctional role in the overall 
scheme of transepithehal aqueous flow possibly through the activation of PKC. It has 
been shown that mezerein (MZ), a non-phorbol activator of PKC, increased 
transepithehal water flow when added to the mucosal surface. Although the magnitude 
of water flow was less, and occurred over a longer period as compared to ADH 
stimulated tissues, the response was reminiscent to that seen with hormone (Yorio and 
Satumtira, 1989). A series of ultrastructural experiments also revealed that this 
enhanced water flow induced by MZ was indeed correlated with the propagation of 
apical microvilli and the change in the cellular distribution of PKC isozymes as 
determined by immunogold localization techniques (Mia et al., 1991b, 1992). It has 
been proposed by our laboratory that part of the initiation of transepithehal water flow 
by ADH involves Vj receptors and the activation of PKC. Hie water channels 
(aggrephores) are likely transported from the cytosol to the apical membrane domain 
through an involvement of PKC. Our observations involving the role of PKC during 
enhanced transepithehal water transport correlated with cytomorphological changes and 


48 







concurrent apical membrane surface remodeling, suggest that PKC may play an 
integral role in the phenomenon of membrane recycling. 

The process of endocytosis in amphibian bladder tissues has been described 
(Muller and Kachadorian, 1984; Ding et al., 1985; Harris et al., 1986; Coleman et al., 
1987). Following stimulation of tissues by hormone, the membrane permeability to 
water declines with time and the tissue looses its responsiveness to ADH. During this 
period, membrane recycling takes place resulting in a membrane remodeling and a 
return of the apical membrane to the normal unstimulated state. During this membrane 
restoration process it is assumed that water channels are retrieved by endocytosis. It 
has been predicted that the internalized membranes contain intact particles aggregates 
retrieved during endocytosis. Several studies on endocytosis, using amphibian urinary 
bladders, have shown evidence of membrane retrieval of intact particles aggregates 
using specific protein markers as identification of aggregate protein (Harris et al., 
1986). Additional evidence for retrieval of water channels had come fi*om ultrathin 
section and fi'eeze fi-acture techniques using selectively labeled colloidal gold and 
horseradish peroxidase as tracers to localize membrane particle aggregates (Coleman 
et al., 1987). More recently, it has been shown that endocytosed membrane vesicles 
retain their permeabihty to water following ADH action (Brown, 1989). While these 
studies involve the cellular localization of retrieved aggrephores following withdrawal 
of ADH, there are no studies on surface changes during this process nor time-course 
studies reported. Our present time-course studies provide insight into the membrane 
surface behavior following withdrawal of ADH or MZ. During this process, granular 
epithelial cell membranes tend to invaginate toward the cellular interior as an initial 
response to ADH or MZ withdrawal. This could result fi’om the loss of membrane 
permeability to water, or as an initial cytosolic signal to begin the retrieval process. 


49 





Since transepithelial water flow is maintained during the period, it is highly unlikely 
that this internalization process is initiated by changes in membrane permeabihty or 
dissipation of the osmotic gradient. The membrane intemahzation process appears to 
enter into transitional stages resulting in the loss of the surface microstructures 
(microvilli) prior to the restoration of the apical membrane to one predominantly 
containing microridges. The restoration of apical membranes is correlated with a 
decrease in transepithehal water transport. It is also noteworthy that even when 
hormone is continually present there appears to be a down-regulation of membrane 
permeabihty and an internalization of membrane water channels. Therefore, additional 
unknown mechanisms may act to bring about a return of the membrane to its normal 
state. The present observations indicate and reinforce our previous observations that 
protein kinase C may be involved in the insertion of membrane water channels during 
exocytosis, whereas the process of endocytosis may be mediated by other cellular 
events. Further research in the mechanisms regulating retrieval of water channels is 
necessary so that a complete picture of membrane recycling and its regulation may be 
presented. Such a story could lead to suggestive measures to improve or enhance water 
reabsorptive processes in the kidney. Such measures will maximize water retention 
during periods of water deprivation as may be experienced by soldiers in a desert 
environment. 


REFERENCES 

Asotra, K. and Macklin, W.B. 1993. Use of affinity-purified and protein G-purified 
antibodies to study protein kinase C isozyme expression in ohgodendrocytes. Focus, 
15, 94-98. 

AusieUo, D.A., Skorecki, K.L., Verkman, A.S. and Bonventre, J.V. 1987. Vasopressin 


50 




signaling in kidney cells. Kidney Int., 31, 521-529. 

Bentley, P.J. 1958. The effects of neurohypophysial extracts on water transfer across 
the wall of the isolated urinary bladder of the toad, 5 m/o J. Endocrin., 17, 

201-209. 

Bradford, U. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quatification of microgram 
quantities of protein utihzes the principle of protein-dye binding. Ann. Biochem., 72, 
248-254. 

Brodsky, F.M. 1988. Living ith clatharin: Its role in intracellular membrane traffic. 
Sci., 242, 1396-1402. 

Brown, D. 1989. Vesicle recycling and cell-specific fimction in kidney epithehal cells. 
Aimu. Rev. Physiol., 51, 771-784. 

Brown, D., Verkman, A. S., Skorecki, K. and Ausiello, D.A. 1990. The cellular action 
of Antidiuretic Hormone. Meth. in Enzymology 191, 551-571. 

Cammarata, P.R., Fan, W., Jin, Y. and Yorio, T. 1993. Protein kinase C activity and 
its relation ship to myo-inositol uptake during hyperglycemic conditions in cultured 
bovine lens epithehal cells. Current Eye Res., 12,403-412. 

Candia, O., Mia, A.J. and Yorio, T. 1993. Influence of filter supports on transport 
charateristics of cultured A6 kidney cells. Am. J. Physiol., 265 (Cell Physiol. 34), 
C1479-C1488). 

Chevalier, J., Bourguet, J. and Hugon J.S. 1974. Membrane associated particles: 
distribution in fi-og urinary bladder epithehum at rest and after oxytocin treatment. Cell 
Tiss. Res., 152,129-140. 

Coleman, R.A., Harris, W. Jr., and Wade, J.B. 1987. Visualization of endocytosed 
markers in freeze-fi-acture studies of toad urinary bladder. J. Histochem. Cytochem., 
35,1405-1414. 


51 



Davis, W.L., Goodman, B.P., Schuster, R.J., Rasmussen, H. and Martin, J.H. 1974. 
Effects of cytochalasin B on the response of toad urinary bladder to vasopressin. J. 
Cell Biol., 63,986-997. 

Davis, W.L., Jones, R.G., Ciumei, J., Knight, P.C. and Goodman, D.B. 1982. 
Electron-microscopic and morphometric study of vesiculation in the epithehal cell layer 
of the toad urinary bladder. Cell Tissue Res., 225, 619-631. 

DiBona, D.R., Civan, M.M. and Leaf, A. 1969. The cellular specificity of the effect 
of vasopressin on toad urinary bladder. J. Membr. Biol., 1, 79-91. 

DiBona, D.R. 1978. Direct visualization of epithehal morphology in the hving 
amphibian urinary bladder. J. Membr. Biol., 400, 45-70. 

DiBona, D.R. 1981. Vasopressin action of the conformational state of the granular cell 
in the amphibian urinary bladder. In Epithehal Ion and Water Transport. J. Cardiovasc. 
Pharm., 8, 23-528. 

Ding, G., Franki, N. and Hays, R.M. 1985. Evidence of cycling of aggregate-containing 
tubules in toad urinary bladder. Biol. Cell, 55,213. 

Dratwa, M., LeFurgey, A. and Tisher, C.C. 1979. Effect of vasopressin and serosal 
hypertonicity on toad urinary bladder. Kidney Int., 16, 695-703. 

Gronowicz, G., Massur, S.K. and Holtzman, E. 1980. Quantitative analysis of 
exocytosis and endocytosis in the hydroosmotic response of toad urinary bladder. J. 
Membr. Biol., 52, 221-235. 

Grynkiewicz, G., Poenie, M. and Tsien, R.Y. 1985. A new generation of Ca^^ 
indicators with greatly improved fluorescence properties. J. Biol. Chem., 260, 3440- 
3450. 

Handler, J.S. and Orloff, J. 1973. The mechanism of action of anti-diuretic hormone. 
Handbook of Phys., 8, 791-814. 


52 



Handler, J.S. and Orlofif, J. 1981. Antidiuretic hormone. Ann. Rev. Physiol., 43, 611- 
624. 

Hardy, M.A. and DiBona, D.R. 1982. Microfilaments and the hydro-osmotic action 
of vasopressin in toad urinary bladder. Am. J. Physiol., 243, C200-C204. 

Harris, H.W., Wade, J.B. and Handler, J.S. 1986. Fluorescent markers to study 
membrane retrieval in ADH treated toad urinary bladder. Am. J. Physiol, 251, C274. 
Hays, R. M, Bourguet, J., Satir, B.H., Franki, N. and Rapaport, J. 1982. Retention 
of antidiuretic hormone-induced particle aggregates by luminal membranes separated 
from toad bladder epithelial cells. J. Cell Biol. 92: 237-241. 

Hays, R.R. 1983. Alteration of luminal membrane structure by antidiuretic hormone. 
Am. J. Physiol, 245, C289-C296. 

Hays, R. M., Chevaher, J., Gobin, R. and Bourget, J, 1985. Fusion images and 
intramembrane particle aggregates during the action of antidiuretic hormone. A rapid 
freeze study. Cell Tissue Res., 240,433-439. 

Humbert, F., Montesano, R., Grosso, A., DeSousa, R.C. and Orci, L. 1977. Particle 
aggregates in plasma and intracellular membranes of toad bladder (granular cells). 
Experimentia, 33,1364. 

Ito, T., Tanaka, T., Yoshida, T., Oneda, K., Ohta, H., Hagiwara, M., Ito, Y., Ogwa, 
M., Saito, H. and Hidaka, H. 1988. Immunocytochemical evidence for translocation 
of protein kinase C in human megakaryoblastic leukemic cells: Synergistic effects of 
Ca^^ and activators of protein kinase C on the plasma membrane association. J. Cell 
Biol, 107, 929-937. 

Jaken, S., Leach, K. and Klauck, T. 1989. Association of type 3 protein kinase C with 
focal contracts in rat embryo fibroblasts. J. Cell Bio., 109, 697-704. 

Kachadorian, W.A., Casey, C. and DiScala, V.A. 1977. Time course of ADH-induced 


53 




intramembrane particle aggregation in toad urinary bladder. Am. J. Physiol. 234, F461- 
F465. 

Kachadorian, W.A., Muller, J., Rudich, S. and DiScala, V.A. 1978. Time course of 
ADH-induced intramembrane particle aggregation in toad urinary bladder. Am. J. 
Physiol., 234, F461. 

Leach, K.L., Ponus, E.A., Ruff, V.A., Jaken, S. and Kaufinann, J. 1989. Type 3 
protein kinase C localization to the nuclear envelope of phorbol ester-treated NIH 3T3 
cells. J. Cell Biol, 109, 685-695. 

LeFurgey, A. and Tisher, C.C. 1981. Time course of vasopressin-induced formation of 
microvilli in granular cells of toad urinary bladder. J. Membr. Biol, 61,13-19. 

Mia, A.J., Tarapoom, N., Carnes, J. and Yorio, T. 1983. Alteration in surface 
substructure of frog urinary bladder by calcium ionophore, verapamil and antidiuretic 
hormone. Tissue & Cell, 15,737-748. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Torres, L., Herman, C. and Yorio, T. 1987. Morphometric 
analysis of epithehal cells of frog urinary bladder. L Effect of antidiuretic hormone, 
calcium ionophore (A23187) and PGE 2 . Tissue & Cell, 19, 437-450. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Moore, T.M., Chang, P.H. and Yorio, T. 1988a. 
Morphometric analysis of epithelial cells of frog urinary bladder. H. Effect of ADH, 
Calcium Ionophore (A23187) and verapamil on isolated and dissociated cells. Tissue 
& Cell, 20, 19-33. 

Mia, A.J. Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1988b. Effect of verapamil on cytoplasmic 
distribution of granules and microfilaments in amphibian urinary bladder. Proc. Elect. 
Microscopic. Soc. Am., 46, 324-325. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1989a. Alterations in surface substructures and 
degranulation of subapical cytoplasmic granules by mezerein (MZ) in toad urinary 


54 




bladder epithelia. Proc. Elect. Microscopic. Soc. Am., 47, 916-917. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1989a. Modulation of cytoskeletal organization 
and cytosolic granule distribution by verapamil in amphibian urinary bladder. J. Cell 
Biol., 107, 772. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Cammarata, P. and Yorio, T. 1991a. Modulation of 
cytoskeletal organization and cytosolic granule distribution by verapamil in amphibian 
urinary epitheha. Tissue & Cell, 23,161-171. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1991b. Role of PKC isozymes in water 
transport in toad urinary bladder. Proc. Elect. Microscopic. Soc. Am., 49, 302-303. 
Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Thompson, P.D. and Yorio, T. 1992. Role of PKC isozyme 
in (alpha) in water transport in amphibian urinary bladder. Proc, Elect. Microscopic. 
Soc. Am., 50, 796-797. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Yancy, H.F., Davidson, A.D. and Yorio, T. 1993a. Evidence 
of endocytosis in toad urinary bladders as revealed by SEM. FASEB J., 7, A577. 
Mia, A.J.., Oakford, L.X., Hayes, S.C., Davidson, A.D.. and Yorio, T. 1993b. 
Membrane dynamic during endocytosis in toad urinary bladders as visualized by SEM. 
Scanning 15 Suppini, 110-111. 

Mia, A.J., Davidson, A.D., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1993c. SEM studies of 
membrane endocytosis in toad urinary bladders following withdrawal of mezerin. Proc. 
Microscopy Soc. Am., 474-475. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1994. Surface membrane remodeling following 
removal of vasopressin in amphibian urinary bladder. Tissue & Cell, 26,189-201. 
Mills, J.J. and Malick, L.E. 1978. Mucosal surface morphology of the toad urinary 
bladder. Scanning electron microscopic study of the natriferic and hydro-osmotic 
response to vasopressin. J. Cell Biol., 77, 598-610. 


55 



Mochly-Rosen, D., Hendrick, C.J., Cheever, L., Khaner, H. and Simpson, P.C. 1990. 
A protein kinase C isozyme is translocated to cytoskeletal elements on activation. Cell 
Regul., 1, 693-706. 

Muller, J. and Kachadorian, W.A. 1984. Aggregate-carrying membranes during ADH 
stimulation and washout in toad bladder. Am. J. Physiol., 247, C90-C98. 

Pearl, M. and Taylor, A. 1983. Actin filaments and vasopressin-stimulated water flow 
in a toad urinary bladder. Am. J. physiol., 245, C28-C39. 

Pearse, M.F. and Crowther, R.A. 1987. Structure and assembly of coated vesicles. 
Annu. Rev. Biophys. Chem., 16,49-68. 

Perkins, F.M. and Handler, J.S. 1981. Transport properties of toad kidney epitheha in 
culture. Am. J. Physiol, 241 (Cell Physiol. 10), C154-C159. 

SchlondrofiF, D. and Levine, S.D. 1985. hihibition of vasopressin-stimulated water flow 
in toad urinary bladder by phorbol myristate acetate, dioctanoylglycerol, and RHC- 
80267. J. Clin. Invest., 76,1071-1078. 

SchlondorfiF, D. and Satriano, J.A. 1985. Interactions of vasopressin, cAMP, and 
prostaglandins in toad urinary bladder. Am. J. Physiol, 248, F454-F458. 

Schmid, S.L. 1992. The mechanism of receptor-mediated endocytosis: More questions 
than answers. BioEssays, 14, 589-596. 

Simboli-Campbell, M., Gaynon, A., Welsh, J. and Franks, D.J. 1993. Analysis of 
PKCe in renal cells. Focus, 15,12-15. 

Smart, E.J., Ying, Y.S., Kamen, B.A. and Anderson, R.G.W. 1994. Protein kinase C 
activators prevent receptor-mediated potocytosis by inhibiting internalization of 
caveolae. Mol. Biol. Cell, 4,435a. 

Spinelli, F., Grosso,A. and DeSousa, R.C. 1975. The hydrosomotic effect of 
vasopressin: A scanning electron-microscope study. J. Membr. Biol., 23,139-156. 


56 





Stossel, T.P. 1994. The machinery of cell crawling. Sci. Am. 54-63. 

Taylor, A., Mamelak, M., Reaven, E. and Maffly, R. 1973. Vasopressin: possible role 
of microtubules and microfilaments in its action. Sci., 181, 347-350. 

Teitelbaum, I. and Straheim, A. 1990. AVP stimulates adenylcyclase and 
phosphohpase C in reciprocal fashion in cultured RIMCT cells. Am. J. Physiol., 259, 
C693-C696. 

Wade, J.B. 1978. Membrane structural specialization of the toad urinary bladder 
revealed by fi'eeze-firacture technique. III. Location, structure and vasopressin 
dependence of intramembrane particles arrays. J. Membr. Biol., special issue, 281. 
Wade, J.B., Stetson, D.L. and Lewis, J.A. 1981. ADH action: evidence for a 
membrane shuttle mechanism. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 322,106-117. 

Yorio, T., Henry, S., Hodges, D. and Caffrey, J.L. 1983. Relationship of calcium and 
prostaglandins in the antidiuretic hormone response. Boichem. Pharmacol., 32,113- 
118. 

Yorio, T., Royce, R., Mattem, J., Oakford, L.X. and Mia, A.J. 1985. Inhibition of 
hydro-osmotic response to vasopressin and hypertonicity by phenothiazines and W7 
calmodulin antagonism. Gen. Pharmac., 164, 347-353. 

Yorio, T. and Satumtira, N. 1989. Contribution of the vasopressin Vi receptor to its 
hydro-osmotic response. Biol.Cell, 66, 7-12. 

Yoshida, Y., Huang, F.L., Nakabayashi, H. and Huang, K.P. 1988. Tissue distribution 
and development expression of protein kinase C isozymes. J. Biol. Chem., 263, 9868- 
9873. 


57 






ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The authors sincerely express their appreciation to the U.S. Army Medical 
Research and Development Command for supporting their research project on 
"Vasopressin Receptor Signaling and Cycling of Water Channels in renal Epitheha", 
tenured at Jarvis Christian College (an Historically Black College, HBCU), Hawkins, 
Texas and at the University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth/ 
TCOM (a Majority Research Institution, MRI), Fort Worth, Texas. The authors also 
thank the student research participants for their excellent technical support during the 
course of the project. 


58 



KEY TO FIGURES 

Figure 1. Schematic presentation of unstimulated (A), ADH or MZ stimulated (B) 
cells, and retrieved cells (C) following withdrawal of ADH or MZ. A, aggrephores, 
D, desmosomes, En, endocytosomes. Mi, membrane invagination, M, microtubules, 
Mf, microfilaments, N, nucleus, PKC, protein kinase C enzyme localized with 
protein A-gold particles. 

Figure 2. Schematic representation of experimental set-up of toad urinary bladder 
as a sac. 

Figure 3. SEM of control toad urinary bladder tissue retained in Ringer's solution 
under an imposed osmotic gradient for 10 min showing apical plasma membrane 
predominantly containing microridges (arrows). X2,000. 

Figure 4. SEM of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with lOOmU/ml ADH for 
10 min showing propagation of numerous microvilli (arrows) over the apical plasma 
membrane surface. X2,000. 

Figure 5. SEM of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ lO'^M for 10 min 
showing propagation of numerous microvilli (arrows) over the apical plasma 
membrane surface. X2,000. 

Figure 6. SEM of control toad urinary bladder tissue retained in Ringer's solution for 
60 min showing the presence predominant microridges (arrows) over the granular 
cell surface. X4,000. 

Figure 7. SEM of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with lOOmU/ml ADH for 
60 min showing formation of microvilli (arrows) over the surface of the granular 
cells. X4,000. 

Figure 8. SEM of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ lO'^M showing the 
formation of microvilli (arrows) over the granular cell surface. X4,000. 


59 





Figure 9. Histograms representing the percent of granual cells with microvilli in the 
control, ADH and MZ treated toad urinary bladder cells for 10, 30 and 60 min 
respectively. 

Figure 10. SEM of A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells grown on a ICN filter support 
and retained in DMSO solution for 60 min for control showing the surface 
substructures containing microridges and the cellular junctions. X4,000. 

Figure 11. SEM of A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells grown on a ICN filter support 
and stimulated with lOOmU/ml ADH for 60 min showing cellular swelling and caving 
of the cellular junctions, and the propagation of numerous microvilH over the cell 
surface. X4,000. 

Figure 12. SEM of A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells grown on a ICN filter support 
and stimulated with MZ lO'^M for 60 min showing the formation of microviUi over the 
cell surface. X4,000. 

Figure 13. SEM of A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells grown on a ICN filter support 
and stimulated with ADH plus MZ for 60 min showing the formation of numerous 
microviUi over the ceU surface and tissue swelling. X4,000. 

Figure 14. TEM of control toad urinary bladder tissue retained in Ringer's solution for 
10 min under an imposed osmotic gradient showing the general cytoplasmic 
composition, subapical secretory granules (arrows) and the basolateral membrane with 
little membrane infoldings. XI2,800. 

Figure 15. TEM of control toad urinary bladder tissue retained in Ringer's solution for 
60 min under an imposed osmotic gradient showing the loss of heterochromatins and 
the general density of nuclei due to prolonged exposure to an osmotic gradient, and no 
loss of subapical secretory granules (arrows). X5,600. 

Figure 16. Freeze fi-acture replica of a control toad urinary bladder tissue fi-actured 


60 



across the apical plasma membrane and the cytoplasm showing the impressions of the 
secretory granules (arrows) and the apical membrane containing a thin distribution of 
intramembrane particles. X24,000. 

Figure 17. TEM of toad urinary bladder sac exposed to ML 10‘^M for 5 min showing 
a dense cytoplasm with numerous microfilaments, a few microtubules (short arrows) 
and mitochondria with altered cristae (long arrows). X27,000. 

Figure 18. TEM of toad urinary bladder sac challenged with ML lO'^M for 5 min 
showing a partial loss of the secretory granules (short arrows) and the highly indented 
basolateral membranes (long arrows). X24,000. 

Figure 19. TEM of toad urinary bladder sac treated with ML lO'^M for 60 min showing 
the loss of secretory granules and heterochromatins fi*om the nuclei of these cells. 
These cells also showed significant swelling. X4,000. 

Figure 20. TEM of lOOmU/ml ADH challenged toad urinary bladder sac for 60 min 
showing the preservation of the subapical secretory granules (arrows) and the general 
cytoplasmic composition. X5,600. 

Figure 21. Freeze fi'acture rephca of ADH challenged tissue for 60 min showing the 
distribution of intact secretory granules in the subapical cytoplasm (arrows). X48,000. 
Figure 22. Freeze fi'acture rephca of ADH challenged tissue for 60 min shovmig the 
parallel and circular oriented rough ER membrane profiles (arrows). X27,000. 

Figure 23. Freeze fiucture replica of ADH challenged tissue for 60 min showing golgi 
body with enlarged cistemae associated with many large vesicles. X40,000. 

Figure 24. Freeze fiacture rephca of control tissue retained in Ringer's solution for 60 
min showing golgi body with smaU cistemae and fewer smaU vesicles as compared to 
ADH treated tissues as shown in Figure 23. X40,000. 

Figure 25. Freeze fiacture rephca of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with 100 


61 





mU/ml ADH for 60 min showing membrane fusion event with typical stellar particle 
orientation (arrow). X96,000. 

Figure 26. Freeze fracture replica of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ 
10"®M for 60 min showing membrane fusion events with stellar particle orientation 
(arrow). X96,000. 

Figure 27. Freeze fracture rephca of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated concurrently 
with ADH and verapamil showing the occurrence of membrane fusion event (arrow). 
X64,000. 

Figure 28. Ultrathin section of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ 10“®M 
for 60 min showing immuno A-gold localization of protein kinase C isozyme It (20nm) 
in difiused cytoplasmic bodies (arrows). X48,000. 

Figure 29. Ultrathin section of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ for 60 
min showing immnuo A-gold (lOnm) localization of protein kinase C isozyme in in a 
diffused cytoplasmic body (arrow). X32,000. 

Figure 30. Ultrathin section of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with ADH for 60 
min showing immuno A-gold (20nm) localization of protein kinase C isozyme I with 
a large number of gold particles concentrated in a diffused cytoplasmic body (arrow). 
X54,000. 

Figure 31. Ultrathin section of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ for 60 
min showing immuno A-gold (lOnm) localization of protein kinase C isozyme HI with 
a large number of gold particles concentrated over a diffused cytoplasmic body (short 
arrow) in association with many microfilaments (long arrows). X48,000. 

Figure 32. Ultrathin section of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ for 60 
min showing immuno A-gold (20nm) locahzation of protein kinase C isozyme I in a 
diffused cytoplasmic body adjacent to a microvillus (arrow). X128,000. 


62 



Figure 33. Ultrathin section of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ for 60 
min showing immuno A-gold (20nm) localization of protein kinase C isozyme I within 
two adjacent microvilli (arrows). X48,000. 

Figure 34. Ultrathin section of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with ADH for 60 
min showing immuno A-gold (lOnm) localization of protein kinase C isozyme HI 
within a microvillus (arrow) shown in a cross-sectional view. X90,000. 

Figure 35. Ultrathin section of toad urinary bladder stimulated with ADH for 60 min 
showing dual labeling of immuno A-gold (5nm for isozyme H, 20nm for isozyme I) 
localization of protein kinase C in a microvillus (arrow) at the apical membrane surface. 
X48,000. 

Figure 36. Ultrathin sction of control toad urinary bladder tissue retained in Ringer's 
solution and exposed to 0.1% BSA and then to lOnm protein A-gold probes showing 
no specific labeling with gold particles. X60,000. 

Figure 37. Phase contrast micrograph of A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells grown in 
monolayer on a microscope glass cover slip. X280. 

Figure 38. Immunofluorescent detection of PKC isozyme m in ADH stimulated A6 
amphibian kidney cells using FITC showing the presence of particulate structures. 
X700. 

Figure 39. Immunofluorescent detection of PKC isozymes HI in MZ stimulated A6 
amphibian kidney cells using FITC showing the presence of particulate structures. 
X700. 

Figure 40. Control A6 amphibian kidney cells exposed to 0.1% BSA and then to FITC 
showing little or no fluorescence. X280. 

Figure 41. Histograms showing the significant distribution of gold particles associated 
with ADH and MZ treated toad urinary bladder tissue against the control tissue. 


63 



Figure 42. Photograph of the SDS-PAGE gel on protein isolated from toad urinary 
epithelial cells. 

Figure 43. Photograph of a representative western blot of the SDS-PAGE gel showing 
the presence of PKC a (arrows) on both the membrane and cytosohc fractions. 
Figure 44. Osmotic water flow across A6 kidney cells grown on Anocell filters 
supports in the presence of lOOmU/ml ADH and ImM dibutyryl cAMP. 

Figure 45. Osmotic water flow across A6 kidney cells grown on Cellagen filter 
supports in the presence of lOOmU/ml ADH and ImM dibutyryl cAMP. 

Figure 46. Adenylcyclase activity of A6 amphibian kidney cells following addition of 
ADH (lOOmU/ml) or forskolm (10'^ M) as measured by an adenine labeling technique 
modified for quantitating cAMP changes in cells grown on filter supports. 

Figure 47. Unidirectional tritiated water fluxes (THO) in A6 kidney cells grown on 
Anocell filters in the presence of 50 and 200 mU/ml ADH. 

Figure 48. Unidirectional tritiated water fluxes (THO) in A6 kidney cells grown on 
Anocell filters in the presence of amphotericin B and digitonin. 

Figure 49. Unidirectional water fluxes (YHO) in filter without cell monolayer as a 
fimction of time. 

Figure 50. Unidirectional water fluxes (THO) in filters without cell monolayer as a 
function of filter resistance. 

Figure 51. Electrical properties of A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells grown on 
Anocell filters. 

Figure 52. Dose-response curve of vasopressin (ADH) effects on cAMP formation in 
A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells. 

Figure 53. Time-response curve of vasopressin (ADH) effects on cAMP formation in 
A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells as compared to control. 


64 



Figure 54. SEM picture of normal LLC-PKi porcine kidney cultured cells grown on 
Anocell filter support showing scattered microridges over the cell surfface. X3,500. 
Figure 55. Increased intracellular calcium in LLC-PKi porcine kidney cultured cells 
following stimulation with 10"* M ADH. 

Figures 56 and 57. Shows the comparative effects on intracellular calcium mobilization 
in response to ADH and oxytocin in LLC-PK, kidney cultured cells. 

Figure 58. The effect of the oxytocin antagonist peptide on the actions of ADH and 
oxytocin on calcium mobilization.. 

Figure 59. Dose-effect of ADH on intracellular calcium concentration in the presence 
of an oxytocin antagonist in LLC-PKi porcine kidney cultured cells. 

Figure 60. Effects of ADH on the intracellular distribution of calcium before and after 
the administration of oxytocin antagonist in LLC-PKi porcine kidney cultured cells. 
Figures 61 and 62. SEM of control toad urinary bladder sacs retained m Ringer's 
solution for 10 and 20 min respectively, showing the surface substructures as composed 
of continuous phases of microridges. X 4,000. 

Figure 63. SEM of toad urinary bladder tissue showing the induction of surface 
invaginations (arrows) in the granular cells during a 5 min retrieval following 
withdrawal of ADH. X5,400. 

Figure 64. SEM of MZ stimulated toad urinary bladder tissue showing the induction of 
surface invaginations (arrows) in the granular cells during 5 min retrieval following 
withdrawal of MZ. X3,000. 

Figure 65. Graph represents the percentage of endocytosed granular cells in toad 
urinary bladder tissue stimulated by ADH and MZ as compared to control tissues. 
Figure 66. SEM of MZ treated toad urinary bladder tissue for 10 min and retrieved for 
30 min following withdrawal of MZ showing invaginations over the apical membrane 


65 



(arrows). X2,100. 

Figure 67. SEM of toad urinary bladder sac stimulated with ADH for 10 min and 
retrieved for 10 min following withdrawal of ADH showing granular cells with surface 
invaginations (arrows). X2,000. 

Figure 68. TEM of ADH stimulated toad urinary bladder sac showing a sectional view 
of the apical membrane invagination at 10 min retrieval following withdrawal of ADH. 
X30,000. 

Figure 69. SEM of toad urinary bladder sac stimulated with ADH for 10 min and then 
retrieved for 20 min following withdrawal of ADH, showing endocytosis and 
restoration of apical membranes (arrows) involving many granular cells. XI,050. 
Figure 70. SEM of toad urinary bladder sac stimulated with MZ for 10 min and then 
retrieved for 10 min following withdrawal of MZ showing endocytosed granular cells. 
X3,000. 

Figure 71. TEM of toad urinaiy bladder cells stimulated with ADH for 15 min and then 
retrieved for 20 min following withdrawal of ADH showing deep invaginations with 
formation of vacuoles (arrows) and the displacement of nucleus. XI 5,000. 

Figure 72. TEM of toad urinary bladder sac stimulated with ADH for 15 min and then 
retrieved for 20 following withdrawal of ADH showing the presence of coated vesicles 
(arrows) within the cytoplasm. X80,000. 

Figure 73. Freeze fracture rephca prepared from toad urinary bladder sac stimulated 
with ADH for 15 min showing the presence of coated vesicles (arrows) within the 
cytoplasm. XI 12,000. 

Figures 74 and 75. Toad urinary bladder tissues stimulated with MZ lO"^ M for 15 min 
and then labeled with anti-PKC isozyme I and protein A-gold probes. Gold particles 
appear locahzed predominantly in association with coated vesicles indicating 


66 


association of PKC isozyme I with coated vesicles (arrows). X33,750. 

Figure 76. Toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ 1 O'® M for 15 min and then 
labeled with anti-PKC isozyme I and protein A-gold probes. Gold particles are shown 
to be associated with several coated vesicles (arrows) which indicate the association 
of PKC isozyme I with coated vesicles. These coated vesicles appear to show a pattern 
of migration from the apical membrane into the cytosol. X33,750. 

Figure 77. Freeze fracture rephca of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with ADH 
showing the presence of protocytosed caveolae (arrows) in a microfilament-rich cell. 
X67,000. 

Figure 78. SEM of ADH stimulated toad urinary bladder sac for 15 min and then 
retrieved for 60 min following withdrawal of ADH showing the restoration of the apical 
membrane almost to a normal state as in the prehormone treated tissue. X700. 

Figure 79. SEM of toad urinary bladder sac stimulated with MZ for 10 min and then 
retrieved for 30 follovring withdrawal of MZ showing the apical membrane restoration 
almost toa normal state except for few invaginations. X700. 

Figure 80. SEM of toad urinary bladder sac stimulated with MZ and then retrieved for 
60 min following withdrawal of MZ showing almost complete restoration of the apical 
membrane to a normal state. X700. 

Figure 81. SEM of toad urinary bladder tissue showing the apical membrane restoration 
and the presence of a few invaginations at 30 min following withdrawal of ADH. 
X2,000. 

Figure 82. SEM of toad urinary tissue treated with MZ for 10 min and then retrieved 
for 20 min following withdrawal of MZ showing details of membrane restoration and 
a gradual return of apical microridges. X8,000. 

Figure 83. SEM of toad urinary bladder sac showing the gradual restoration of 


67 




microridges in an endocytosed pit at 30 min following withdrawal of ADH. X8,000. 
Figure 84. Graph shows the comparative loss of water from the toad urinary bladder 
sacs following withdrawal of ADH while maintaining the osmotic gradient in the 
experimental sac. Measurements were made at 25,45, 60 and 75 min. 


68 


RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONS 

Full-length Papers Published: 

Candia, O., Mia, A. J. and Yorio, T. 1993. Influence of filter supports on transport 
characteristics of cultured A6 kidney cells. Am. J. Phisiol. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L. X. and Yorio, T. 1994. Surface membrane remodeling 
following removal of vasopressin in toad urinary bladder. Tissue and Cell, 26(2): 
189-201. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Davidson, A. and Yorio, T. Protein kinase C isoforms 
and vasopressin-medicated water flow in toad urinary bladder. Tissue and Cell (In 
preparation). 

Published Abstracts: 

a) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., and Yorio, T. 1992. Vasopressin-induced 
morphological changes in cultured amphibian A-6 kidney cells. FASEB J. 6(5): 
A957. 

b) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1992. Water permeabihty response to 
vasopressin (AVP) of A-6 cells grown on Anocell filter inserts. FASEB J. 
6(5):A1194. 

c) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., and Yorio, T. 1992. Characteristics of Vasopressin Vi 
and N 2 actions in cultured amphibian A-6 cells. Proc. 5th International Congress on 
Cell Biology, Madrid, Spain, 112. 

d) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Thompson, P.D., and Yorio, T. 1992. Role of PKC 
isozyme III (alpha) in water transport in amphibian urinary bladder. MSA 50:796- 
797. 

e) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., and Yorio. 1992. Surface substructural changes of 
renal A-6 cells on filter supports following activation of PKC. Mol. Biol. Cell. 3, 


69 









228a. 


f) Mia, AJ., Oakford, L.X., Finkley, A.E., Davidson, A.D., and Yorio, T. 1993. SEM 
studies of membrane recycling in Vasopressin-stimulated toad urinary bladders. Proc. 
Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med. 203,258. 

g) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Yancy, H.F., Davidson, A.D., and Yorio, T. 1993. 
Evidence of endocytosis in toad urinary bladders as revealed by SEM. FASEB J. 
7,A5770. 

h) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Hayes, S.C., Davidson, A.D., and Yorio, T. 1993. 
Membrane dynamics during endocytosis in toad urinary bladders as visualized by SEM. 
Scanning, 15, SupplIII, 110-111. 

i) Mia, A.J., Davidson, A.D., Oakford, L.X., and Yorio, T. 1993. SEM studies of 
membrane endocytosis in toad urinary bladders following withdrawal of Vasopressin. 
Microscopic Soc. Am. 474-475. 

j) Mia, A.J., Gunter, S., Johnson, S., Franklin, J.L., Tuck, T., Gardner, D., and Yorio, 
T.1993. Immunofluorescent detection of PKC alpha in A-6 amphibian kidney cells. 
Mol. Biol. Cell, 4, 358a. 

k) Mia, A.J., Robinson, C., Bolden, A., Davidson, A.D., Oakford, L.X., and Yorio, 
T. 1993. Membrane remodeling by endocytosis in toad urinary bladders under 
sustained osmotic gradient. Mol. Biol. Cell, 4, 430a. 

l) Mia, A.J., Davidson, A.D., Robinson, C, Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1994. SEM 
studies of comparative membrane remodeling by endocytosis in toad urinary bladders 
following withdrawal of ADH and ML. Microsc. Soc. Am., 52, 350-351. 

m) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1994. Possible association of PKC with 
coated vesicles in ADH stimulated toad urinary bladders. Mol. Biol. Cell, 5, 445a. 


70 







71 







OTHER ACTIVITES 


The following African-American undergraduate students at Jarvis Christian 
College received training in biomedical research and career enrichment with financial 
support from this research project under the supervision of Dr. Mia at Jarvis and Dr. 
Yorio at the University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth/TCOM: 

Pander Thompson - A Presidential Scholar at Jarvis graduated in May 1992, 
Summa Cum Laude, with chemistry as a major and biology as a minor. Pander has 
enrolled in a Ph.D. program at the University of North Texas Health Science Center at 
Fort Worth to pursue a career in biomedicine under the supervision of Dr. Yorio. 

Haile Yancy - Graduated from Jarvis in May 1994 with majors in 
biology/chemistry, and now pursuing a Ph.D. in Cell Biology at Howard University, 
Washington, D.C. Haile had received research training during his undergraduate 
program working with Dr. Yorio at the UNT Health Science Center and with Dr. Loy 
Frazier at Baylor College of Dentistry. 

Alvin Finkley - Graduated in May 1994 with honors in chemistry and minor in 
biology. He received fiuther training under the supervision of Dr. Yorio at the UNT 
Health Science Center and plans to attend graduate school to pursue a Ph.D. in 
Biomedical Sciences at the Health Science Center in Fort Worth. 

Ina Swopes - Graduated in May 1993 with a minor in biology and a major in 
chemistry. 

The following Afiican American undergraduate students trained under the 
current grant will graduate in May 1995. 


72 





Shondola Hayes - A Presidential Scholar at Jarvis transferred to Washington 
State University in Pullman. She had received research training at New York and 
Princeton Universities and plans a carreer in dentistry upon graduation in May 1995. 

Chasity Robinson - A Presidential Scholar at Jarvis majoring in biology and a 
minor in chemistry. Plans to pursue a career in pharmacology. She received research 
training at the UNT Health Science Center under the supervision of Dr. Yorio and 
received further training in biomedicine at Indiana University, Bloomington under Dr. 
Kaufinan's direction working on molecular biological techniques. 

Kristi Henderson - A Presidential Scholar at Jarvis majoring in biology and a 
minor in chemistry. She plans a career in biomedicine. Has received research training 
in genetic finger printing and PCR techniques at the UNT Health Science Center under 
the supervision of Dr. Dzandu. 

Tashara Tuck - An honor student at Jarvis majoring in biology with a minor in 
chemistry. She has received research training in Confocal Microscopy at Baylor 
College of Dentistry working with Drs. Frazier and Wong. 

Juha Franklin - An honor student at Jarvis majoring in chemistry with a biology 
minor will graduate in May 1996. 

Crystal Woods - Major in biology and minor in chemistry is making steady 
progress in her studies. 


73 




Microvilli Invagination 



(A) Unstimulated Cell (B) Exocytosis (C) Endocytosis 











Wire hook for weighing of 
water loss using analytical balance 



Figure 



















































































































































Interaction Bar Plot for« of particles 

Effect; TREATMENT 

Error Bars; ± 1 Standard Deviation(s) 



CX3NTR0L 


ADH 

Cell 












t? 









Iwl 



<•! 

*• 1 
j 












Osmotic Water Flour Across Anocell Filler Supports 


*VP (100 RiU/ml) 
T Ob-c*.MP (i mU) 


Osmotic Water Flow Across ICN Cellfien Filter Supports 

----- 1 --,- 

AVP (100 mlj/ml) 
Db-cAMP (1 mM) 


CONTROL 


AVP 

Treatments 


09-CAMP 


CONTROL AVP 

X6 CELL S mla 


DB-CAMP 


S 2.5 


ft: 4.U 

§ ..s 



FORSK. 

100 laU/tnl 10-5 U 


_ADEN:,irra^sr,^Acnyr^^ an adenine 












TABLE 1. Electrical Properties of A6 Cells Grown on Anocell Filters 


TREATMENT 

Potential Difference 
(PD- mV) 

Short-Circuit Current 
(Isc- pA/cm^) 

Resistance 
(R-lOi cm^) 

Control 

37 ± 5 

8 ± 1 

4.6 

ADH (10 min) 

31 ± 4 

11 ± 1* 

2.7* 

AMILORIDE (30 min) 

15 ± 3** 

3 ± .6** 

4 9** 

AMPHOTERICIN B 
(30 min) 

28 ± 3*** 

24 + 4*** 

0.6*** 


The data represents the Mean ± S.E. of eight separate experiments. 
*p<.05 from control.**p<.05 from ADH.***p<.05 from amiloride. 


Figure 51 




























IS cett E min irltti IBUX (or 10 min 



A6 CEa TIUE CURVES 



TIME (min) 53 








Intracellular calcium (nU) 






































f Endocytosed Cells Stimulated by ADH and MZ 



Figure 65 









































ffec 



(MIN) 









