Unlike ordinary (continuous-tone) 
images, a classification map typically 
contains a relatively small number of 
pixel values. Also, unlike in continuous- 
tone images, numerically close pixel val- 
ues do not necessarily represent similar 
content. These properties make the 
problem of compressing classification- 
map-data differ from the problem of 
compressing data from ordinary images. 

Prediction is commonly used in loss- 
less-compression schemes. In predictive 
compression, pixels or other samples are 
encoded sequentially on the basis of a 
probability distribution estimated from 
previously encoded samples. Context 
modeling is often used in conjunction 
with predictive compression. In context 
modeling, each pixel or other sample to 
be encoded is classified into one of sev- 
eral contexts based on previously en- 


coded samples. A context-modeling al- 
gorithm maintains separate statistics for 
each context and uses these statistics to 
estimate and encode samples more ef- 
fectively. Ideally, contexts are defined so 
that different contexts contain sets of 
pixels or other samples characterized by 
substantially different statistics. 

The present algorithm incorporates a 
simple adaptive context modeler that 
feeds into a binary interleaved entropy 
coder. The algorithm operates on the 
pixels of a classification map or other 
image in raster scan order. A sequence 
of binary decision bits is produced for 
each pixel to indicate which, if any, 
neighboring pixel (s) it matches. The en- 
coder maintains probability-of-zero esti- 
mates for these bits for each of the con- 
texts. The interleaved entropy coder is 
bit-wise adaptable, enabling the context 


modeler to quickly adapt to changing 
statistics in the image. 

In tests, the present algorithm and 
three prior general-purpose image- 
data-compression algorithms were ap- 
plied to five classification maps con- 
taining from 4 to 32 different classes. 
The four-class map is shown in the fig- 
ure. The results of the tests showed 
that the volumes of data generated by 
the present algorithm ranged from 15 
to 40 percent below those of the prior 
algorithms. 

This work was done by Hua Xie and 
Matthew Klimesh of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. 

The software used in this innovation is 
available, for commercial licensing. Please 
contact Karina Edmonds of the California In- 
stitute of Technology at (626) 395-2322. 
Refer to NPO-45103. 


Framework for ReSTful Web Services in OSGi 


NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Ensemble ReST is a software system 
that eases the development, deploy- 
ment, and maintenance of server-side 
application programs to perform func- 
tions that would otherwise be per- 
formed by client software. Ensemble 
ReST takes advantage of the proven dis- 
ciplines of ReST (Representational State 
Transfer — a style of software architec- 
ture for such distributed hypermedia sys- 
tems as the World Wide Web) and OSGi 
(formerly, Open Services Gateway Initia- 
tive — an industry standard for software 
for connecting such devices as home ap- 
pliances and security systems to the In- 
ternet) . ReST leverages the standardized 
HTTP protocol to enable developers to 
offer services to a diverse variety of 


clients: from shell scripts to sophisti- 
cated Java application suites. 

Ensemble ReST abstracts away com- 
plexities associated with development of 
server-side application programs, en- 
abling programmers to focus more on 
business logic than on server issues. It is 
robust, scalable, and secure; capable of 
serving dynamic as well as static content; 
and extensible to provide additional func- 
tionality. Services can be added, removed, 
or updated on a server, without restarting 
the server. Furthermore, the development 
environment for these services (Eclipse 
IDE) allows developers to debug the 
server-side applications side-by-side with 
the clients. The framework enables rapid 
prototyping and development of produc- 


tion level ReSTIets that can be deployed 
to support mission critical applications. 
The rapid development cycle offered by 
this framework has enabled the Maestro 
team to develop and deploy many produc- 
tion server-side applications to MER, 
Phoenix, and MSL missions. 

This program was written by Khawaja S. 
Shams, Jeffrey S. Norris, Mark W. Powell, 
Thomas M. Crockett, David S. Mittman, 
Jason M. Fox, Joseph C. Joswig, Michael N. 
Wallick, Recaredo J. Torres, and Kenneth 
Rabe of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer - to NPO-45848. 


MAGIC: Model and Graphic Information Converter 

John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida 


MAGIC is a software tool capable of con- 
verting highly detailed 3D models from an 
open, standard format, VRML 2.0/97, into 
the proprietary DTS file format used by the 
Torque Game Engine from GarageGames. 
MAGIC is used to convert 3D simulations 
from authoritative sources into the data 
needed to run the simulations in NASA’s 
Distributed Observer Network. 

The Distributed Observer Network 
(DON) is a simulation presentation tool 


built by NASA to facilitate the simulation 
sharing requirements of the Data Pres- 
entation and Visualization effort within 
the Constellation Program. DON is 
built on top of the Torque Game Engine 
(TGE) and has chosen TGE’s Dynamix 
Three Space (DTS) file format to repre- 
sent 3D objects within simulations. 

The DTS file structure is generally in- 
tended to contain common game objects, 
with less than ten thousand polygons 


each, and if built using the standard 
methods trill break (fail to load or contain 
corrupted geometry) after that amount. 

MAGIC employs techniques to work 
around the DTS limitations, allowing 
for much more information to be suc- 
cessfully represented with the DTS file 
structure (millions of polygons). This 
ability opens up the Torque Game En- 
gine to be used in applications where 
such detail is needed. 


56 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2009 


