N Q 2 X 6 6 X 4 

APPLICATION OF A RULE-BASED KNOWLEDGE SYSTEM USING CLIPS 
FOR THE TAXONOMY OF SELECTED OPUNTIA SPECIES 


Bart C. Heymans, Joel P. Onema, Joseph O. Kuti 

Horticulture Research Laboratory, College of Agriculture 
Texas A&I University, Kingsville, Texas 78363 


Abstract A rule-based knowledge system was developed in CLIPS (C-Language Integrated Production 
System) for identifying Opuntia species in the family Cactaceae, which contains approximately 1,500 
different species. This botanist expert tool system is capable of identifying selected Opuntia plants from 
the family level down to the species level when given some basic characteristics of the plants. Many 
Opuntia species are cultivated as ornamental plants and some are significant as food crops. Opuntia 
plants are becoming of increasing importance because of their nutrition and human health potential 
especially in the treatment of diabetes mellitus. The expert tool system described in this paper can be 
extremely useful in an unequivocal identification of many useful Opuntia species. 

INTRODUCTION 

Rule-based expert tool systems have been implemented in a variety of applications 
(NASA 1989). One of the better suited applications of the tool systems is in botany or plant 
sciences, where they can be used to effect plant identification and taxonomic search. Plant 
taxonomy is particularly suited for the tool systems because it usually starts out from 
empirical characteristics, which are sometimes confusing and/or fuzzy in nature, until it 
narrows down the characteristics to a few but concrete ones for the eventual identification 
of particular plant species and their botanical synonyms, which are common to all scientific 
nomenclatures. 

This particular tool systems may start out from plant kingdom and end in the 
eventual identification of the plant species. The overall taxonomic structure obtained 
constitutes a tree-like hierarchy [fig. 1] in the leaves represents individual species. This 
hierarchy will be covered in some details later. The CLIPS language, developed by NASA 
has been chosen for this system because of its portability, flexibility and the capability of its 
integration with other languages e.g. the C language (NASA 1990). 

SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 

A general overview of the system is shown in a directed graph [fig. 2]. The system 
is capable of identifying selected Opuntia and Nopalea species (Britton and Rose 1963) 
when adequate information are given on the basic characteristics that distinguish these 
species from each other (Buxbaum 1950). The system also enables the user to start species 
identification from any taxonomic level. For example, if the plant family is known, 
identification may start at this level, or if the plant series and forms are known, these will 


505 



become the starting points of the taxonomic search. If on the other hand, no plant sped 
can be identified, the user has the option to continue the search, to quit or to start all ov 
again. 

To build the tool system we opted for a modular approach, [fig. 4] The syste 
consists of different knowledge segments modularly linked together as one logical knowled] 
base. Each knowledge segment could be considered as having a salience associated with 
so that it can only be accessed in a predetermined order. As identification proceeds, ; 
item (e.g. in the plant Order, Class, Series, etc...) must be identified and loaded in a pare 
segment or a subsidiary segment provided the item in question does not constitute the ei 
of the search. Smaller subunits can be loaded from the subsidiary segment when they ha' 
been duly selected. Thus, by means of this modular approach, a cascading effect will occi 
and plant characteristics selected by the user may fire the necessary rules in the startii 
segment. These rules will then propagate through intermediary segments and will eventual 
terminate in the identification of the plant species in one of the leaf segments. 
Currently, the functioning modules in the system include a root or driver segment th 
contains the rules for the plant taxa, several intermediary modules [fig. 5] and the le: 
segments which form core of the program. 

The Opuntia and Nopalea species in the Cactaceae family [fig. 1], as described t 
Britton and Rose (1963) and Pizzeti (1985), were chosen as model for the expert to 
system. Selected plants belong to the tribe Opuntiae, the the family Cactaceae and the ordi 
Cactales [fig. 1]. In the tribe we identify plants in the genera Nopalea and Opuntia. Th< 
include species in the series Dillenianae, Streptacanthae, Polyacanthae, Ficus-indicae, ar 
Robustae, in the subgenus Platyopuntia and in the genus Opuntia. The system has addition 
capabilities which include the possibility of keeping track of multitude and often confusir 
botanical synonyms that are common with plant taxonomy. Our system is adaptable to 
regular updating of the knowledge segment so that the system can display all the botanic 
synonyms, if so desired. Our system can also give the common name in any or all of fi\ 
selected foreign languages (if a common name is available in that language). 

The system is menu driven in which the user is presented interactively with a choi< 
between predefined plant characteristics, hierarchically structured [fig. 3] and demonstratic 
option. Since we opted for a modular approach the system agenda is kept to the minimui 
so that fewer rules can be fired at a time. In consequence, the system closely mimics tl 
taxonomic categories or taxa used in plant and animal systematics. This allows for quick* 
implementations of new modules from the existing (i.e. not yet implemented) or undefine 
(i.e. previously not defined in the taxonomy) items, easier merger of the two modules if tl 
two items can be unified taxonomically and deletion of the obsolete segments especial 
when an item loses its independent status. When a new botanical name is used to identi 
a plant, the name must only be changed inside its particular segment since its scope 
limited to that segment. For example when the name Angiospermopsida is substituted f< 
Angiospermae the name has to be changed only inside its segement (i.e. the regnu 
segment). 

The addition of new knowledge segments can potentially stretch the availab 
memory to its limits, since at a run time only the selected module (i.e. out of a potential 
limitless number) will be active thus requiring only very limited run time capabilities. Oi 
modular approach addresses several potential problems one may encounter in plai 
taxonomy e.g. constant changes in plant classification at species level and moving plai 


506 


genera from one family to the other and the use of different taxonomic methods (Cronsquist 
1968). The rule based system described in this paper is capable of dealing with all these 
problems. When there is a change in taxonomic criteria agreed upon in the scientific 
community, such as in case of the Opuntia species, new rules can be added to reflect these 
changes. Old taxonomic criteria can be moved to a separate knowledge segment where 
other botanical synonyms or plant names are stored. When one is identifying a plant species, 
one can obtain the botanical synonyms or plant names that are currently set as the standard. 
This will ensure that people working with an older or different taxonomic criteria are still 
able to use the tool system and have opportunity to learn the current taxonomic criteria and 
terminology that are internationally acceptable for identifying a particular plant species. 

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS 

This project has demonstrated the feasability of using CLIPS to build an Opuntia 
expert tool system. Although, the knowledge base was implemented for a selected number 
of Opuntia species, their available common names and symnonyms. The system can be 
expanded, at any time, to include more Opuntia species in the family Cactacaea in different 
foreign languages by adding or expanding the parent or subsidiary segments. 

The nature of taxonomic definitions and search, in regards to modelling the real 
world defintions, contains inherently fuzzy concepts and definitions. Logically, fuzzy 
qualifiers are most appropriate to represent the taxonomic descriptions. In our case we only 
concern ourselves marginally with this problem while giving the user more options. In an 
improved version however, we will implement a different mechanism for dealing with fuzzy 
definitions. In this perspective, a probabilistic value will be attached to the different 
manifestations of a characteristic, therefore allowing the system to choose on the basis of 
the value of the characteristic adopted. 


REFERENCES 

Britton, N.L. and Rose, J.N. (1963) The Cactaceae. Vol.. 1 & 2. Dover Press. New York. 

Buxbaum, F. (1950). Morphology of cacti. Abbey Garden Press, Pasadena, California. 

Cronquist, A. (1968). The evolution and classification of flowering plants. Houghton Mifflin 
Company, Boston. 

Pizzeti, M. (1985). Guide to Cacti and Succulents Simon and Schuster. New York. 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration. (1989). Clips Users Guide Version 4.3. 
Artificial Intelligence Section. Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration. (1990). In CLIPS, first Clips Conference 
Proceedings, Houston. 


507 / 

c-y 


Tsxonomle Struotur* 

runmn . 


DIVISION 


rfr»T 


iTo¥l 


— er 


hr 


'lurcmii 


~OI(j|R 

nifiir 


t huU 

imi 


•uiA 


rcrr~ 


SINKS 


• NICKS 


Figure 1. 




. JriontoQfr/ f 

•r mttOP */ ti 


*AAthO 0 Oft • 

w 0iootyi*aor>4* 


m CsCtWM 

QoufltiM 


m QfiQAtl9 (Tovfllt/orti WH*r 
gP /mt *6BuntlM 


gnAuAum c*i0'otici 
E ngl»m§rt §no B'g$io m 


System Overview 


Basic Characteristics 

—i ■■ — - ■» 


Species Identification 


Expert System 


Knowledge-Base 


Inference Engine 


Figure 2. 


508 


ORIGINAL PAGE 
OF POOR QUALT 





haracterlatlce 



Figure 3. 



Figure 4. MODULAR CONFIGURATION 


509 










PLANT TAXA 



Figure 6. Functional Modules 


510 






