













Summary of SEI Accomplishments: 2Q90 


Three evaluation teams from Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command (SPAWAR) 
and Naval Ocean Systems Center (NOSC) participated in a Software Capability Evalu¬ 
ation training program in June at the SEI. 

The first Process Definition Steering Committee meeting was held in June at the SEI. 
The steering committee is composed of leading software process researchers and practi¬ 
tioners from government, industry, and academia. More than thirty people attended the 
two-day meeting. 

The Software Process Modeling Project hosted the bimonthly meeting of the Post De¬ 
ployment Software Support (PDSS) Subgroup of tire DoD Joint Logistics Commanders 
Joint Policy Coordinating Group on Computer Resources Management. The military 
handbook Mission-Critical Computer Resources Software Support, developed by the 
PDSS Subgroup, was approved by the DoD this quarter. 

Real-Time Scheduling in Ada Project members assisted McDonnell Douglas personnel 
in preparing a presentation to NASA recommending that rate monotonic scheduling be 
the standard discipline for designing real-time software for the Space Station Data Man¬ 
agement System. 

The Software for Heterogeneous Machines Project completed a prototype implementa¬ 
tion of a Durra task to be used as a building block for communication network modeling. 

A course for executives. Software: Profit Through Process Improvement, was held at 
the SEI in June. The 10-hour course was attended by upper management represenuttives 
from 10 organizations. 

The six instructors from the Air Force Institute of Technology and the two civilian par¬ 
ticipants in the Course Development Workshop returned to their respective sites. During 
the six-month workshop at the SEI, these participants developed five graduate-level con¬ 
tinuing education courses, which will be presented by the instructors who participated in 
tire workshop. 

The SEI hosted the information object modeling (IOM) technical interchange/work¬ 
shop in mid-June, which was attended by representatives of all STARS prime contractors 
and which addressed issues regarding the future applicability of IOM to the STARS Pro¬ 
gram. 

The SQL Ada Module Extensions (SAME) Design Committee held its June meeting in 
conjunction with the SQL Rapporteur Group of the International Standards Organization 
Working Group on Ada. The working group will vote on the SAME Description Lan¬ 
guage as a draft proposed standard at its December meeting. 

Members of Technology Applications and the SEI Process Program began to collaborate 
with the Computer Resource Management Technology (CRMT) program to transition 
several SEI concepts and products. The CRMT program is the engineering program that 
the Air Force uses to transition advances in computer resources management, including 
software technologies, into Air Force practice. 

Eight new industry affiliates, five new academic affiliates, and two new resident affili¬ 
ates joined the SEI this quarter. 

Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) members conducted the Second Inv ita¬ 
tional Workshop on Computer Security Incident Response in Tune. This workshop 
fcatCvd on "'•".v ideas cad models in the area of incident handling as well as lessons 
learned. There were more than 100 attendees and 40 speakers from the federal govern¬ 
ment, academic community, and private industry. 






-O' \j i) 



This section provides 
a summary of 
accomplishments from 
April-June 1990 


DTIC 


- i 







Table of Contents,! 


Software Capability Evaluation. 1 Software 

Software Process Assessment.2 Engineering 

Software Process Development.2 Process 

Software Engineering Process Definition .3 


Software Development Environments ... 
Software Architecture Design Principles. 


5 Software 

5 Engineering 


Software Process Modeling.6 Methods j 

Domain Analysis.6 


Real-Time Embedded Systems Testbed.9 Software 

Real-Time Scheduling in Ada .9 Systems ^ 

User Interface .10 

Software for Heterogeneous Machines.10 • 


Software Engineering Curriculum . 13 Education! 

Video Dissemination .14 

Advanced Learning Technologies . 15 


Software Architectures Engineering .17 Ada & 

Binding of Ada and SQL.18 SuDDOTt 

Study and Analysis for Ada 9X.18 J 


Technology Applications.21 S'echnology 

Affiliate Relations.22 Transition } 

Empirical Methods .22 


Accession For 

NTIS GRAM 
DTIC TAB □ 

Unannounced □ 

Justificatio n 

By.—-- 

Distribution/ _ 

Availabilit y Codes 
Avail and/er 
Diet Special 


/ 

'£>*• 

V *>> J 


25 ^CERT 

Coordination 
Center, ^ 


27 For More 
Information 


-r.' . 

j- ■■ 


CnnW '' 


ff'*!:- '■ ’ f ft 2 ) 
























Software Engineering Process 


The Software Engineering Process Program focuses on improving the process of soft¬ 
ware development. Projects within the program are assessing the actual practice of soft¬ 
ware engineering in the defense community, training organizations to gain management 
control over their software development processes, supporting the use of quantitative 
methods and measures as a basis for process improvement, and developing improved 
methods for software process management. 


The Software Capability Evaluation (SCE) Project helps DoD acquisition organizations 
to evaluate the capability of contractors to competently develop and maintain software. 
The project is improving and transitioning an evaluation method for use in software-in- 
tensive acquisitions. 

In June, project members updated and baselined descriptions of the software process 
areas (such as configuration management and project planning) contained in the capabil¬ 
ity maturity model. The tables itemizing significant practices in these software process 
areas were also updated and baselined. The descriptions and tables were reviewed at the 
March 1990 workshop and within the Process Program prior to baselining. This pro¬ 
posed baseline was released to the maturity questionnaire and model working group, 
composed of 70 industry, government, and academic representatives who are actively 
participating in the project’s revision effort through reviews and workshops. Project 
members plan to draft a maturity questionnaire revision based on the content and cover¬ 
age of the practices contained in this baseline. 

Three evaluation teams from Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command (SPAWAR) 
and Naval Ocean Systems Center (NOSC) participated in a Software Capability Evalu¬ 
ation training program on June 19-21 at the SEI. Project members presented an overview 
of SCE (course 1) and lead the teams through simulated visits to two contractor sites 
(course 2). 

The project leader participated on a panel at the Structured Development Forum held in 
San Diego in May. The panelists presented their views on how software quality can be 
improved and answered questions from the audience and the moderator. The session was 
attended by 75 participants primarily from industry. 

In June, project members visited the Swedish Defense Acquisition agency (FMV) in 
Stockholm, Sweden, to collect feedback on their use of the capability evaluation method 
in two mulli-ycar-fundcd contracts. The FMV funded the trip. While in Sweden, project 
members visited three software companies to learn more about their process technology. 
Two companies have successful projects with highly mature software management and 
engineering processes. 

Project members presented an overview of the project and discussed the capability ma¬ 
turity model during an April meeting in Pittsburgh with the AIA (Aerospace Industries 
Association) Software Quality Assurance Subcommittee. 


Software Capability 
Evaluation 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 1 











Software Process 
Assessment 


Software Process 
Development 


The Software Process Assessment Project assists software organizations in launching 
effective process improvement programs, characterizes and reports on the software engi¬ 
neering capabilities of defense contractors, and defines priority needs for software proc¬ 
ess improvement in the defense community. 

Project members acted as observers for self-assessments conducted by Jet Propulsion 
Laboratories in San Diego, California, and Ashton Tate in San Jose, California. The pro¬ 
ject frequently provides one or two observers experienced in assessments to attend an 
organization’s initial self-assessment. 

Project members conducted the sixth self-assessment training session at the SEI in May. 
Forty-three registrants from five affiliate organizations attended. The training prepares 
software professionals to assess die software engineering capabilities of their organiza¬ 
tions. The training was preceded by a one-day pre-assessmem training tutorial in soft¬ 
ware process management and the capability maturity model. 

A self-assessment briefing was held in Pittsburgh in June. Seventy-eight participants 
attended. Special self-assessment briefings were given to Tinker Air Force Base in Okla¬ 
homa City, Oklahoma, and to the Army Material Command at the SEI during this quar¬ 
ter. 

The fourth (and final) SEI-assistcd assessment planned for fiscal year 1990 was com¬ 
pleted during this quarter. The on-site phase was conducted in April for TRW (Systems 
Integration Division / West Coast) in Redondo Beach, California. (During the on-site 
phase, the assessment team conducts extensive discussions with project managers and 
software practitioners, and briefs the senior executives on the team’s view of the organi¬ 
zation’s most pressing software process issues.) A final assessment report and a briefing 
on action recommendations were delivered to TRW in June. 

Project members conducted assessment tutorials at the United Technologies Engineering 
Coordination and Activities Conference and Trade Show in Stamford, Connecticut, and 
in Montreal for Canadian representatives from academia, the aerospace industry, and 
government agencies who have been given the funding to do a study to create an SEI 
Canada. 


The Software Process Development Project is advocating the use of measurement in the 
practice of software development and management. Toward that end, it coordinates a 
steering committee, two working groups, and a best-practices study, all devoted to en¬ 
couraging organizations to use quantitative methods to improve their software process. 

The Software Metrics Definition Working Group and the Software Acquisition Metrics 
Working Group met separately for three days each in May and June, respectively. Both 
working groups tire developing documents that specify measures of products, processes, 
and project characteristics that can be widely and consistently used. Both groups have 
scheduled additional meetings throughout the year. The Software Metrics Definition 
Working Group plans to complete a preliminary draft of its document for review by 
Januttry 1991. The Software Acquisition Metrics Working Group plans to have a draft 
available for review later in 1991. 

The correspondence group has grown significantly and now has about 100 members. It 
will be the source for future openings in the working groups and the Measurement Steer¬ 
ing Committee. 


2 SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 







► 

To encourage organizations to adopt measurement, project members are collecting best 
practices and motivations, which will be published in an SEI technical report To further 
the collection, project members visited Hewlett Packard in Palo Alto, California; IBM 
Communications Products in Raleigh, North Carolina; and IBM Federal Sector Division 
in Houston, Texas. Additional visits are planned. 

Project members made presentations to the National Security Industrial Association, the 
DoD Inspector General, the Technology Cooperation Program, and a Defense Systems 
Management College (DSMC) train-the-traincr’s course on Total Quality Management. 
They also presented to an International Standards Organization working group and ple¬ 
nary meetings, the annual meeting of the International Society of Parametric Analysts, 
and a Computer Science Corporation technology exchange forum. 

Project members also spoke with a NASA Goddard Space Flight Center software pro¬ 
gram office, and gave a presentation to visiting members of the faculty of the University 
of Lund in Sweden. 


The Software Engineering Process Definition (SEPD) Project supports process improve¬ 
ment through the maturation of the methods and technology associated with software 
engineering process definition. The project is developing the capabilities required to sup¬ 
port the definition and evolution of software processes within an organization. This pro¬ 
ject began as a task within the Software Process Development Project. 

The project completed the context analysis phase during this quarter. The project team 
held five on-site meetings with Standard Systems Center (SSC) personnel at Gunter Air 
Force Base. They gathered and analyzed data for the development of a detailed strategy 
and plan to assist SSC with the implementation of process improvement based on proc¬ 
ess definition capability. 

During these meetings, the relationship between die SEPD Project and the newly formed 
SSC Software Management Council (SMC) and its working groups was established. The 
project and the working groups will collaborate to develop process definitions for die 
focus area assigned to each working group, and will conduct pilot improvement efforts. 

The project team met with the working group chairs to identify selection criteria foi pi¬ 
lot projects to be conducted during the implementation phase of the SEPD Project. Pro¬ 
ject members conducted interviews of candidate projects, and identified those projects 
that will be used for the initial pilot efforts. 

The project team reviewed draft action plans from two SMC working groups in prepara¬ 
tion for elaborating and implementing these plans during the next phase of the project. 

The first Process Definition Steering Committee (PDSC) meeting was held on June 
12-13 at the SEI. The steering committee is composed of leading software process re¬ 
searchers and practitioners from government, industry, and academia. More than thirty 
people attended the two-day meeting, which included a detailed overview and discussion 
of the project, presentations by participants, and a roundtable disejssion of issues. 

Project members began cataloging a process definition library. It will include recently 
published material on process, process modeling, process definitions, and related areas. 
More than 50 documents were added to the library during this quarter. ► 


Software Engineering 
Process Definition 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 3 








► 

The project team held a three-day meeting with an independent consultant to establish a 
work plan for the development of a suite of the practice report on the use of software 
process in Europe. This report will provide coverage of process definition methods and 
technologies that are employed in Europe and that would be applicable to the SSC proc¬ 
ess improvement effort. 

Project members met with Texas Instruments in Dallas, Texas, and IBM Federal Sector 
Division in Houston, Texas, to review their approach to implementing process defini¬ 
tions. 

Project members made presentations at the Air Force Software Technology Support 
Center Conference, and to the Joint Logistics Commanders Post-Deployment Software 
Support subgroup, the Air Force Science Advisory Board, and representatives from Scott 
Air Force Base. 


4 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 






Software Engineering Methods 


The primary objective of the Methods Program is to improve the practice of software 
engineering by improving individual and team productivity through the identification 
and transition to practice of emerging software technology. Promoting the appropriate 
use of this technology supports the SEI effort to transform software development from 
an ad-hoc, labor-intensive activity to a technology-supported engineering discipline. 


The Software Development Environments Project is studying the problem of tool con¬ 
figuration management (CM) and is tracking the state of environment architectures with 
a focus on configuration management functionality. 

To address the problem of managing tool configuration, project members began investi¬ 
gating appropriate approaches to integrating tools, especially those with complex data 
management schemes and multi-user support. Based on lessons learned from the initial 
data model for the tool configuration prototype, this task involves in-house experimenta¬ 
tion with tools and CM systems embedded in new generation environment frameworks. 
This task will lead to the development of requirements for interfaces between tools and 
CM. 

The Navy is working on standardizing the next generation of programming support envi¬ 
ronments. The project leader is deputy to the working group coordinating the Navy’s 
effort with the STARS (Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems) Pro¬ 
gram. This will involve formulating strategics and reference models for the coordinated 
Next Generation Computer Rcsourccs/Programming Support Environments (NGCR/ 
PSE) and STARS effort. 

The project demonstrated the benefits and limitations of CM usage models as imple¬ 
mented in the Sun Network Software Environment (NSE), at the request of various gov¬ 
ernment agencies. This work will collectively be presented on videotape as pan of the 
Technology Scries of the SEI Video Dissemination Project. 


To develop a fundamental understanding of structures for the software architecture level 
of design, this project is describing basic design elements used in the description, analy¬ 
sis, and development of software systems. 

The report User Interface Software Structures (CMU/SEI-90-SR-13) was completed 
this quarter. This report codifies the structural choices faced by designers of user inter¬ 
face software. It describes how these choices can be based on system requirements. The 
report was submitted as a joint paper for the SEI and the Dcparunent of Computer Sci¬ 
ence. 

The project leader gave a panel presentation on “Competitiveness and Software” at the 
AI Systems in Government Conference per request of the Office of Naval Research 
(ONR), and made presentations on software architectures to IBM Federal Sector Divi¬ 
sion, Bell Northern Research Labs, and at the SEI Educator Development Workshop. 

The project leader continued public services activities, which included serving on and 
attending meetings of several advisory boards including: Computer Science and Tech¬ 
nology Board, DARPA/ISTO Information Science and Technology (IS AT) Summer ► 


Software Development 
Environments 


Software Architecture 
Design Principles 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 5 






► 

Study, and ACM Panel on Distinguished Advisory Board. She also is serving on a plan¬ 
ning panel for the ACM Distinguished Advisory Board and is a distinguished reviewer 
of the ACM/IEEE Curriculum ‘90. 


Software Process 
Modeling 


The Software Process Modeling Project is investigating techniques for modeling soft¬ 
ware development and maintenance processes. 

In May, the project hosted the bimonthly meeting of the Post Deployment Software 
Support (PDSS) Subgroup of the DoD Joint Logistics Commanders Joint Policy Coordi¬ 
nating Group on Computer Resources Management. A project member represents the 

SEI on the PDSS Subgroup. The subgroup was established to address and resolve prob- j 

lems and issues related to die support phase of the software life-cycle and create prod¬ 
ucts that can be used DoD-widc to improve and standardize the software support proc¬ 
ess. The PDSS Subgroup is composed of representatives from the Army, Navy, Marine 
Corps, Air Force Logistics Command (AFLC), and Air Force Systems Command 
(AFSC). 

The project team developed a model of the PDSS process prescribed in MIL- 
HDBK-347, Mission-Critical Computer Resources Software Support. This military 
handbook was developed by the PDSS Subgroup and was approved by the DoD this 
quarter. The model developed by the project was presented and discussed at the PDSS 
Subgroup meeting in May. In-depth discussions regarding this model were also con¬ 
ducted with Software Technology Support Center (STSC) personnel, resulting in the 
clarification of a number of issues and resolution of various questions. Corresponding 
changes to tire model have been made in preparation for delivery to Ogden Air Logis¬ 
tics Center. 

Project members presented a half-day tutorial entitled “Post Deployment Software Sup¬ 
port Process Modeling” at the USAF STSC-HQ USAF/SC Joint Software Conference in 
Salt Lake City in April. The tutorial explained the process modeling work being done at 
the SEI; discussed the F-14A, F-16 A/B, and MIL-HDBK-347 models that the project 
members built; and outlined the benefits which arose from developing the models. 

A project member is serving as tutorial chair for the 1990 Conference on Software 
Maintenance, to be held in San Diego in November. During this quarter, he participated 
in the Program Committee meeting held in Washington, D.C., and selected the set of 
tutorials to be presented at the conference 

In April, the project leader presented a lull-day seminar entitled “Software Process 
Modeling” for the Association for Computing Machinery, Washington D.C. Chapter, 

Spring Professional Development Seminar Series, in College Park, Maryland. 


Domain Analysis 


This project is developing and testing methods for performing domain analysis to sup¬ 
port software reuse. The primary objectives of the project arc to define a process and set 
of products to support the systematic discovery and exploitation of commonality across 
related software systems and to apply the process to a domain within the Army Tactical 
Command and Control System (ATCCS). 

The project defined the methods to be used for its domain analysis and applied them in 
analyzing window management software. In addition, project members implemented a 
tool to handle consistency checking of the domain model and are using STATEMATE 
to simulate the model and applications specified using the model. ► 


6 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 














► 

Project members completed a comprehensive, annotated bibliography on domain analy¬ 
sis (CMU/SEI-90-SR-3). The document presented references on the comparatively new 
discipline called domain analysis. Its purpose is to provide an historical perspective on 
the field as well as necessary background information for further work in the discipline. 
During this quarter, the project began defining the scope of the domain analysis to be 
performed with ATCCS. The ATCCS program consists of five major systems to support 
tactical battlefield operations. The systems are built on common hardware and support 
software, and, as part of the scoping effort, the project met w'ilh working groups specify¬ 
ing the common support software. Project members arc proposing man-machine inter¬ 
face software as the initial domain for analysis. Our effort in this area will be to apply 
the results of the feasibility study to help refine the ATCCS System Segment Specifica¬ 
tion in the area of window management software. Project members also will look at that 
aspect of the man-machine interface lliat deals with battlefield map representations. 

Another of the project’s scoping activities is defining the context for analysis of move¬ 
ment control software. This software manages and controls the movement of tactical 
battlefield resources. It supports three planning activities: preparing movement requests, 
coordinating those requests with the appropriate Army command headquarters, and 
maintaining movement files. 

Project members presented at a technical interchange meeting at the CECOM Center for 
Software Engineering and at the Third Annual Workshop on Methods and Tools for 
Reuse. 


Survey of Formal Specification Techniques for Reactive Systems 
(CMU/SEI-90-TR-5) 

A Domain Analysis Bibliography 
(CMU/SEI-90-SR-3) 

User Interface Software Structures 
(CMU/SEI-90-SR-13) 

For information on how' to order reports, see page 27. 


00000000000000 

Software Engineering 
Methods Program 
Reports 

April-June 1990 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 7 






8 


SEI Quarterly Update 2090 









Software Systems 


The goal of the Systems Program is to improve the development of real-time distributed 
systems by integrating software engineering with systems engineering and reducing the 
risk of new technology. 


The Real-Time Embedded Systems Testbed Project is collecting, classifying, generating, 
and disseminating information about software development for real-time embedded sys¬ 
tems. 

The project has received over 60 requests for the Version 1.0 of Hartstone benchmark 
and accompanying information. (The Hartstone benchmark is designed to measure the 
performance of a compilation system on real-time applications with hard scheduling 
deadlines. Version 1.0 contains the Periodic Harmonic Scries.) Of these requests, ap¬ 
proximately half have come from industry, and the remainder is almost equally split be¬ 
tween government, academia, and Ada compiler vendors. 

Hartstone results were gathered for six Ada compilers: DDCI, DEC VAX/VMS, Ra¬ 
tional, System Designers, TcleSoft, and Verdix. A report analyzing the results is near 
completion. 

New versions of the Ada Compiler Evaluation Capability (ACEC) and Ada Evaluation 
System (AES) test suites were installed. These test suites will be used, along with 
Hartstone, to perform extensive evaluations of the Verdix compiler. This evaluation 
technology, along with new evaluation technology for distributed systems, will be used 
to support the BSY-2 effort of the Govcrntneni Electronics Systems division of General 
Electric in Moorcstown, New Jersey. 


The Real-Time Scheduling in Ada Project is demonstrating how to design and imple¬ 
ment real-time systems using analytic scheduling algorithms. 

Project members assisted McDonnell Douglas personnel in preparing a presentation to 
NASA recommending that rale monotonic scheduling be tire standard discipline for de¬ 
signing real-time software for the Space Station Data Management System. If the recom¬ 
mendation is approved, everyone developing real-time software for the Data Manage¬ 
ment System will use rate monoionic methods unless they have a waiver. 

The introduction of rate monoionic scheduling concepts to General Electric (GE), the 
prime contractor for the Navy’s BSY-2 system, is proceeding well. Several training ses¬ 
sions were held with GE personnel, and die project’s training materials arc being used 
by GE trainers to train other workers on the project. The project assisted GE personnel 
in analyzing selected software designs from the system to show how die rate monotonic 
theory could be used successfully during the design phase to identify potential problems 
and to develop alternative designs. The prospects arc reasonably good that the technol¬ 
ogy will be adopted by the BSY-2 program because it has already proven to be helpful 
in identifying potential problems early in the design phase. ► 


Real-Time Embedded 
Systems Testbed 


Real-Time Scheduling 
in Ada 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 9 








User interface 


Software for 

Heterogeneous 

Machines 


► 

A technical report, Implementing Sporadic Servers in Ada (CMU/SEI-90-TR-6), was 
completed this quarter. This report presents the data structures and algorithms for imple¬ 
menting sporadic servers in real-time systems programmed in Ada. (The sporadic server 
algorithm is an extension of the rate monotonic scheduling algorithm.) 

An introductory article on rate monotonic scheduling appeared in the April 1990 issue of 
Computer magazine, and a report demonstrating how the rate monotonic theory can be 
applied to solve a common class of problems is nearing completion. Work is also pro¬ 
ceeding on identifying technical issues in applying rate monotonic theory to distributed 
systems. 

Validation tests for checking the Ada implementations of the priority ceiling protocol 
have been designed, and a report describing their use is in the final stages of preparation. 
Several Ada compiler vendors have been contacted and have expressed interest in ob¬ 
taining the tests. 


The User Interface Project is developing Serpent, a user interface management system. 
Serpent separates the concerns of the user interface from those of the application, which 
allows integration of input/output technologies without modifying die functional portion 
of the application. 

The .8 release of Serpent, which contains a snapshot of the new layout editor, was made 
available to the public through electronic distribution. Serpent now runs on VAX 
(ULTRIX 3.1), DECstation (ULTR1X 3.1), Sun (OSAO), and HP 9000 OS Version 6.0. 

Project members exhibited Serpent at the Conference for Computer-Human Interaction 
(CHI ’90) and at USENIX. They also participated in a UIMS panel at Xhibition 90 and 
chaired a study group on UIMSs under the auspices of the IEEE PI201 standards group. 
Presentations examining UIMS systems from a standards perspective were also made to 
other groups, including the Open Software Foundation and a NIST working group on 
environments. 

Design work for the remaining two pieces of Serpent 1.0 was completed this quarter. 

The two pieces are: (1) the integration of the layout editor with the structure editor and 
(2) a generalized method for incorporating Xtk-bascd toolkits into Serpent. The user 
interfaces for the structure editor and the visualization editor were integrated and are 
being tested and refined. A color palette has been developed for the visualization editor 
and was added to the Serpent demo suite. 

The latest Serpent newsletter was distributed. One of the items in the newsletter an¬ 
nounced the availability of a Serpent videotape that presents a manager’s perspective of 
Serpent. Over 60 requests for the videotape have been filled. 

The Software for Heterogeneous Machines Project is developing tools and a methodol¬ 
ogy for building distributed, large-grained, concurrent applications running on heteroge¬ 
neous machine networks. The project has developed Durra, a language for describing 
distributed applications as a set of tusk descriptions and type declarations that prescribe a 
way to manage the resources of the network. ► 


10 SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 













► 

In conjunction with the Institute for Simulation and Training (1ST) at the University of 
Central Florida, the project is designing a demonstration system to simulate a network of 
simulators and training devices using SIMNET protocols for the wide-area network and 
SIMNET or proprietary protocols for the local-area networks. 

The project is developing a Durra task to be used as a building block for communication 
network modeling. After the design is implemented and tested, it will be integrated into 
the runtime executive as a built-in task. Design goals include developing an application 
description style in which the application tasks are split into “tightly-coupled” communi¬ 
cation groups and deciding how much information is shared between communication 
tasks. The project completed a prototype implementation of the task this quarter. 

Project members upgraded the Ada development tools to die beta release of VADS 6.0. 
This beta release contains a number of changes (for example, pragma syntax and library 
unit names) that arc incompatible with VADS 5.5. In collaboration with the SEI Tech¬ 
nology Transition staff, a new release of Durra was built and installed on the public ac¬ 
cess host for anonymous file transfer protocol (FTP). 

As part of a team of reviewers appointed by DARPA Tactical Technology Office (TTO), 
Mario Barbacci attended the preliminary design review for the designs by Honeywell 
and Texas Instrument for the Aladdin multiprocessor sponsored by DARPA. 


Implementing Sporadic Servers in Ada 
(CMU/SEI-90-TR-6) 

For information on how to order reports, see page 27. 


000000000000 

Software Systems 
Program Reports 

April-June 1990 


SEI Quarterly Update 2090 11 










12 SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 





Education 


The primary objective of the SEI Education Program is to increase the number of highly 
qualified software engineers by rapidly improving software engineering education 
throughout the education communities of academia, government, and industry. To ac¬ 
complish this, the projects of the Education Program focus on accelerating the develop¬ 
ment of software engineering programs in academia and on enhancing opportunities for 
the continuing education of practitioners. 

This summer Carnegie Mellon is offering one course in its new Master of Software En¬ 
gineering (MSE) program, a joint effort between the SEI and the CMU School of Com¬ 
puter Science. The course, Software Development Studio, is a continuation from the 
spring semester. It consists of a team effort by the students to complete all phases of a 
realistic software development project. Four students arc enrolled in this course. 

The SEI has five new academic affiliates: Mississippi Slate University, University of 
Virginia, Florida Atlantic University, Troy State University, and University of Califor¬ 
nia, Los Angeles. The academic affiliates are educational institutions who have contra¬ 
ctually joined the SEI in cooperative efforts of mutual interest. These efforts include 
work in education, training, research, development, or technology transition. 


The Fourth SEI Conference on Software Engineering Education was held April 2-3 in 
Pittsburgh. Attended by approximately 100 educators, the program included presenta¬ 
tions by invited speakers, refereed papers from an international group of sofiwarc engi¬ 
neering educators, panel discussions, and reports from the SEI. The conference proceed¬ 
ings were published by Springcr-Verlag as part of their Lecture Notes in Computer Sci¬ 
ence series. 


Software Engineering 
Curriculum 


The Eighth SEI Educator Development Workshop was held April 4 in Pittsburgh. The 
71 attendees included representatives from academia, government, and industry. Two 
new curriculum modules and one set of support materials were presented, all on the 
topic of concurrent programming (see p. 15 for titles). Presentations by SEI staff in¬ 
cluded software architectures and using temporal logic to develop specifications. 

Dr. Norman Wilde of the University of West Florida was in residence as a visiting sci¬ 
entist for a four-week period. He developed a curriculum module tentatively titled Un¬ 
derstanding Program Dependencies. 

The project leader and the program director participated in the International Federation 
for Information Processing working group (IFIP WG) 3.2 workshop on “Informatics 
Curricula for the 90s” in Providence, Rhode Island, on April 5-7. About 50 participants 
(half from the U.S., half from Europe, Canada, and Mexico) discussed issues related to 
the design and content of curricula for the immediate future. Several speakers expressed 
their high regard of theoretical computer science and formal approaches to program¬ 
ming; a few suggested that computing also has an engineering component. SEI ► 


SEI Quarteily ' Update 2Q90 13 






► 

participants report that they gained insight into the widely varying perceptions of what 
computer science (informatics) is; that insight will help shape the curriculum efforts of 
the Education Program. 

The project leader was invited to participate in a working group entitled “The Impact of 
Computing Education on the Software Crisis.” Meeting in conjunction with the National 
Educational Computing Conference, the group addressed very high-level and broad is¬ 
sues. Participants were, among others, the presidents of the ACM and IEEE-CS, Senator 
Albert Gore (who has sponsored legislation in support of advancing the United States 
computing capabilities), a vice president of Apple Computers, and representatives of 
NSF and 1CCP (Institute for Certification of Computer Professionals, which is currently 
developing an examination for certification of software engineers). 


Video Dissemination 


The Video Dissemination Project provides courses on modem software engineering 
methods. The project has three scries of videotaped courses: the Academic Series, which 
develops graduate courses that are offered by universities for academic credit; the Con¬ 
tinuing Education Series, which offers noncredit courses to software practitioners in gov¬ 
ernment and industry; and the Technology Series, which provides stand-alone presenta¬ 
tions that promote awareness of emerging issues and leading-edge technologies. 

The Academic Series completed its sixth semester of production by videotaping two 
courses: Software Creation and Maintenance, and Software Verification and Validation 
(version 2). These courses arc available for use by participating universities for the fall 
1990 semester. 

During the spring 1990 semester a total of 228 students received credit for completing 
course work in Academic Series courses offered at 9 universities in the United States 
and Canada. A total of 17 class sessions were held: 12 of Software Project Management; 
3 of Software Design; and 2 of Software Verification and Validation. 

Course authors made site visits to two participating schools: The Wichita State Univer¬ 
sity (Software Project Management) and the University of Minnesota, Duluth (Software 
Verification and Validation). While at Wichita State, the course author presented one of 
the lectures. 

For the summer semester. Software Design is being offered at Florida Institute of Tech¬ 
nology, and Software Verification and Validation is being offered at six sites of Florida 
Atlantic University. Tutors from these schools participated in an SEI-sponsorcd tutor 
orientation. 

Tutors from Rockwell International, Westinghousc Electric, McDonnell Douglas, and 
the Air Force who were trained in previous offerings of the course at the SEI have 
taught Software Project Management at their respective organizations. So far they have 
trained more than 110 students and 23 tutors. Invited SEI staff presented lectures held at 
tutor training sessions at McDonnell Douglas in Mesa, Arizona, and Westinghousc Elec¬ 
tric Company in Pittsburgh. ► 


14 SEI Quarterly Update 2090 






► 

A course for executives, Software: Profit Through Process Improvement, was held at the 
SEI on June 5-6, 1990. The 10-hour course was attended by upper management repre¬ 
sentatives from Xerox, Ford Aerospace, Martin Marietta, Rockwell International, Texas 
Instruments, Pacific Bell, Motorola, United Technologies Research Center, Boeing Aero¬ 
space, and the United States Navy. 

Participants in the Course Development Workshop returned to their respective sites: six 
instructors from the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) and one representative 
each from General Dynamics and the University of Scranton. During the six-month 
workshop at the SEI, these participants developed five courses: Software Generation and 
Maintenance, Principles and Application of Software Design, Software Specification, 
Software Verification and Validation, and Software Engineering Concepts. Final devel¬ 
opment of the courses will be done by the participants at their home locations. The five 
graduate-level continuing education courses will be presented at AFIT by the instructors 
who participated in the workshop. 


The Advanced Learning Technologies (ALT) Project is using hardware and software 
technologies to teach software code inspections. Interactive, technology-intensive train¬ 
ing can be distributed economically to a broad audience and can provide an effective 
learning experience. 

A context-sensitive help system was developed for the interactive video course on in¬ 
spections. Support for multiple fonts and colors in text windows was also added to the 
course. The second CD-ROM check disk was created; this version will be used by the 
beta sites that arc testing the course. 


Advanced Learning 
Technologies 


The project leader gave a seminar on the project at the University of Michigan. In atten¬ 
dance were approximately 50 faculty and graduate students from the Department of 
Computer Science, Cognitive Science and Machine Intelligence Laboratory, and the 
School of Education. They arc considering using ALT as a model for their development 
of a new DVI project at the university. 


Software Engineering Education Directory 
(CMU/SEI-90-TR-4) 

Technical Writing for Software Engineers 
(SEI-CM-23) 

Concepts of Concurrent Programming 
(SEI-CM-24) 

Language and System Support for Concurrent Programming 
(SEI-CM-25) 

Support Materials for "Language and System Support for Concurrent Programming” 
(SEI-SM-25) 

For information on how to order modules and reports, see page 27. 


00000000000000 

Education Program 
Reports 

April-June 1990 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 15 






16 SEI Quarterly Update 2090 









Ada & STARS Support 


As Ada use becomes more common in software-dependent systems, users will be faced 
with the benefits and problems of adopting more disciplined approaches to software en¬ 
gineering. The goals of the Ada and STARS (Software Technology for Adaptable, Reli¬ 
able Systems) Support Effort arc to remove technical and managerial impediments to the 
adoption of Ada, to support the DoD STARS Program in technology development and 
transition efforts, and to explore the advantages and disadvantages of new software engi¬ 
neering approaches and paradigms made possible by Ada language features. 

Program members participated in the following STARS activities during this quarter: 
STARS program management review, system architects meetings, S-incremcnt proposal 
reviews, and the review of the Bocing/Hughes information object modeling (IOM) ef¬ 
fort. They were also interviewed by and discussed the STARS Program with the DoD 
Inspector General. 

The SEI hosted the IOM technical intcrchangc/workshop in mid-June, which was at¬ 
tended by representatives of all STARS prime contractors and which addressed issues 
regarding the future applicability of IOM to the STARS Program. Plans are also being 
developed to support STARS process modeling activities and Navy next generation com¬ 
puting resources (NGCR) environment activities. 


The Software Architectures Engineering (SAE) Project provides to DoD program offices 
improvements to the practice of software engineering by assisting in the development 
and insertion of new architectural and practice models where old models have proved 
inadequate. The project accomplishes this by assisting in the development of a new set 
of engineering optimizations (goals) in the application area and setting the requirements 
for models tunable to the new optimizations. The new models are packaged so that they 
can be adopted by practitioners in the area by extending the architectures to address pos¬ 
sibilities precluded by the current model set. Project members are refining and maturing 
the new model sets by transitioning them to others and providing additional sources of 
reflection on their use. 


Software Architectures 
Engineering 


Project members worked on a plan to support Granite Sentry in the future. This activity 
was put on hold because of reorganization within the Granite Sentry Program. Project 
members attended meetings at Peterson AFB to provide input to the MITRE assessment 
and data integrity tiger teams evaluating Granite Sentry. 

Project members arc completing a final lessons-learned report for the STARS Advanced 
Millimeter-Wave Seeker (AMMWS) Shadow Project on the Millimeter-Wave Seeker. 
The report will be ready later in 1990. 

The SAE Project is working with Lieutenant Colonel Erik Mcttala, manager of the 
DARPA Domain-Specific Software Architectures (DSSA) Program, to organize and 
hold a workshop in July to determine the goals and objectives of the DSSA Program. 
Workshop acceptance letters were sent, and final site preparations are being made. ► 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 17 




► 

Acceptance was based on response to a white paper written by the SAE project leader. 
Project members are writing a direct support agreement for long-term SAE participa¬ 
tion in the DSSA Program as research coordinator. 

A direct support agreement between the Air Force Electronic Combat Office (AFECO) 
and the SAE Project was established for work on the Electronic Combat Digital Evalu¬ 
ation System (ECDES). Work in this quarter focused on writing a document that sets 
the context for the engineering of simulation systems using structural models to coordi¬ 
nate the work of the simulator and computer engineers and presents the system soft¬ 
ware requirements in terms of the new models. 

SAE project information, lessons learned from the C31 domain, and applicability of 
SAE technology to the Command and Control Evaluation System (CCES) were pre¬ 
sented to Computer Resource Management Technology (CRMT) representatives. Pro¬ 
ject members are evaluating this effort to determine its applicability to the overall SAE 
strategy and to the C3I domain specifically. The project is also evaluating the need for 
direct funding to support the effort and strategy. 

To support transition of SAE technology and gather information about others doing 
similar work, project members prepared proposals for TRI-Ada ’90 and made presenta¬ 
tions to American Management Systems Inc. (AMS), Space Defense Initiative Office/ 
National Testbed (SDIO), and STARS prime contractors. 


The Binding of Ada and SQL Project, initiated at the request of the Ada Joint Program 
Office (AJPO), has investigated the problem of binding the Ada programming language 
with the Structured Query Language (SQL) database language. The solution to this prob¬ 
lem was the specification of the SQL Ada Module Extensions (SAME), an interface that 
permits an application program written in Ada to access and manipulate data controlled 
by a database management system (DBMS) using SQL. 

The SAME-Dcsign Committee (SAME-DC) held its June meeting in conjunction with 
the SQL Rapporteur Group (SRG) of the International Standards Organization Working 
Group on Ada, ISO/JTC1/SC22/WG9. The SRG announced to the full working group 
that a complete draft of the SAME Description Language Reference Manual 
(SEI-89-SR-24) will be mailed to each member by October 1, 1990. This should allow 
the working group to vole on the SAME Description Language (SAMeDL) as a draft 
proposed standard at its December meeting. 

There arc now three commercial implementations of the SAMeDL under development. 
An implementors’ workshop is planned for July. 


Binding of Ada 
and SQL 


Study and Analysis 
for Ada 9X 


The Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) has decided that a revision to the Ada language 
standard is required to maintain it as a standard (ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A). This revision 
process is commonly referred to as Ada 9X. The purpose of this project is to identify 
and evaluate potential areas for revising the Ada standard based on the experiences of 
software developers and compiler implementors. This project is providing an organiza¬ 
tional framework to help guide revision activities. ► 


18 SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 









► 

A draft study report on mathematical processing requirements was received for editing, 
and revision of the reuse report is nearing completion. The planned report on distributed 
systems requirements was withdrawn because an active group outside the SE1 is pro¬ 
ceeding well on identifying those issues. 

In June, the Ada 9X program manager asked the SEI to accept a new task to complete 
the preparation of the Ada 9X requirements work. This request was accepted, and an 
additional full-time staff member was added to the project to work on this task. A meet¬ 
ing with a small group of the Ada 9X Distinguished Reviewers was held in June to de¬ 
cide on the best approach for completing the requirements definition effort. 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 


19 












Technology Transition 


The Technology Transition Program is the local point for SE1 transition efforts. The 
program works with other SE1 programs to match problems and solutions in the DoD 
software community. 


The Technology Applications Function provides a link between DoD mission-critical 
application domains and ongoing SE1 activities in technology evaluation, development, 
and transition. The goal of these activities is t > assist the efforts of organizations to 
adopt and institutionalize new technology through matching the technology to an appro¬ 
priate context, fostering a climate of acceptance for the technology, and tailoring the 
technology for pilot installations. Transition sites arc principally chosen for their ability 
to influence llic further adoption of die technology throughout a larger community. 

Members of Technology Applications and the SE1 Process Program began to collaborate 
on transition activities with die Computer Resource Management Technology (CRMT) 
program of the U.S. Air Force. The CRMT program is the engineering program that the 
Air Force uses to transition advances in computer resources management, including soft¬ 
ware technologies, into Air Force practice. Efforts are underway to transition several SE1 
concepts and products using the CRMT program, including Serpent, the architectural 
models and processes of die Software Architectures Engineering (SAE) Project, the 
process maturity model, and die Software Capability Evaluation (SCE) method. 

Technology Applications is currently engaged in improvement projects with seven DoD 
organizations. These projects provide an integrated approach to making improvements 
and will eventually become a continuous improvement effort within the client organiza¬ 
tion. For example, Technology Applications is assisting die Air Force Standard Systems 
Center (SSC) in a comprehensive effort to improve their technical and organizauonal 
ability to perform their mission. That mission is to analyze, acquire, design, develop, 
integrate, test, implement, and maintain standard communication computer systems to 
support Air Force operadons. The improvement project will advocate technological and 
organizational change and will affect methods, tools, procedures, and policy. 

The SSC improvement project was initiated in die SSC Human Resources area and a 
study of SSC education and training capabilities was completed during this quarter. This 
study will lead to a professional development plan for SSC staff. The SEI has become 
familiar with the SSC organizational and technical issues while conducting change man¬ 
agement training and development activities with SSC executives. Initial components of 
a transition inlrastructure-a Software Management Council, several technical working 
groups, and a technology transition group-are now functioning at SSC. In addition, a 
comprehensive strategy for die entire improvement project was developed in this quarter. 


Technology 

Applications 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 


21 





Affiliate Relations 


The Affiliate Relations Function establishes and maintains SEI relationships with indus¬ 
try and government organizations. Affi’iatc Relations also negotiates and places, with the 
cooperation of the SEI Joint Program Office, governmer* and industry resident affiliates 
at the SEI. The SEI Education Program manages academic affiliates and visiting scien¬ 
tists from academia. 

Eight new industry affiliates signed information exchange agreements during this quarter: 
Century Technologies, Inc.; Comptck Research, Inc.; IBM, Application Solutions Divi¬ 
sion; Intel Corporation; Loral Data Systems; Proprietary Software Systems, Inc; 

Sunstrand Corporation; and Textron Defense Systems. 

Two new resident affiliates, one from Gunter Air Force Base Standard Systems Center 
and one from the National Security Agency, joined the SEI this quarter. Five resident 
affiliates concluded their work at the SEI during this quarter. As of June 30, 1990, seven¬ 
teen resident affiliates were working at the SEI: five from industry, two from academia, 
and ten from the services and government agencies. 

Affiliate Relations conducted SEI Visitors Day on May 17, 1990. This event is held quar¬ 
terly to accommodate the increasing requests for visits to the SEI. Twenty representatives 
from twelve companies and two government organizations attended. The next Visitors 
Day is scheduled for August 23, 1990. Visitors must register for Visitors Day; walk-ins 
arc not accepted. 

Preparations for die 1990 Affiliates Symposium are underway. The symposium will be 
held September 11-13, 1990, in Pittsburgh. More than 70 ho irs of material for tutorials, 
briefings, and seminars are planned for 32 sessions scheduled uaring the symposium. The 
preliminary program and registration information was mailed to all affiliates. 


Empirical Methods 


The Empirical Methods Function supports transition management of SEI technology 
projects by providing market research methods and materials, conducting surveys, and 
evaluating events or validating products of SEI projects. 

During this quarter. Empirical Methods staff published a technical report. National Soft¬ 
ware Capacity: Near-Term Study (CMU/SEI-90-TR-12). This study provides an initial 
assessment of U.S. industrial capacity to produce MCCR (mission-critical computer re¬ 
sources) software. The report describes labor, oiganizalional, and technological issues 
affecting software production capacity and concludes with some preliminary recommen¬ 
dations for DoD and industry initiatives. For those who want a brief summary of the 
contents of die report, Empirical Methods staff also published National Software Capac¬ 
ity: Near-Term Study Executive Summary (CMU/SEI-90-SR-12). 

Empirical Methods staff completed another report this quarter, Understanding the Adop¬ 
tion of Ada: Results of an Industry Survey (CMU/SEI-90-SR-10). This report summa¬ 
rizes the results of a survey concerning the economics of Ada adoption and completes 
SEI efforts to understand and document MCCR industry decisions to adopt or not adopt 
Ada for use in specific application domains. 


22 SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 








00000000000000 


National Software Capacity: Near-Term Study 

(CMU/SEI-90-TR-12) Technology Transition 

Program Reports 

Understanding the Adoption of Ada: Results of an Industry Survey 

(CMU/SEI-90-SR-10) April-June 1990 

National Software Capacity: Near-Term Study Executive Summary 
(CMU/SEI-90-SR-12) 

For information on how to order reports, sec page 27. 


SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 23 




24 SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 






CERT Coordination Center 


The Computer Emergency Response Team Coordination Center (CERT/CC) supple¬ 
ments existing mechanisms by which informally organized experts deal with and prevent 
computer emergencies. The CERT/CC at the SEI supports two different communities: 
Internet users and developers of technology that is available on the network, such as 
Unix and networking software. The CERT/CC provides a dependable 24-hour point of 
contact for security issues and allows rapid communication during emergencies. It also 
raises constituents’ awareness of security issues and assists individual organizations in 
improving the security of their systems. Finally, the CERT/CC maintains a highly secure 
repository of information for team members and cultivates close ties with researchers in 
the area of trusted systems to improve the security of existing systems. 

Since its inception in 1988, the CERT/CC has responded to a continuous stream of re¬ 
ported security incidents. These include reports of intrusions, worms, and viruses as well 
as reports of vulnerabilities and suggested fixes for problems. In handling these prob¬ 
lems, the CERT/CC issues advisories to the Internet community to warn them of prob¬ 
lems and inform them of preventive techniques. In cases where vulnerabilities exist, the 
CERT/CC works with software vendors and the technical community in analyzing and 
resolving the problems. 


During the second quarter of 1990, the CERT/CC continued working with the Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF) to produce recommendations for Internet security policy. 
The Security Policy Working Group held two working meetings, agreed to a policy 
framework, and initiated work on detailing key security issues. Special emphasis was 
placed on the unique characteristics of Internet operations where portions of the network 
arc owned and operated by independent, cooperating organizations. Policy development 
and enforcement will require extensive consensus building and international cooperation. 

During initial meetings of the Site Security Policy Handbook Working Group, partici¬ 
pants outlined key issues and agreed on the contents of the initial release of the hand¬ 
book. CERT members organized this second IETF working group whose aim is to pro¬ 
duce a security handbook for use by Internet-connected site and system administrators. 
This handbook will provide guidance on policy, administrative, and technical issues to 
support efforts at improving the security of their systems. 

To raise awareness of security issues and to support organizations’ efforts at improving 
the security of their operational systems, CERT/CC staff members hosted working meet¬ 
ings and participated in professional conferences. The focus of these activities was to 
share lessons learned and to help other organizations to improve their incident handling 
capabilities. 

The CERT/CC produced a draft charter and conducted, along with the National Institute 
of Standards and Technology, a membership meeting of the CERT system, a federation ► 


SEI Quarterly Update 2090 25 





► 

of organizations working together to improve the security of their systems. CERT system 
charter members, eleven federally funded groups, reached concensus on the charter and 
expect formal approval and announcement of the system in July 1990. In addition to the 
charter members, four private organizations have expressed interest in participating in the 
CERT system. Additionally, the Australian Computer Society has announced its intention 
to create an Australian Computer Emergency Response Team using the model developed 
by the CERT/CC at the SEI. 

CERT project members conducted the Second Invitational Workshop on Computer Secu¬ 
rity Incident Response on June 20-21 in Pleasanton, California. This workshop focused 
on new ideas and models in the area of incident handling as well as lessons learned. 
There were more than 100 attendees and 40 speakers from the federal government, aca¬ 
demic community, and private industry. The workshop highlighted advancements in the 
following areas: improved incident response capabilities, development of models to char¬ 
acterize and analyze security threats, development of tools and techniques for improving 
the security of network communications and system operation, and the development of 
publicly available information resources. 


26 SEI Quarterly Update 2Q90 






For More Information 


To order an SEI publication, send a written request accompanied by a preaddressed 
mailing label to: 

Software Engineering Institute 
ATTN: Publications Requests 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 


To be added to the Bridge mailing list, write to: 

Software Engineering Institute 
ATTN: Bridge Mailing List 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 


For information on opportunities for affiliation, contact: 

Software Engineering Institute 
ATTN: Mark Coticchia 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 
(412) 268-6138 
Internet: mec@sei.cmu.edu 


For further information about the SEI, contact: 

Information Center 
Software Engineering Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 
(412) 268-5800 


How to Order 
SEI Publications 


How to Get the 
SEI Magazine 


How to Become 
an SEI Affiliate 


How to Get 

Additional Information 


SEI Quarterly Update 2G90 27 










28 


SEI Quarterly Update 2090 






