NASA/TM— 20 10-216822 


AIAA-20 10-0080 



The Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels 
With TunnelSim and TunnelSys 


Thomas J. Benson 

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 
Carol A. Galica 

Stinger Ghaffarian Technologies, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio 
Anthony J. Vila 

Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 


October 2010 


NASA STI Program ... in Profile 


Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the 
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The 
NASA Scientific and Technical Information (STI) 
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain 
this important role. 

The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices 
of the Agency Chief Information Officer. It collects, 
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates 
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI program provides access 
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and 
its public interface, the NASA Technical Reports 
Server, thus providing one of the largest collections 
of aeronautical and space science STI in the world. 
Results are published in both non-NASA channels 
and by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which 
includes the following report types: 

• TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of 
completed research or a major significant phase 
of research that present the results of NASA 
programs and include extensive data or theoretical 
analysis. Includes compilations of significant 
scientific and technical data and information 
deemed to be of continuing reference value. 
NASA counterpart of peer-reviewed formal 
professional papers but has less stringent 
limitations on manuscript length and extent of 
graphic presentations. 

• TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific 
and technical findings that are preliminary or 
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release 
reports, working papers, and bibliographies that 
contain minimal annotation. Does not contain 
extensive analysis. 

• CONTRACTOR REPORT Scientific and 
technical findings by NASA-sponsored 
contractors and grantees. 


• CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected 
papers from scientific and technical 
conferences, symposia, seminars, or other 
meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA. 

• SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific, 
technical, or historical information from 
NASA programs, projects, and missions, often 
concerned with subjects having substantial 
public interest. 

• TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English- 
language translations of foreign scientific and 
technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission. 

Specialized services also include creating custom 

thesauri, building customized databases, organizing 

and publishing research results. 

For more information about the NASA STI 

program, see the following: 

• Access the NASA STI program home page at 
http://www.sti.nasa.gov 

• E-mail your question via the Internet to help@ 
sti.nasa.gov 

• Fax your question to the NASA STI Help Desk 
at 443-757-5803 

• Telephone the NASA STI Help Desk at 
443-757-5802 

• Write to: 

NASA Center for AeroSpace Information (CASI) 
7115 Standard Drive 
Hanover, MD 21076-1320 


NASA/TM— 20 10-216822 


AIAA-20 10-0080 



The Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels 
With TunnelSim and TunnelSys 


Thomas J. Benson 

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 
Carol A. Galica 

Stinger Ghaffarian Technologies, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio 
Anthony J. Vila 

Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 


Prepared for the 

48th Aerospace Sciences Meeting 

sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
Orlando, Florida, January 4-7, 2010 


National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 


Glenn Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 


October 2010 


Acknowledgments 


The Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels, TunnelSim, and TunnelSys are products of the NASA Glenn Educational Programs 
Office and are supported by NASA Headquarters. All of this information is in the public domain and is made available at the 
NASA Glenn education Web site: http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/K-12/aiiplane. 


Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identification 
only. Their usage does not constitute an official endorsement, 
either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration. 


Level of Review. This material has been technically reviewed by technical management. 


Available from 


NASA Center for Aerospace Information 
7115 Standard Drive 
Hanover, MD 21076-1320 


National Technical Information Service 
5301 Shawnee Road 
Alexandria, VA22312 


Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov 


The Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels 
With TunnelSim and TunnelSys 

Thomas J. Benson 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Glenn Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 

Carol A. Galica 

Stinger Ghaffarian Technologies, Inc. 

Cleveland, Ohio 44135 

Anthony J. Vila 
Vanderbilt University 
Nashville, Tennessee 37240 

Abstract 

The Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels is a Web-based, on-line textbook that explains and 
demonstrates the history, physics, and mathematics involved with wind tunnels and wind tunnel testing. 
The Web site contains several interactive computer programs to demonstrate scientific principles. 
TunnelSim is an interactive, educational computer program that demonstrates basic wind tunnel design 
and operation. TunnelSim is a Java (Sun Microsystems Inc.) applet that solves the continuity and 
Bernoulli equations to determine the velocity and pressure throughout a tunnel design. TunnelSys is a 
group of Java applications that mimic wind tunnel testing techniques. Using TunnelSys, a team of 
students designs, tests, and post-processes the data for a virtual, low speed, and aircraft wing. 

Introduction 

The development of personal computers and the Internet presents new methods for students to learn 
mathematics and physics. The Web requires the use of a browser program that retrieves information from 
anywhere in the world and displays the information on the monitor screen. Special computer software like 
Java has been developed that can execute programs (or applets) within the browser. The input to and 
output from these programs is principally graphical and visual. Since vision is the most perceptive sense 
used in education, applets are particularly well suited for education. Educational applets can provide a 
student with a simulated desktop laboratory that can be used to develop a feel and an understanding of 
math and physics. Although the Web is currently used primarily for news, business and advertisement, 
engineers and scientists are beginning to develop software for the Web that can be used in education. For 
example, Reed and Afjeh, Reference 1, have developed a turbine engine design and analysis package, and 
Devenport and Shetz, Reference 2, have developed several aeronautical software packages that execute 
on the Web. Martindale, Reference 3, currently lists over 23,000 calculator programs, covering a wide 
range of engineering disciplines that are available on the Web. Most of these programs are intended for 
practicing engineers, but some of them are finding their way into undergraduate education. 

A team at the NASA Glenn Research Center has been investigating the use of the Internet for 
educational purposes. The studies have lead to the development of a large Web site called the Beginner’s 
Guide to Aeronautics (BGA). The BGA is a Web-based textbook that includes interactive programs to 
demonstrate science, technology, engineering, and mathematics using airplanes, jet engines, model 
rockets, kites, and compressible, and hypersonic aerodynamics. The BGA is divided into several sections 
with each section built around an interactive software program. The Beginner’s Guide to Propulsion 
(BGP) section provides the math and physics background information for EngineSim, Reference 4. 


NASA/TM— 2010-216822 


1 



EngineSim is a Java applet that calculates the thrust and fuel usage of a jet engine by performing a 
Brayton cycle thermodynamic analysis as described by Hill and Peterson, Reference 5, and Mattingly, 
Reference 6. EngineSim allows the student to vary all of the parameters involved in the thermodynamic 
analysis of a turbojet, turbofan, or ramjet engine and estimates the weight of the engine based on engine 
size and the component materials. The BGP is intended for students and teachers who desire a more 
thorough understanding of propulsion physics. Similarly, FoilSim and the Beginner’s Guide to 
Aerodynamics section, Reference 7, were built for students to explore the fundamentals of airfoils and the 
generation of lift and drag. 

The current paper presents information on a new section of the BGA that deals with wind tunnels. 

The science and mathematics are described in a new Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels (BGT) and there 
are several new applets and applications that allow students to learn the basics of wind tunnel design and 
testing techniques. TunnelSim allows the students to design a wind tunnel by changing the geometry and 
flow conditions in the tunnel. TunnelSys explores the process of wind tunnel testing from the design of 
tunnel models, through the actual testing, post-processing, and model modification. Additional 
background information is provided by nearly one hundred hyperlinked Web pages covering such topics 
as wind tunnel force balances, instrumentation, and flow visualization techniques. In the same way that 
the Web-based BGP was able to provide the technical information from the classical propulsion textbook 
of Mattingly and Hill and Petersen, it is hoped that the BGT will provide much of the technical 
information from the classical wind tunnel textbooks of Pope, References 8 and 9. 

Nomenclature 


A Area 

p static pressure 
u velocity 
p gas density 


Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels 

The Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels (BGT) provides teachers and students with the basic science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) that is used in wind tunnels. The BGT is a Web-based 
textbook with pages that utilize the power of the Internet. Each page includes many linked references to 
other pieces of information, sophisticated computer graphics and animations, and interactive applets to 
demonstrate math and physics principles. The Web site includes galleries of pictures of wind tunnels and 
their application, Microsoft PowerPoint (Microsoft Corporation) presentations about wind tunnels that 
have been developed by NASA scientists, and copies of NASA publications on wind tunnels that the user 
can download or read on-line. Construction plans for several student wind tunnels are also available at the 
Web site. 

The format for a typical page from the BGT is shown on Figure 1. At the top of each page is a slide 
describing some topic associated with a wind tunnel; in this case, the operation of a low speed wind 
tunnel. The size of the slide was chosen so that it can be easily copied by the user and dropped into the 
user’s Microsoft PowerPoint presentation. Below the slide is a technical description of the topic of the 
slide with numerous hyperlinks to other pages. The hyperlinks appear as underlined words in different 
colors from the normal text and can be used to obtain a broad span of information related to the topic, or 
greater depth of information on a particular topic. Some of the related topics for this page include the flow 
conditions that affect the forces on the model and the various speed regimes for different types of wind 
tunnels. Detailed information on this page includes the mathematical equations that describe the variation 
of speed in the various sections of the tunnel as a function of the cross-sectional area. Mathematical 
equations and derivations are presented on many pages so that students can see how engineers use math to 
describe physical systems. 


NASA/TM— 2010-216822 


2 




For low speed (constant density) : 

(V x A), = (V x A) 2 


Aerodynamicists use wind tunnels to test models of proposed aircraft. In the tunnel, the engineer can carefully control the flew conditions which 
affect the forces on the aircraft. By making careful measurements of the forces on the model, the engineer can predict the forces on the full scale 
aircraft. And by using special diagnostic techniques, the engineer can better understand and improve the performance of the aircraft. 

Wind tunnels are designed for a specific purpose and speed ranee and there is a wide variety of wind tunnel types and model instrumentation. The 
tunnel shown in the figure is a low-speed, closed tunnel which we are viewing from above. The air inside the tunnel is made to move by the fan on 
the far side of the tunnel. Air continuously circulates through the wind tunnel, passing over the model that is mounted in the test section. 


Figure 1. — Typical beginner’s guide Web page. 


The model is instrumented to provide the engineer with test data To obtain meaningful data, the engineer must insure that 
the flow similarity parameters of Mach number and Reynolds number match the desired flight conditions. Both the Mach 
number and the Reynolds number depend on the velocity and density in the tunnel. 


Activities: 


9-12 | 

9-12 | 

9-12 | 

9-12 | 



Navigation .. 


Wind Tunnel Index 


] 


Aerodynamics Index I Propulsion Index 


Beginner's Guide Home Page 


Figure 2. — Bottom of typical Web page for beginner’s guide. 


At the bottom of every Web page there are navigation buttons, as shown in Figure 2. The activities 
buttons are linked to problems that were generated by teachers at summer workshops hosted at NASA 
Glenn. The “Wind Tunnel Index” button links to a list of all the pages at the BGT. Figure 3 shows the 
current status of the index page. 


NASA/TM— 2010-216822 


3 





MIND TUHHEL HISTORY 

Wind Tunnels of NASA NASA'SP-440 pdf 
On-line Wind Tunnel Information 
Historical Wind Tunnel Gallery 
Whirling Arms & the First Wind Tunnels 


HRIGHT BROTHERS 

Bicycle Test 

1901 Wind Tunnel Tests 

1901 Wind Tunnel 

Wind Tunnel Models 

Wind Tunnel Results 

Lift Balance Design 

Lift Balance Operation 

Lift Eouation of the 1900’s 

Drag Balance Design 

Drag Balance Operation 

Drag Eouation of the 1900's 

Snieaton's Pressure Coefficient 

Interactive Wright 1901 Wind Tunnel 


| HIND TUNNELS 

Wind Tunnels 

Control Rooms 

Wind Tunnel Design 

W'ind Tunnel Theory 

Wind Tunnel Parts 

Low Speed Tunnel Operation 

PowerPoint bv Dr. Judy Van Zante 

PowerPoint bv Dr. Charles Trefnv 


HIND TUNNEL TYPES 

Types of W'ind Tunnels 

Open Return W'ind Tunnel Interactive** 

Closed Return Wind Tunnel 

Blowdown Wind Tunnel 

TunnelSim Open Return Version 


| TEST TCCIIHIQUCC | 

Wind Tunnel Testing 
Force Balance 

Idealized Force and Moment System 
Force Balance Coordinates 
Flow Diagnostics 
Flow Visualization 

TunnelSvs -Wind Tunnel Testing Process 
Interactive Tunnel Test Program 


HIND TUNNEL MODELS 

Aerodynamic Force Model 
Inlet Performance Model 
Nozzle Performance Model 
Model Mounts 

Wing Geometry Interactive** 
Interactive Model Design Program 


CONSTRUCTION 

Build Your Own Tunnel 
Student Wind Tunnel Gallery 
Aviation High Wind Tunnel 
Barberton Wandering Wind Tunnel 
Vision in Aeronautics Wind Tunnel 
Flow Visualization Wind Tunnel 


l_ I HCTnilMrHT * TTOH 

Sta_ _ . .. 

Total Pressure Measurement 
Pitot-Static iPrandtll Tube 
External Force Balance 
Internal Force Balance 
Soring Gage 
Strain Gage 

Hot-Wire Velocity Probe 
Smoke Flow and Tufts 
Surface Oil Flow 
Schlieren Systems 
Laser Sheet 

Laser Doppler Velocimetrv - LDV 
Five Hole Probe - Flow Direction 
Inlet Instrumentation - 40 Probe Rake 


| AERODYNAMICS 

Aerodynamic Forces 
Center of Pressure - co 
Aerodynamic Center 
Similarity Parameters. Interactive” 

Mach Number Interactive** 

Role of the Mach Number 
Mass Flow Choking Interactive** 
Reynolds Number Interactive** 

Boundary Laver 
Bernoulli's Eouation 
Dynamic Pressure 
Lift Coefficient 
Drag Coefficient 

i SCIENCE FUNDAMENTALS ~ 

Three States of Matter 
Newton's Laws of Motion 
Newton's First Law 
Newton’s Second Law - F=ma 
Newton's Third Law - Action & Reaction 

Torquoc iMomontc) 

Equilibrium 
Ohm's Law 
Resistors in Parallel 
Resistors in Series 
Wheatstone Bridge Circuit 


| MATH FUNDAMENTALS 

Functions 

Area 

Volume 

Scalars and Vectors 
Comparing Two Scalars - Ratio 
Comparing Two Vectors 
Vector Addition 
JL Vector Components 
Trigonometry' 

Sitie-Cusine-Taiiuenl 

Ratios in Triangles 

Pythagorean Theorem Interactive** 



Figure 3. — Partial index of the BGT. 


NASA/TM— 2010-216822 


4 


From the index page, a user can move to any other page at the site by clicking on the name of the 
page. With the index page, the user is never more than two clicks from any other page at the Web site. 
The index currently lists nearly one hundred individual pages covering a range of topics including the 
history of wind tunnels, wind tunnel design and operation, test techniques, instrumentation, types of 
tunnels, an extensive section on the Wright Brothers’ 1901 tunnel, plans for building several wind 
tunnels, and the fundamental mathematics and aeronautical science pertaining to wind tunnels. The BGT 
is a “living document” that is constantly being updated to include new features suggested by the users of 
the Web site. The BGT includes Java applet programs on as many pages as possible to allow users to 
learn through interaction. The following sections of the paper will discuss two of the major programs 
available at the BGT. 


TunnelSim 


TunnelSim is a Java applet that allows students to study and design their own low-speed wind tunnel. 
There are two distinct versions of the software; one for an open return tunnel, and the other for a closed 
return tunnel. Figure 4 shows a picture of the open return version of TunnelSim as it appears in the 
browser. The display is divided into five sections. At the upper right are several buttons and a drop down 
menu. The red “Reset” button returns the program to the default conditions. Calculations and input may 
be performed in either Imperial (English) units or metric units by using the menu button. A row of buttons 
describes the components of the wind tunnel; the bellmouth, the test section, and the diffuser. The buttons 
are used to reveal input panels for each component with the current selected panel indicated by the 
yellow-colored button. At the middle right, the selected input panel is displayed. Each component has a 
distinct input panel with its own design variables for input. Input variables include flow parameters, such 



TunnelSim - Open Return 
Version 1 0g 

1-D Simulation Sections 


Pressure-psi 
Velocity-fVs 
Airflow-cu fVs 
Length-ft 
X-Section: 
Width-ft 
(Quadratic 

Height-ft 


14.686 


42 


<£± 


84 


il 


2.0 

Rectangle 


jlJH 


1.99 


- 1.0 


2.614 


Linear 




05 



Bellmouth 


Test Section 


Diffuser 



J2i 




±J 


Velocity 

Reynolds 

Mach 


Test Section Conditions 

Pressure | 
Airflow 
DifT Angle I 


21 8.627 ftfs 


1395195 


0.195 


1 4.305 psi 


218.627 cu W 


5.723 deg 


Figure 4. — TunnelSim open return version. 


NASA/TM— 20 10-216822 


5 
















as the pressure, velocity, and airflow, and geometric parameters that define the shape of the component. 
The student changes the value of an input variable by using the computer mouse to move the sliders, or 
the computer keyboard to type into the input boxes next to the sliders. On some input panels a drop-menu 
is used to select an option. As the value of an input variable is changed, the program instantly calculates 
the values of the flow variables in all of the components of the tunnel as well as the performance variables 
in the test section and graphically displays the results. At the bottom right, the flow conditions through the 
test section are displayed, including the Mach number, Reynolds number, velocity, pressure, and diffuser 
angle. The diffuser angle is the half angle formed by the change in height from the test section exit to the 
diffuser exit divided by the length of the diffuser. When applicable, warning flags are also displayed at 
the lower right as discussed below. At the lower left is the output for the various flow variables through 
the tunnel. The display includes a bar graph and a numerical value for the flow variable at each cross- 
section indicated on the schematic. The user selects the variable to display by using the buttons located 
above the graph; the velocity is shown in this figure. At the upper left, the geometry of the wind tunnel is 
shown. Views from the top and side of the tunnel are indicated on the display. The user can move the 
display within the window by using the computer mouse and resize the display by using the green slider 
at the left. As the user changes geometry input variables, the output geometry changes and the flow 
variable bar graphs are changed. Eight cross-sections are noted on the geometry display corresponding to 
the locations of the output bar graphs. 

The analysis used in TunnelSim assumes low speed flow and neglects the effects of fluid viscosity. 
The flow is assumed to be one-dimensional with a constant density (incompressible). The conservation of 
mass, or continuity, equation specifies that 


p u A = constant 

where p is the density of the flow, u is the velocity, and A is the cross-sectional area. The value of the 
constant is determined at some selected cross-section and remains constant throughout the tunnel. For the 
one-dimensional flow through the tunnel, Bernoulli’s equation can be used to relate the velocity and 
density to the local static pressure, p, in the tunnel: 

P + V 2 p u" = constant 

Since the density is assumed constant through the tunnel, the continuity equation reduces to: 

Ml A 1 — U2 A2 

where the subscripts 1 and 2 represent different locations in the tunnel. As the student changes geometry 
input variables, the program calculates the change in the local cross-sectional area and the resulting 
change in velocity and pressure. 

There are certain combinations of input variables that violate the assumptions used in the analysis. If 
a speed of 300 mph occurs anywhere in the tunnel, the density in the tunnel would not be constant 
because of compressibility effects. If the program detects a high velocity in the tunnel, a red flashing 
warning is displayed at the lower right of the screen to warn the student that compressibility effects are 
present. If the diffusion angle from the test section to the exit exceeds 7°, another warning is flashed to 
warn about possible flow separation in the diffuser. The analysis does not include viscosity, so it cannot 
predict boundary layer development or separation. But experience has shown that a diffusion angle of 7° 
or greater often results in boundary layer separation in diffuser ducts. 


NASA/TM— 2010-216822 


6 



TunnelSys 


TunnelSys is a series of three Java application programs that simulate the systems engineering 
process of wind tunnel analysis. The separate programs allow students to design a wind tunnel model, test 
that model in a simulated tunnel, and post-process the data generated during the test to develop 
performance plots for the design. The individual TunnelSys programs communicate with each other via 
data files. Because Java does not allow the reading or writing of files from an applet, the programs of 
TunnelSys are written as Java applications and must be compiled and executed on a personal computer 
without access to the Internet. Because Java is platform-independent, any operating system may be used 
on the computer. The user must download and install the Java Development Kit (JDK) on the computer 
before compiling the programs. The source codes for Tunnelsys are provided for download at the BGT. 
An applet version of each program with an on-line user’s manual is provided so students can learn how 
the programs operate without saving data files. Each of the applications of TunnelSys writes an output file 
which can be printed by the student as a record of their calculations. 

The TunnelSys design program is shown in Figure 5. The design engineer must design a wing model 
that will be wind tunnel tested to determine the lift of the design. At the upper left is a computer generated 
picture of the wing model design. Below the picture are a series of input boxes and sliders that allow the 
design engineer to change the camber, span, and chord of the model. As the input parameters are changed, 
the wing drawing is also changed. Output boxes at the bottom of the figure provide information on the 
wing area and aspect ratio, while engineering drawings of the wing are shown at the right. When the 
design engineer has completed the design, the blue “Save Data” button is pressed and a form appears on 
the screen to allow the design engineer to create and save a data file on the computer. The data file can 
contain several different wing designs that can be wind tunnel tested by another student. Output from the 
design program is used as input to a wind tunnel simulator. 



Figure 5. — TunnelSys design program. 


NASA/TM— 2010-216822 


7 







The wind tunnel simulator is shown in Figure 6. At the upper left is an animated picture of the model 
in the wind tunnel. On the computer screen, the blue and white particles flow past the model and separate 
from the upper surface should the angle of attack become too great. The test engineer sets the speed in the 
tunnel, the angle of attack of the wing, and the static pressure by using the sliders and input boxes located 
below the wing graphic. The test engineer selects the wing model for testing by pressing the yellow “Load 
Models” button. A browser screen appears that allows the test engineer to select the data file generated by 
the design engineer. At the bottom right the test engineer selects the particular model in the file for testing 
and the geometric parameters associated with the wing design are shown in the boxes at the lower right. 
As air flows over the model, the diagnostic plot of the static pressure variation around the airfoil section 
of the wing is shown at the upper right. Below the plot is a control panel for a diagnostic probe that can be 
moved through the test section of the tunnel. The probe location is given by the tip of the L-shaped white 
line in the graphics window at the left. The probe can display the local value of the velocity or pressure or 
can inject “smoke” into the tunnel for flow diagnostics. Below the probe control panel on the right, the 
program displays the calculated value of the lift of the wing. To record the output from a wind tunnel test, 
the test engineer uses the blue buttons in the middle of the program at the left. There are three types of 
tests that can be conducted: varying the speed while holding the angle of attack and pressure constant; 
varying the angle of attack while holding the speed and pressure constant; varying the pressure while 
holding the speed and angle of attack constant. When the test engineer selects the type of test, a screen 
appears to select a name and location for the output data file containing the results. The test engineer then 
presses the black “Begin Test” button and changes the selected variable using the slider or input box. Data 
is recorded by pushing the blue “Take Data Point” button and then a new value of the variable is selected. 
This process is repeated until the “End Test” button is pushed. Output boxes record the test number and 
point number as the output is generated. The test engineer may perform additional tests and store the 
results in the same output file. The output file from the test program is used as input for the data reduction 
program. 



Speed-mph 1 62.75 
Angle-deg 1 9.56 
Pressure- psf | 21 1 6.0 


iJ~I 

li 

<1 


Load Models 1 1 Models Loaded -1 models 


Probe ON 

f 

—1 

Pressure 
4 ^6 

Velocity 

Pressure 


f- 

0 10 
1.467 xIO 1 

Smoke 

Probe OFF 

Jj 

J 


Select Test: 


Test#: 


Speed I Angle of Attack I Pressure 


Begin Test 



Density 

Dynamic Press 
Select-* 
Chord 


0.00237 slug. 


1 0.058 lbsffi A 


Span 

Units: | Imperial Aspect Ratio 


Lift 

Total Pressure 
Model# [7 

Camber 
Thickness 
Wing Area 



21 26.058 lbs. 



Figure 6. — TunnelSys wind tunnel test program. 


NASA/TM— 20 10-216822 

























The data reduction program is shown in Figure 7. The data analysis engineer begins by selecting the 
data for analysis by clicking on the “Load Data” button. A browser appears and the analysis engineer 
selects the data file generated by the test engineer. Since a single file may contain multiple tests, the 
analysis engineer enters the test number and clicks on the “Open Test” button. The number of data points 
and the type of test is noted by the program and a plot of the data is displayed at the upper left. The 
analysis engineer may rescale the plot by using the buttons on the graphics panel. The analysis engineer 
may also select a different plot display by using the blue buttons on the left. At the upper right of the 
program is an additional display window. The analysis engineer may select to compare the plot at the left 
with other test plots in the window at the upper right, or the engineer can display a “movie” of a previous 
test point, as shown in the figure. The selection is made with the “Display” menu located below the right 
window. Details of the selected test point are given in the output boxes at the right. 

With the information generated by the analysis engineer, the lift performance of the wing design has 
been determined. The team engineers (design engineer, test engineer, and analysis engineer) must now 
determine if the process should be repeated to produce a better wing design or whether to proceed to 
flight test of the design. When used in a design class, the team should probably include a “program 
manager” to keep the team members on schedule and to determine when the design is finished. As 
currently configured, TunnelSys can only determine the lift of the wing design. Future versions of the 
program will also include the drag of the wing. 



Select Test#: 1 1 


L vs Angle 


Open Test 1 1 1 1 data points for this test 


Type ofTest: Vary Angle of Attack 


Plot Selection 


Civs Angle 


- Decrease 

F" 

Speed 

108.0 mph j* 


Lvs Pressure 

Lvs Speed 

Civs Pressure 

Civs Speed 


Static Pressure 
Total Pressure 
Lift (L) 
Geometry: 
Chord 
Span 

Aspect Ratio 


21 1 6.0 lbsffl A 


2145.796 lbs. 


142 lbs 


Model# 



Angle of Attack 
Density 

Dynamic Press 
Coefficient (Cl) 

Camber 
Thickness 
Wing Area 


12.36 


0.00237 slug. 


29.796 Ibs/T 


1 46 


Airfoil 


0.0 


12.5 


3.281 ft A 2 


Figure 7. — TunnelSys data reduction program. 


NASA/TM— 2010-216822 


9 




























Conclusions 


High speed personal computers coupled with the Internet, interactive operating systems, and 
computer graphics provide many opportunities for new techniques to learn science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics. This paper has presented two new products that use interactive flow 
simulators and a Web-based textbook. The subject of wind tunnel design is used to introduce the ideas of 
functions, graphing, physical units, test techniques, and flow measurement and visualization. A guiding 
principal in the development of the BGT, TunnelSim and TunnelSyS is to do more than just present 
answers to problems; it is to involve student in the learning process by having them work with the 
package to achieve a result. When using TunnelSim, as the design parameters are changed, the output 
panels show the variation in conditions throughout the tunnel, the change in the configuration of the 
tunnel, and the change in test section performance. With control of the input conditions, the student learns 
how a wind tunnel operates and performs. More importantly, students see how graphs are used to present 
data, and develop a feel for the physical concepts of velocity, pressure, density, and the units used to 
describe them. 

TunnelSys has been developed to introduce a team of students to the systems engineering aspects of 
wind tunnel testing. Each student is responsible for their own part of the wind tunnel testing process; 
design of a model, testing of the model, and post-processing the data from the test. Communication 
between the team members and a project manager is important for the success of the project. With the 
TunnelSys computer programs, students can practice the process without the expense of actually building 
and testing a physical model. 


References 

1. Reed, J.A., and Aijeh, A.A., “A JAVA Simulator for Teaching Gas Turbine Operation,” AIAA Paper 
97-0850, 1997. 

2. Devenport, W.J. and Shetz, J.A., “Boundary Layer Codes for Students in Java,” ASME 1998 Fluids 
Engineering Summer Meeting, June 21-25, Washington, D.C., 1998. 

3. Martindale, J., Calculators On-Line Center, http://www.martindalecenter.com/ 
Calculators4_l_Aero.html, hosted by University of California, 2009. 

4. Benson, T.J., “EngineSim and the Beginner’s Guide to Propulsion,” ASME 2001 Fluids Summer 
Meeting, ASME Paper FEDSM2001-18228, 2001. 

5. Hill, P.G., and Peterson, C.R., Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Propulsion, Addison- Wesley 
Publishing Co., Reading, MA, 1965. 

6. Mattingly, J.D., Elements of Gas Turbine Propulsion, McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, NY, 1996. 

7. Benson, T.J., “Using Computers in Fluids Engineering Education,” ASME 1998 Fluids Engineering 
Summer Meeting, ASME Paper FEDSM98-5 135, 1998. 

8. Pope, A., and Rae W.H., Low-Speed Wind Tunnel Testing, John Wiley and Sons, New York, NY, 
1984. 

9. Pope, A., and Goin K.L., High-Speed Wind Tunnel Testing, Krieger Publishing, Malabar, FL, 1965. 


NASA/TM— 2010-216822 


10 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the 
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this 
burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302. 
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB 
control number. 

PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 

1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 
01-10-2010 

2. REPORT TYPE 

Technical Memorandum 

3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

The Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels With TunnelSim and TunnelSys 

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 



5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Benson, Thomas, J.; Galica, Carol, A.; Vila, Anthony, J. 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

WBS 561581.02.02.03.03 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

E- 17451 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, DC 20546-0001 

10. SPONSORING/MONITOR'S 
ACRONYM(S) 

NASA 

11. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
REPORT NUMBER 

NASA/TM-20 10-2 16822 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Unclassified-Unlimited 

Subject Categories: 01,61, and 99 

Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov 

This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 443-757-5802 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

14. ABSTRACT 

The Beginner’s Guide to Wind Tunnels is a Web-based, on-line textbook that explains and demonstrates the history, physics, and 
mathematics involved with wind tunnels and wind tunnel testing. The Web site contains several interactive computer programs to 
demonstrate scientific principles. TunnelSim is an interactive, educational computer program that demonstrates basic wind tunnel design and 
operation. TunnelSim is a Java (Sun Microsystems Inc.) applet that solves the continuity and Bernoulli equations to determine the velocity 
and pressure throughout a tunnel design. TunnelSys is a group of Java applications that mimic wind tunnel testing techniques. Using 
TunnelSys, a team of students designs, tests, and post-processes the data for a virtual, low speed, and aircraft wing. 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 

Aeronautics; Mathematical and Computer Sciences; General 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

17. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

uu 

18. NUMBER 
OF 

PAGES 

16 

19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

STI Help Desk (email:help@sti.nasa.gov) 

a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS 

U U page 

U 

19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area code) 

443-757-5802 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 



































