N89-16330 


TOWARDS A GENERAL OBJECT-ORIENTED 
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGY 

Ed Seidewitz / Code 554 
Mike Stark / Code 552 
Goddard Space Flight Center 
Greenbelt, MD 20771 


1. INTRODUCTION 

An object is an abstract software model of a problem domain 
entity. Objects are packages of both data and operations on 
that data [Goldberg 83, Booch 83]. The Ada (tm) package 
construct is representative of this general notion of an object. 
Object-oriented design is the technique of using objects as the 
basic unit of modularity in system design. The Software 
Engineering Laboratory at the Goddard Space Flight Center- is 
currently involved in a pilot project to develop a flight 
dynamics simulator in Ada (approximately 40,000 statements) 
using object-oriented methods. Several authors have applied 
object-oriented concepts to Ada (e.g., [Booch 83, Cherry 85b]). 
In our experience we have found these methodologies limited 
[Nelson 86]. As a result we have synthesized a more general 
approach which allows a designer to apply powerful, 
object-oriented principles to a wide range of applications and 
at all stages of design. The present paper provides an overview 
of our approach. Further, we also consider how object-oriented 
design fits into the overall software life-cycle. 


2. OBJECTS AND OBJECT DIAGRAMS 

We can model a procedure as a mathematical function. That 
is, given a certain set of inputs (arguments and global data), a 
procedure always produces the same set of outputs (results and 
global updates). A procedure, for example, cannot directly 
model an address book, because an address book has memory (a set 
of addresses) which can be accessed and updated. Normally, the 
solution to this is to place such memory in global variables. 

Figure 1 gives a representation of the above situation. 
This diagram uses a notation similar to [Yourdon 79] to show 
both data and control flow. The arrow from CALLER to PROCEDURE 
indicates that CALLER transfers control to PROCEDURE. Note that 
there is an implicit ret ur n of control when PROCEDURE finishes. 
The smaller arrows in figure 1 show the data flows, which may go 
in either direction along the control arrow. Also, figure 1 
includes an explicit symbol for the GLOBAL DATA. Control arrows 
directed towards this symbol denote data access, even though 
control never really flows into the data, of course. This 
convention indicates that the data is always passive and never 
Initiates any action. 


D.4.6. 1 




FIGURE 1 A procedure call 


FIGURE 2 An ADDRESS BOOK object 


The use of global storage leaves data open to illicit 
modification. To avoid this, an object packages some memory 
together with all allowable operations on it. We can model an 
object as a mathematical "state machine" with some internal 
state which can be accessed and modified by a limited number of 
mathematical functions. We thus implement an object as a 
packaged set of procedures and internal data, as shown in 
figure 2. For an address book object, the internal memory would 
be a set of addresses, and the allowable operations would be 
accessing an address by name, adding an address, etc. Unlike a 
procedure, the same arguments to an object operation may produce 
different results at different times, depending on the hidden 
internal state. We will diagram an object showing only its 
operational connections to other objects, as in the object 
diagram of figure 3 [Seidewitz 85a]. 

When there are several control paths on a complicated 
object diagram, it rapidly becomes cumbersome to show data flows 
or all individual procedure control flows. Therefore, an arrow 
between objects on an object diagram indicates that one object 
invokes one or more of the operations provided by another object 
and is not marked with data flow arrows. Object de scri pt i o ns 
for each object on a diagram provide details of the data flow. 
An object description includes a list of all operations provided 
by an object and, for each arrow leaving the object, a list of 
operations used from another object. For example, the object 


D.4.6.2 







description for DATE BOOK from figure 3 is: ^ . 

Provides : 

Next Appointment () NAME + ADDRESS 
Get_Appoi ntment (DATE + TIME) NAME + ADDRESS 
Make_Appoi ntment (DATE + TIME + NAME) 

Cancel _Appo i ntment (DATE + TIME) 

Uses : 

ADDRESS BOOK 
Look_Up 

CLOCK 

GetDate 
Get_T i me 

Data in parentheses are arguments which flow al^ong the control 
arrow, while unparenthesized data are results which are 
returned . 




FIGURE 3 A simple schedule organizer 


FIGURE 4 Parent-child hierarchy 


D.4.6.3 






3. OBJECT-ORIENTED DESIGN 


The intent of an object is to represent a problem domain 
entity. The concept of abstraction deals with how an object 
presents this representation to other objects [Dijkstra 68, 
Liskov 74, Booch 83]. There is a spectrum of abstraction, from 
objects which closely model problem domain entities to objects 
which really have no reason for existence. The following are 
some points in this scale: 


Best 


f 

Worst 


IUllfy Abstraction - An object represents a useful 
model of a problem domain entity. 

Action Abstraction - An object provides a generalized 
set of operations which all perform the same kind of 
f unct i on . 

Virtual Machine Abstraction - An object groups 
together operations which are all used by some 
superior level of control or all use some junior level 
set of operations. 

Coincidental fAbs t ractlonl - An object packages a set 
of operations which have no relation to each other. 


The stronger the abstraction of an object, the more details are 
suppressed by the abstract concept. The principle of 
information hiding states that such details should be kept 
secret from other objects [Parnas 72, Booch 83], so as to better 
preserve the abstraction modeled by the object. 

The principles of abstraction and information hiding 
provide the main guides for creating "good" objects. These 
objects must then be connected together to form an 
object-oriented design [Seidewitz 85b]. Following [Rajlich 85], 
we consider two orthogonal hierarchies in software system 
designs. The fiiient^chUd hierarchy deals with the 
decomposition of larger objects into smaller component objects. 
The seniority hierarchy deals with the organization of a set of 
objects into "layers". Each layer defines a virtual m a c h^ri e 
which provides services to senior layers [Dijkstra 68]. A major 
strength of object diagrams is that they can distinctly 
represent these hierarchies. 

The parent-child hierarchy is directly expressed by 
leveling object diagrams (see figure 4). At its top level, any 
complete system may be represented by a single object. For 
example, figure 5 shows a diagram of the complete SCHEDULE 
ORGANIZER of the last section. The object SCHEDULE ORGANIZER 
represents the "parent" of the complete object diagram of 
figure 3. The boxes labeled "USER" and "CLOCK" are external 
entitles, objects which are not included in the system, but 
which communicates with the tog level system object. Note the 
arrow labeled "RUN". B> convention, RUN is the operation used 
to initially invoke the entire system. 


D.4.6.4 


VIRTU Al. 
MACHINE 
INTERFACE 1 





RGURE 5 External Entities Diagram 


FIGURE 6 Seniority hierarchy 


Figure 3 is the decomposition of the SCHEDULE ORGANIZER of 
figure 5. Beginning at the system level, each object can be 
refined in this way into a lower level object diagram. The 
result is a leveled set of object diagrams which completely 
describe the structure of a system. At the lowest level, 
objects are completely decomposed into primitive objects, 
procedures and internal state data stores, resulting in diagrams 
similar to f i gure 2 . 

The seniority hierarchy is expressed by the topology of 
connections on a single object diagram (see figure 6). Any 
layer in a seniority hierarchy can call on any operation in 
junior layers, but never any operation in a senior layer. Thus, 
all cyclic relationships between objects must be contained 
within a virtual machine layer. Object diagrams are drawn with 
the seniority hierarchy shown vertically. Each senior object 
can be designed as if the operations provided by junior layers 
were "primitive operations" in an extended language. Each 
virtual machine layer will generally contain several objects, 
each designed according to the principles of abstraction and 
information hiding. 

The main advantage of a seniority hierarchy is that it 
reduces the coupling between objects. This is because all 
objects in one virtual machine layer need to know nothing about 
senior layers. Further, the centralization of the procedural 


D.4.6.5 










and data flow control in senior objects can make a system easier 
to understand and modify. However, this very central i zati on can 
cause a messy bottleneck. In such cases, the complexity of 
senior levels can be traded off against the coupling of junior 
levels. The important point is that the strength of the 
seniority hierarchy in a design can be chosen from a spectrum of 
possibilities, with the best design generally lying between the 
extremes. This gives the designer great power and flexibility 
in adapting system designs to specific applications. 

In the simple automated plant simulation system shown in 
figure 7, the junior level components do not interact directly. 
This design is somewhat like an object-oriented version of the 
structured designs of [Yourdon 79]. We can remove the data flow 
control from the senior object and let the junior objects pass 
data directly between themselves, using operations within the 
virtual machine layer (see figure 8). The senior object has 
been reduced to simply activating various operations in the 
virtual machine layer, with very little data flow. We can even 
remove the senior object completely by distributing control 
among the junior level objects (see figure 9). The splitting of 
the RUN control arrow in figure 11 means that the three objects 
are activated simultaneously and that they run concurrently. 
The seniority hierarchy has collapsed, leaving a homologous or 
non-hierarchical design [Yourdon 79] (no seniority hierarchy, 
that is; the parent-child hierarchy still remains). A design 
which is homologous at all decomposition levels is very similar 
to what would be produced by the PAMELA (tm) methodology of 
[Cherry 85a, Cherry 85b]. 



FIGURE 7 A simple plant automation 
simulation system 


FIGURE 8 plant simulator with 
junior-level connections 


D.4.6.6 









FIGURE 10 EMS context diagram 

FIGURE 9 Plant simulator homologous design 


4. OBJECT-ORIENTED LIFE CYCLE 

Object diagrams and the object-oriented design concepts 
discussed above can be used as part of an object-oriented life 
cycle. To do this, we must show that a specification can be 
translated into object diagrams, and that object diagrams map 
readily into Ada. We use structured analysis for developing the 
specification [DeMarco 79]. The data flow diagrams of a 
structured specification provide a leveled, graphical notation 
containing the information needed to represent abstract 
entities, but in a form emphasizing data flow and data 
transformati on . 

Abstraction analyses is the process of making a transition 
from a structured specification to an object-oriented design 
[Stark 86]. We will use a simplified version of an Electronic 
Message System (EMS) as an example of abstraction analysis. 
Figure 10 is the context diagram for EMS, and Figure 11 is the 
level 0 data flow diagram. EMS must allow the user to send, 
read, and respond to messages, to obtain a directory of valid 
users to which messages can be sent, and to add and delete users 
from that directory. 

The first step of abstraction analysis is to find a central 
sniffy. This is the entity that represents the best abstraction 
for what the system does or models. The central entity is 
identified in a similar way to transform analysis [Yourdon 79], 
but instead of searching for where incoming and outgoing data 
flows are most abstract we look for a set of processes and data 
stores that are most abstract. It may sometimes be necessary to 


D.4.6.7 





look at lower level data flow diagrams to find the central 
entity. EMS is a system serving a person sitting at a terminal 
sending and receiving messages. On figure 11 we have circled 
the "current user" data store and the process 1.0 GET EMS 
COMMAND. Together this process and data store represent the 
user entering commands at a terminal. Thus they represent the 
central entity. 

Next, we need to find entities that directly support the 
central entity. We do this by following data flows away from 
the central entity and grouping processes and data stores into 
abstract entities. In our example the USER DIRECTORY data store 
and the three processes (2.0, 4.0 and 5.0) supporting it form an 
entity. The process 3.0 ACCESS QUEUES with the data store USER 
QUEUE INDEX also form an entity. All these entities are circled 
and labeled on figure 11. We continue to follow the data flows 
and to identify entities until all the processes and data stores 
are associated with an entity. 

Figure 12 is the entity 2 ra£h for EMS. Squares represent 
entities, lines with arrows represent flow of control from one 
entity to another, and lines with no arrowhead represent 
interactions where flow of control is not yet determined. A 
"most senior" entity is placed into the design to give an 
initial flow of control. In the EMS example, entity EMS is this 
most senior object, and we have the USER INTERFACE entity 
"controlling" the external entity USER. This flow of control 



FIGURE 11 EMS level 0 data flow diagram 


D.4.6.8 




FIGURE 12 EMS entity graph FIGURE 13 EMS object diagram 

into USER will ultimately be implemented as read and write 
operations. Note also that the USER entity controls EMS. This 
flow of control represents the user invoking the EMS system. 
After this invocation control resides with EMS until the system 
is exited. All other potential interfaces are shown by lines 
with no arrows. The numbers inside the squares represent the 
processes and the data stores contained in the entity. This 
provides traceability from requirements to design. 

The entity graph is the starting point for object 
identification. It shows entities with the highest abstraction 
possible and also shows all the possible interconnections 
between the entities. Since we are trying to balance design 
complexity, object abstraction, and control hierarchy, we will 
alter the entity graph to form the final object diagram. In EMS 
the entities are easily mapped into objects. The entities USER, 
USER INTERFACE, and EMS form a cyclic graph and therefore are on 
the same virtual machine level. We cannot combine an external 
entity into an object, but combining EMS and USER INTERFACE 
yields a single object that is senior to USER DIRECTORY and 
MESSAGE CENTER. Combining the two junior objects would simplify 
the design, but at the expense of abstraction, as the message 
passing mechanisms have little to do with the directory. We 
have also chosen to make USER DIRECTORY senior to MESSAGE 
CENTER, since the data flows are from USER DIRECTORY into data 
stores contained by MESSAGE CENTER. Figure 13 shows the 
resulting object diagram. 


D.4.6.9 










Needless to say, identifying objects is not always this 
simple. Usually there is a trade-off made between level of 
abstraction and design complexity, or a balancing of these two 
considerations and the virtual machine hierarchy. When these 
situations occur it is still the designer’s judgement that must 
determine which side of the trade-off matters more for the 
application being designed. 

Once the object diagrams are drawn we can identify the 
operations provided and used by each object. In the case of 2.0 
USER DIRECTORY the operations are identified by examining the 
primitive processes contained within processes 2.0, 4.0 and 5.0 
on figure 11. The data exchanged are identified by looking at 
data flows crossing the object boundaries, with the detailed 
information about the data being found in the data dictionary. 
The object description is produced by matching the operations 
and the data. The description generated for 2.0 USER DIRECTORY 
is as foil ows : 


Provides : 

Li st_Names () L I ST_0F_NAMES 

Add_User ( USER_NAME + PASSWORD) 

Del ete_User (USE R_N AM E ) 

Signon (USER_NAME + PASSWORD) VAL I D I TY_F t AG 
Uses : 

3.0 MESSAGE QUEUES 
ResetQueue 
Create_New_Queue 

Using the subset data flow diagram of processes and data 
stores that an object contains, the process of object 
identification can be repeated to produce a child object 
diagram. The only difference is that entities are identified 
based on how they support the object’s operations, not by 
finding a central entity. This process is used until the lowest 
level of data flow diagrams is exhausted. 


The transition from an object diagram to Ada is 
straightforward. The relationship between object diagram 
notations and Ada language features is: 


Object Diagram 

Object 

Procedure 

State 

Arrow 

Actor 


Ada Construct 

Package 

Subprogram 

Package or task variables 
Procedure/function/entry call 
Entries/Accepts 

(not covered in this paper) 


Package specifications are derived from the list of operations 
provided by an object. For the EMS USER DIRECTORY object the 
package specification is: 


D.4.6. 10 



package UserDi rectory is 

subtype USER_NAME is STRING( 1 . . 20) ; 
subtype PASSWORD is STRING ( 1 .. 6) ; 

type LISTOFNAMES is array {POSITIVE range <>) of USERNAME; 

procedure Signon (User: in USER_NAME; PW : in PASSWORD; 
Valid_User : out Boolean); 

procedure Add_User (U: in USERNAME; PW : in PASSWORD); 
procedure DeleteUser (U: in USERNAME); 
function ListNames return LISTOFNAMES ; 

end UserDi rectory ; 

The package specifications derived from the level 0 object 
diagram are placed in the declarative part of the top level Ada 
procedure as follows: 

procedure EMS is 

package Userlnterf ace is 
procedure Start; 

end Userlnterf ace ; 

package UserDi rectory is 

end UserDi rectory ; 

package Message_Queues is 

end Message_Queues ; 

package body Userlnterf ace is separate; 

package body UserDi rectory is separate; 

package body MessageQueues is separate; 

beg i n 

Use r_ Inter face. Start; 
end EMS; 

For lower level object diagrams the mapping is similar, with 
package specifications being nested in the package body of the 
parent object. States are mapped into package body variables. 
This direct mapping produces a highly nested program structure. 
To implement the same object diagram with library units would 
require the addition of a package to contain data types used by 
two or more objects. This added package would serve as a global 
data dictionary. 

The process of transforming object diagrams to Ada is 
followed down all the child object diagrams until we are at the 
level of implementing individual subprograms. If the mapping is 
done without explicitly creating library units the lowest level 
subprograms will all be implemented as subunits, rather than by 
embedding the code in package bodies. 


D.4.6. 11 


5. EVALUATION OF THE METHODOLOGY 


To measure how well abstraction analysis works as a 
methodology we must first define our criteria for a good 
methodology. We will use Barry Boehm’s "Seven Principles of 
Software Engineering" [Boehm 76] as a basis of comparison. 
These principles are: 

Manage using a sequential life cycle plan 

Maintain disciplined product control 

Perform continuous validation 

Use enhanced top down structured design 

Maintain clear accountability for results 

Use better and fewer people 

Maintain a commitment to improve the process 

Abstraction analysis supports all these principles. .The 
111® cycle supported by providing the abstraction 

analysis method for producing object diagrams, which are in turn 
mappable into Ada. This also provides a means of disciplined 

by tracing how Ada software implements an object 
oriented design, and also tracing how the design meets the 
specification. This traceability allows a manager to see that 
software meets its specification, and allows maintenance of 
specifications, design, and software to be cons i stent . Grady 
Booch’s [Booch 83] work influenced our methodology, but did not 
provide a sufficient means of specifying large systems. Another 
drawback is that Booch does not define a formal mapping from a 
speci f ication to a design. 

The graphic notation supports a top down approach to 
software development. The leveling of both dataflow diagrams 
and of object diagrams allows the designer to start at a high 
level and work top-down to a design solution. The use of 
graphics also supports continuous validation by making design 
walkthroughs and iterative changes easier tasks to perform. 
Both Booch and Cherry [Cherry 85b] use graphics, but Booch’s 
notation was not designed for large applications, and Cherry’s 
methodology stops graphing after all the concurrent objects have 
been identified. The graphics used by structured analysis 
[DeMarco 79] provide the best analogy to how graphics are used 
in the object diagram notation. 

The life cycle model we have defined also supports the 
remaining three principles. Objects are defined in the design 
phase and implemented as separate Ada compilation units. Tools 
such as unit development folders can be used to maintain 

for completion of the design, implementation, and 
testing of objects. It is hoped that the object-oriented 
approach and the use of Ada will enhance both productivity and 
software reliability. This assertion will be tested by 
measuring the outcome of the pilot project in the Software 
Engineering Laboratory at Goddard Space Flight Center. The 
success of this methodology would allow better and fewer people 
to concentrate more effort on producing a good design. 


D.4.6. 12 



Finally, we are certainly committed to improving the 
£rocess. The object diagram notation and abstraction analysis 
have already seen much change since the initial versions were 
defined. Further refinement will be to define criteria for 
using parallelism, criteria for choosing between library units 
and the nested approach defined above, and to generate object- 
oriented approaches to software specifications and software 
testing. 

6. CONCLUSION 

Object diagrams have been used to design a 5000 statement 
team trainging exercise and to design the entire dynamics 
simulator. They are also being used to design another 50,000 
statement Ada system and a personnal computer based system that 
will be written in Modula II. Our design methodology evolved 
out of these experiences as well as the limitations of other 
methods we studied. Object diagrams, abstraction analysis and 
associated principles provide a unified framework which 
encompasses concepts from [Yourdon 79], [Booch 83] and 
[Cherry 85b]. This general object-oriented approach handles 
high level system design, possibly with concurrency, through 
object-oriented decomposition down to a completely functional 
level. We are currently studying how object-oriented concepts 
can be used in other phases of the software life-cycle, such as 
specification and testing. When complete, this synthesis should 
produce a truly general object-oriented development methodology. 


TRADEMARKS 

Ada is a trademark of the US Government (Ada Joint Program 
Office). 

PAMELA is a trademark of George W. Cherry. 


REFERENCES 
[Boehm 76] 

[Booch 83] 
[Cherry 85a] 

[Cherry 85b] 
[DeMarco 79] 


Boehm, Barry W. "Seven Basic Principles of 
Software Engineering," NASA/GSF C Engineering 
Colloquium, 1976. 

Grady Booch. Software Engineering with Ada, 
Benjamin/Cummings, 1983. " ' ~ 

George W. Cherry. PAMELA^ Process Abstraction 
Method for Embedded Large Applications, Course 
notes, Thought**Tool s , January 1985. 

George W. Cherry and Grad S. Crawford. The 
PAMELA it m| Methodology, November 1985. 

Tom DeMarco. Structured Analysis and System 
Specification , Prentice-Hall, 1979. 


D.4.6.13 


[Dijkstra 68] 
[Goldberg 83] 
[Liskov 74] 

[Nelson 86] 

[Parnas 72] 

[Rajlich 85] 

[Seidewitz 85a] 
[Seidewitz 85b] 

[Stark 86] 

[Yourdon 79] 


Edsgar W. Dijkstra. "The Structure of the ’THE’ 
Multiprogramming System," Communications of the 
ACM, May 1968. 

Adele Goldberg and David Robison. Smalltalk 80j 
The Language and Its Implementation . 
Addi son-Wesl ey , 1983. 

Barbara H. Liskov and S. N. Zilles. 
"Programming with Abstract Data Types," Proc. of 
the ACM Symp. on Very High Level Languages, 
1ICPLAN Notices, April 1974. 

Robert W. Nelson. "NASA Ada Experiment 
Attitude Dynamic Simulator," Proc^ of the 
Washington Ada Symposium, March, 1986. 

David L. Parnas. "On the Criteria to be Used in 
Decomposing Systems into Modules," 

Communications of the ACM, December 1972. 

Vaclav Rajlich. "Paradigms for Design and 

Implementation in Ada," Communications of the 
ACM, July 1985. 

Ed Seidewitz. Object Diagrams, unpublished GSFC 
report, May 1985. 

Ed Seidewitz. Some Principles of Object 
Oriented Design, unpublished GSFC report, August 
1985. 

Mike Stark. Abstraction Analysis j_ From 

Structured Specification to Object-Oriented 
Design, unpublished GSFC report, April 1986. 

Edward Yourdon and Larry L. Constantine. 
Structured Design j_ Fundamentals of a Discipline 
of Computer Program and Systems Design, 
Prentice-Hall, 1979. 


D.4.6. 14 



SESSION D. 5 
Panel Chair: 

Panel members: 


CAIS PANEL 
David Pruett 

NASA Johnson Space Center 


Clyde Roby 
Jack Krammer 

Institute for Defense Analysis 
Alexandria, Virginia 

Sue LeGrand 
SofTech 

Houston, Texas 

Robert Stevenson 
Gould Electronics 
Fort Lauderdale, Florida 

Robert Fainter 
Virginia Tech 
Blacksburg, Virginia 

Hal Hart 

TRW Defense Systems Group 
Redondo Beach, California 


D.5.1 



