by use of the OGC Style Layer Descriptor 
(SLD) protocol. Full-precision spectral 
arithmetic processing is also available, by 
useof acustom SLD extension. This server 
can dynamically add shaded relief based 
on the Lunar elevation to any image layer. 
This server also implements tiled WMS 
protocol and super-overlay KM L for high- 
performance client application programs. 

T his program was written by L ucian Plesea 
of Caltech and Trent H areof the United States 
Geological Survey for NASA's Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. 

T his software is available for commercial li- 
censing. PleasecontactKarina Edmondsofthe 
California Institute of Technology at (626) 
395-2322. Refer to NPO-45951. 


M Expressions Module for 
the Satellite 0 rbit Analysis 
Program 

The Expressions Module is a software 
module that has been incorporated into 
the Satellite Orbit Analysis Program 
(SOAP). The module includes an ex- 
pressions-parser submodule built on top 
of an analytical system, enabling the user 
to define logical and numerical variables 
and constants. The variables can capture 
output from SOAP orbital-prediction 
and geometric-engine computations. 
The module can combine variables and 
constants with built-in logical operators 
(such as Boolean AND, OR, and NOT), 
relational operators (such as>, <, or =), 
and mathematical operators (such as ad- 
dition, subtraction, multiplication, divi- 
sion, modulus, exponentiation, differen- 
tiation, and integration). Parentheses 
can be used to specify precedence of op- 
erations. 

The module contains a library of 
mathematical functions and operations, 
including logarithms, trigonometric 
functions, Bessel functions, mini- 
mum/maximum operations, and float- 
ing-point-to-integer conversions. The 
module supports combinations of time, 
distance, and angular units and hasa di- 
mensional-analysis component that 
checks for correct usage of units. A 
parser based on the Flex language and 
the Bison program looks for and indi- 
cates errors in syntax. SOAP expressions 
can be built using other expressions as 
arguments, thus enabling the user to 
build analytical trees. A graphical user 
interface facilitates use. 

T his program was devdoped by R obert Carn- 
right, David Stodden, Jim Paget, and John 
Coggi of Caltech forNASA'sJetPropulsion Lab- 
oratory. 


T his software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to N PO -45052. 


© Virtual Satellite 

Virtual Satellite (VirtualSat) is a com- 
puter program that creates an environ- 
ment that facilitates the development, 
verification, and validation of flight soft- 
ware for a single spacecraft or for multi- 
ple spacecraft flying in formation. In this 
environment, enhanced functionality 
and autonomy of navigation, guidance, 
and control systems of a spacecraft are 
provided by a virtual satellite — that is, a 
computational model that simulates the 
dynamic behavior of the spacecraft. 

Within thisenvironment, it is possi ble 
to execute any associated software, the 
development of which could benefit 
from knowledge of, and possible inter- 
action (typically, exchange of data) 
with, the virtual satellite. Examplesof as- 
sociated software include programs for 
simulating spacecraft power and ther- 
mal-management systems. Thisenviron- 
ment is independent of the flight hard- 
ware that will eventually host the flight 
software, making it possible to develop 
the software simultaneously with, or 
even before, the hardware is delivered. 
Optionally, by useof in terfaces in eluded 
in VirtualSat, hardware can be used in- 
stead of simulated. The flight software, 
coded in the C or C++ programming 
language, is compilable and loadable 
into VirtualSat without any special mod- 
i f i cati o n s. T h u s, Vi rtu al Sat can serve as a 
relatively inexpensive software test-bed 
for development test, integration, and 
post-launch maintenance of spacecraft 
flight software. 

This program was written by Stephan R. 
H ammers of the Hammers Co., Inc. for God- 
dard Space Flight Center. Further information 
is contained in a TSP (see page 1). GSC- 
14824-1 


Small-Body Extensions for 
the Satellite 0 rbit Analysis 
Program (SOAP) 

An extension to the SOAP software al- 
lows users to work with tri-axial ellipsoid- 
based representations of planetary bod- 
ies, primarily for working with small, 
natural satellites, asteroids, and comets. 
SOAP is a widely used tool for the visuali- 
zation and analysisof space missions. The 
small body extension provides the same 


visualization and analysis constructs for 
use with small bodies. These constructs 
allow the user to characterize satellite 
path and instrument cover information 
for small bodies in both 3D display and 
numerical output formats. 

Tri-axial ellipsoids are geometric 
shapes the diametersof which are differ- 
ent in each of three principal x, y, and z 
dimensions. This construct provides a 
better approximation than using 
spheres or oblate spheroids (ellipsoids 
comprising two common equatorial di- 
ameters as a distinct polar diameter), 
hi owever, the tri-axial ellipsoid is consid- 
erably more difficult to work with from a 
modeling perspective. In addition, the 
SOAP small-body extensions allow the 
user to actuallyemploya plate model for 
highly irregular surfaces. Both tri-axial 
ellipsoids and plate models can be as- 
signed to coordinate frames, thus allow- 
ing for the modeling of arbitrary 
changes to body orientation. 

A variety of features have been ex- 
tended to support tri-axial ellipsoids, in- 
cluding the computation and display of 
the spacecraft sub-orbital point, ground 
trace, instrument footprints, and 
swathes. Displays of 3D instrument vol- 
umes can be shown interacting with the 
ellipsoids. Longitude/ latitude grids, 
contour plots, and texture maps can be 
displayed on the ellipsoids using a vari- 
ety of projections. The distance along an 
arbitrary line of sight can be computed 
between the spacecraft and the ellipsoid, 
and the coordinates of that intersection 
can be plotted asafunction oftime.The 
small-body extension supports the same 
visual and analytical constructs that are 
supported for spheres and oblate sphe- 
roids in SOAP making the implementa- 
tion of the more complex algorithms 
largely transparent to the user. 

T his work was done by R obert C arn right of 
Caltech and David Stodden and John Coggi 
of T he Aerospace Corporation for NASA'sJd 
Propulsion Laboratory. 

T his softwareis available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to N PO -45054. 


Q Scripting Module for the 
Satellite 0 rbit Analysis 
Program (SOAP) 

This add-on module to the SOAP soft- 
ware can perform changes to simulation 
objects based on the occurrence of spe- 
cific conditions. This allows the software 
to encompass simulation response of 


18 


NASA Tech Briefs, October 2008 


