I 


REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE afrl-SR-ar-TR-04- 

_ --- V 


Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, incite 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments re^ 
including suggestions for reducing this burden to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Informs 
22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washini 


03R0 


ring and 
rmation, 
204, VA 


PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 


1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 2. REPORT TYPE 

26-05-2004 Final Project Summary Report 

3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 

From: 01-08-2000 ~ To: 31-12-2003 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Capturing and Exploiting Semantic Relationships for Information 
Management 

5a. CONTRACT NUMBERS 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

F49620-00-1-0337 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Yolanda Gil 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

USC/INFORMATION SCIENCES INSTITUTE 

4676 ADMIRALTY WAY 

MARINA DEL REY, CA 90292-6695 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Air Force Office of Scientific Research 

4015 Wilson Blvd. 

Arlington, VA 22203 

10. SPONSORING/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 

AFOSR 

11. SPONSORING/MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

12. DISTRIBUTION AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Distribution Statement A. Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

14. ABSTRACT 

TRELLIS provides an interactive environment that allows users to add their observations, opinions, and conclusions as they 
analyze information by making semantic annotations to documents and other on-line resources. Our work concentrated on four 
major areas: 1) designing a vocabulary to annotate information analysis, 2) creating semantic markup representations for this 
vocabulary and annotating analysis products, 3) deriving trust ratings for sources used in collections of analyses, and 4) 
developing the TRELLIS interface and tools. 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 

intelligence analysis, argumentation, semantic markup, intelligent user interfaces, interactive decision aids 



1 16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

17. LIMITATION 

18. NUMBER 

19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

a. REPORT 

b. ABSTRACT 

C. THIS PAGE 

OF ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Yolanda Gil 

UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

55 

19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code) 





(310) 448-8794 


20040706 079 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 













TRELLIS: 

Capturing and Exploiting Semantic Relationships 
for Information and Knowledge Management 

Award Number F49620-00-1-0337 

Final Technical Report 


Submitted to the 

Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) 

Attn: Dr. Robert L. Herklotz, Program Manager of Software and Systems 


May 21,2004 


Yolanda Gil (PI) 

USC/Information Sciences Institute 
4676 Admiralty Way 
Marina del Rey, CA 90292 
(310)822-1511 
gil@isi.edu 




k 


TRELLIS: 

Capturing and Exploiting Semantic Relationships 
for Information and Knowledge Management 


Abstract 


TRELLIS provides an interactive environment that allows users to add their observations, 
opinions, and conclusions as they analyze information by making semantic annotations to 
documents and other on-line resources. Our work concentrated on four major areas; 1) 
designing a vocabulary to annotate information analysis, 2) creating semantic markup 
representations for this vocabulary and annotating analysis products, 3) deriving trust 
ratings for sources used in collections of analyses, and 4) developing the TRELLIS 
interface and tools. 


2 



1 Project Overview 


In a world of overwhelming on-line information access and global communications, more 
and more people are asked to provide faster and more accmate answers based on up-to- 
date knowledge that is increasingly more disseminated in vast amounts of information 
sources. The problem is especially acute in the world of intelligence analysis, the 
proposed application area for this work. 

There are two key research objectives in this work. First, we propose to develop 
techniques to capture and exploit semantic interrelationships among information items. 
Our approach will be to use a semantic markup vocabulary that will enable users to 
specify semantic annotations not only the information items themselves but also the links 
that users make to relate individual items. We will provide a core vocabulary that will 
contain both general and domain-specific terms, and that will be extensible by users. We 
will develop tools that will analyze and exploit these annotations to support users in 
fiiither analysis, sharing, and integration. 

A second objective of this research is to support users in creating new knowledge 
fragments from raw information sources and from other fragments. The key to our 
approach is to use the semantic annotations to capture the derivation and rationale of their 
answers to stated questions as they progressively generate new knowledge based on their 
expertise and viewpoint. Capturing this information results in significant added value 
to the original raw information sources. We will support users to highlight key salient 
information from large reports and documents, to add new intermediate knowledge 
fragments based on their analysis and integration of existing information, and to finally 
put together these fragmented pieces into an overall picture of the situation. 

This work is motivated by our previous research on knowledge acquisition within the 
EXPECT project. In order for non-programmers to add knowledge into a system, tiiiey 
need to be guided step by step through the modeling and knowledge representation 
decisions that knowledge engineers normally do. Users need to be guided through several 
steps: 

1) collecting relevant dociunents and other information and data sources, 

2) analyzing, grouping, and indexing related information, 

3) relating the information into structured and consistent form, and 

4) formalizing the knowledge into a logic formalism that supports automated inference 
and reasoning. 

In our approach, a user could use semantic annotations to specify how each piece of 
knowledge comes about as they follow each of these steps. The results of each step would 
remain part of the knowledge base, so the rationale for each piece of knowledge in the 
system is captured. This approach would be very useful to maintain the knowledge base 
and to integrate it with other reasoning modules, since the source and rationale for each 
piece of knowledge will be available in the knowledge base itself instead of disappearing 
with the knowledge engineers that created it. 


3 



The ultimate scientific goal of the project is to contribute to the vision of a Semantic Web 
that has been put forward by the World Wide Web consortium. 

Our approach has significant implications and benefits for the management of knowledge 
assets that many companies and government institutions are beginning to practice. 

Making documents available on-line and providing indexing and keyword search are a 
good first step, but our approach would support more ambitious information processing 
and management than ever before. By providing increasingly more structure to on-line 
information, as well as means to customize the way the information is organized, our 
approach would enable the development of intelligent information management systems 
that can process and retrieve information in ways specified by the end users themselves. 
This would result in a new generation of knowledge management, sharing, and 
dissemination systems. 

In summary, the goal of TRELLIS is to provide an interactive environment that allows 
users to add their observations, opinions, and conclusions as they analyze information by 
making semantic annotations to documents and other on-line resources. This is in essence 
a knowledge acquisition problem, where the user is adding new knowledge to the system 
based on their expertise as they analyze information. 

In previous work within the EXPECT project, we have investigated several approaches to 
developing knowledge acquisition tools to enable end users to extend a knowledge base, 
including analysis of Interdependency Models, scripts to plan acquisition dialogue, 
exploiting problem solving methods and other background knowledge, and creating 
English-based structured editors [Blythe et al., 2001; Kim and Gil, 2000; Gil and Tallis, 
1998; Swartout and Gil 1995]. EXPECT helps users enter knowledge at the lower levels 
of an RHICB, and has been shown to be quite effective in several user evaluations with 
subjects not familiar with programming and formal languages. TRELLIS acquires more 
informal knowledge and is aimed to support human decision making. 

The key innovative ideas behind our approach are: 

■ Supporting users to create knowledge fragments from the original sources as 
well as from other fragments. The key is to capture how a developer progressively 
generates new knowledge that results in added value to the original raw information 
sources. Our goal is to support users to highlight key salient information from large 
reports and documents, to add new knowledge fragments based on their analysis and 
integration of existing information, and to finally create semi-formal fragments. 

■ Capturing and exploiting semantic interrelationships among information items. 
TRELLIS will 1) facilitate semantic markup of relationships between different pieces 
of knowledge, 2) exploit semantic markups in given problem solving contexts, and 3) 
suggest additional relationships based on those already specified by the user. Users 
will be encouraged and rewarded to add valuable annotations over raw information 
sources, since the more annotations they add the more help the system can provide in 
their work. When the user chooses to do little or no annotation, the system will 


4 




provide weaker support (based on default heuristics and strategies) and will still help 
the user as much as possible. 

2 Extensible semantic markup of information items and their relationships. Users 
will be able to draw from a core semantic markup language that will contain a basic 
domain-independent vocabulary to formulate annotations. They will also be able to 
extend this core language with additional terminology useful in their particular 
domain. Using this language, users will be able to annotate not only the information 
items themselves, but they will also be able to annotate the relationships among 
them, which will enable them to qualify and describe interdependencies between 
different information sources and how they relate to a new conclusion or assessment 
added by the developer. In essence, links between the information items will be first 
class citizens in the knowledge base. 

Figure 1 shows an overview of the architecture of TRELLIS. A User typically starts 
searching the Web for a certain document, or indicating a pointer to a specific Web 
resource that contains useful information. Each is considered an information item. 
Information items may include raw information sources (an image, a text document, a 
video, etc.) as well as products of previous analysis (by the user or by other users.) All 
the information items are in some sense the knowledge base that TRELLIS operates on, 
and we refer to it as the Semantically Marked Information Base, or SMIB. We refer to an 
information item as an EI2 (Extended Information Items). 

Users extend the SMIB using two tools: the Annotation Tool and the Creation Tool. 

They can use the EI2 Annotation Tool to add semantic annotations to an EI2 to describe 
its contents and to relate them to other EI2. For example, an EI2 may be annotated as 
containing a map, or an interesting event. The Annotation tool can also be used to relate 
EI2. The tool will provide an editor with a set of connectors. An example is a connector 
to denote that two EI2s are contradictory. This way, die user may link an EI2 that 
contains a description of a product as having a tag price of $20 to another EI2 that has 
the same product with a price of $25. 

The Annotation tool draws on a library of semantic annotations and connectors that will 
be based on a core domain-independent language defined by the Semantic Annotation 
Vocabulary. An Interdependency Schema defines a vocabulary for coimectors based on 
a variety of dimensions: pertinence, reliability, credibility, structure (x is example of y; x 
is part of y; x describes y, etc.), causality (xl x2...xn contribute to y; xl x2...xn indicate y; 
etc.), temporal ordering (x before y; x after y; x simultaneous with y; etc.), argumentation 
(x may be reason for y; x supports y; etc.). The Domain Schema contains a core 
vocabulary to annotate the content of documents that extends the Interdependency 
Schema with domain terms. Our plan is that TRELLIS will provide a core vocabulary, 
and users will be able to extend it with additional terms. 


5 




Figure 1 Overview of the TRELLIS Architecture 


The Creation Tool enables users to create new EI2. For example, a user may create an 
EI2 as an assessment that he or she formulates based on existing EI2. If a combination of 
some subparts of EI2 lets a user conclude or decide on some definition, then the subparts 
can be captured into a new Information Item, that drops all other irrelevant parts of the 
original EI2. A new EI2 can be added by extracting or summarizing some of the 
previous results. 

Figure 8 shows a snapshot of the current user interface of TRELLIS. In this case, a user 
is using TRELLIS to decide whether a mission to take Navy SEALs to Athens is feasible. 
Given the Web sources consulted and the indicated capabilities of the SEAL team (shown 
on the left), the user has entered the rationale for deciding that the operation is not 
feasible. The interface is described in more detail in a later section. 

In summary, our goal is to develop tools that enable users to specify information in 
increasingly more structured form, and to specify semantic annotations that can be 
exploited for processing and integration of separate information items. 


6 








Figure 2 A Snapshot of the Current TRELLIS Interface 


We released our first version of TRELLIS in August 2001. It includes a vocabulary for 
semantic annotations of decisions and tradeoffs. The initial version of this vocabulary is 
now available as a schema/ontology in XMLS, RDFS, and DAML+OIL. TRELLIS 
allows users to extend this vocabulary and its corresponding schemas. For each analysis 
performed by a user with TRELLIS, the system generates annotations in XML, RDF, and 
DAML+OIL according to the schemas and ontologies for the TRELLIS annotation 
vocabulary. Users can extend the vocabulary using the TRELLIS interface, adding 
perhaps domain specific terms or constructs that are useful to their particular task. 

We exercised TRELLIS with a variety of scenarios and users to annotate tradeoffs and 
decisions (e.g., travel), organizing materials (e.g., search results), analyzing 
disagreements and controversies on a topic (e.g., political debates), and handling 
incomplete information (e.g., genealogy research). 

The TRELLIS software is freely available imder an open software license at 
http://www.isi.edu/licensed-sw/trellis. 


7 




Accomplishments 


Our work concentrated on four major areas: 1) designing a voeabulary to annotate 
information analysis, 2) creating semantic markup representations for this vocabulary and 
annotating analysis products, 3) deriving trust ratings for sources used in collections of 
analyses, and 4) developing the TRELLIS interfaee and tools. 

Each of these topics is elaborated in the sections that follow and corresponding 
appendices. We finalize with an overview of a future vision for this work. 

2 .1 An Initial Vocabulary to Annotate Information Analysis 

Our initial focus application has been intelligence analysis and annotating decisions made 
in the presence of incomplete or inconsistent information. The main constructs that the 
language needs to support are to capture the following kinds of situations and for the 
following kinds of rationales: 

■ Decision making in light of inconsistent and incomplete information. This is the 
norm in intelligence analysis tasks. 

■ Information pedigree and lineage: Each piece of information comes from certain 
sources and may be concluded or derived from other pieces of information. 

Capturing this information has many implications for explanation, since we can 
justify the sources for each decision and users will adopt a piece of information 
accordingly. 

■ Decision making within bound resources, such as time or information availability 

■ Decision making over time. An assessment or decision can change in light of new 
information that may become available at a later time. 

■ Support multi-user decision making. Many users may contribute different aspects of 
the analysis, so it is important that the results of each user's analysis are shared by 
others. 

Given these requirements, the desiderata for our language to annotate analysis products 
includes: 

1) Indicating inconsistent and complementary statements. Assessing the truth of a 
statement in light of contradictory information may not be possible, or perhaps just 
not within the capabilities or scope of the analyst. However, it is very valuable for 
the analyst to annotate inconsistent statements as well as any complementary aspects 
of individual statements regarding a specific topic. 

2) Indicating abandoned and unexplored lines of reasoning. The analysis process 
takes plaee within bounded resources, including the analyst's time to consider each 
possible alternative hypothesis or conclusion. The analyst may coneentrate on 
aspects of the problem that seem more central and not explore other aspects that may 
seem secondary. Our language should help the analyst annotate options that were 
abandoned or unexplored for lack of time, resources, evidence, etc. For someone 
trying to understand the context and value of the resulting analysis it may make a big 
difference whether the analyst did not consider a possibility for laek of time or simply 
because he or she was unaware of it. 


8 


3) Indicating selected statements. The analyst may decide among alternative 
statements which should be dismissed and which should be pursued. Indicating 
which alternatives seem more promising, believable, or otherwise salient is the main 
added value resulting from the analysis. 

4) Indicating sources and weight of statements. Analysts do not just consider 
statements at face value, but instead place enormous consideration on the sources for 
the statements. Based on that, they will assign believabihty and credibility to the 
source and the statements, and assess the weight that a certain piece of evidence 
should carry within the overall analysis. 

5) Customizable vocabulary. Analysts in different areas may prefer certain terms to 
qualify statements, hypotheses, and sources. We wanted to provide an initial core 
vocabulary of generally useful terms that users could extend with additional terms 
considered appropriate for the problem at hand. 

6) Incremental refinement of qualifications. Given the information analyzed at a 
given point in time, the analyst may be able to produce only a high level and possibly 
vague assessment that can be refined later on when more information becomes 
available. 

We use the Dublin Core vocabulary to describe sources. The Dublin Core metadata 
initiative is an international effort to develop standards to describe 
published resources in physical or electronic form, including web pages. 

We developed an initial version of the language. The constructs proposed are included in 
Appendix I. 


9 




2.2 Choosing a Markup Language 


In order to understand the tradeoffs and differences among markup languages, we created 
a detailed comparison table that contrasts the different features that common languages 
provide. This table compares XML (extensible Markup Language), RDF (Resource 
Description Framework), and DAML (DARPA Agent Markup Language). The table is 
included below, and is available on-line at http://www.isi.edu/expect/proiects/trellis . The 
on-line version of the table points to examples that illustrate the different features. 

A new semantic markup language is OWL (Web Ontology Language), being developed 
by the W3C consortium, but the design of this language was not completed at the time 
that this work was performed. 

We also generated and presented tutorial slide presentations on semantic markup 
languages, including XML, RDF, and DAML. These tutorial slides are available and can 
be downloaded from the project web site, http://www.isi.edu/expect/proiects/trellis . 

After this analysis, we decided to provide annotations for TRELLIS in all three 
languages. In the future, we may restrict ourselves to languages that are commonly 
adopted in the semantic web community. 


10 




Contexts 


Object 
Classes & 
Properties 


nheritance 


XML (Schema) 


)efault Namespace: 
mJns 

)eclaring others : 
milns:<label> 

(MLSchema 
Namespace (typically 
abelled xsd) 

s:xsd=”www.w3.o 


rg/2001/XMLScheina ” 
[Final W3C 
Recommendation] 

targetNamespace refers 
to the namespace 
defined by the current 
file. 

Example Namespace 


eclarations 



No concept of classes 
and properties, 
only Elements of 
certain Types. 

The Type can be 
^impleTvpe or a 



Since there aren't any 
Classes, there is no 


RDF (Schema) 


LDF uses XML Namespaces. 

IDF Syntax Namespace 
mlns:rdf="http://www.w3.o 


/1999/02/22-rdf-svntax- 



DAML also uses XML 
Namespaces. 

It uses RDF & RDF Schema 
elements by referring to 
their respective Namespaces. 

The latest DAML Namespace 

xmlns:daml=”http://www.daml.or 

g/2001/03/daml+oil#" 

Example Namespace Declarations 
in DAML 

In DAML, we have to Import 
ontologies to be able to use the 
classes defined in the ontology. 



Resource is the top level 
lass. 

http ://www. w3 .org/2001/01/ 
df-schema#Resource) 

sxample of Classes , & 
roperties 



class can be a subClassOf 
)ther classes (multiple 


concept of inheritance, linheritance is allowed) 


DAML 



Same as in RDF. 


11 

































12 










































f Property 
Values 


<enumeration> tag. 
See an example here . 


3ata Sets maintain 
order by default 

Note: Type 

declarations having the 
Ordered <sequence> tag, just 
Data Set | mean that data should 
appear in the order 
specified 
Example 




egation 


Disjunctive / 

Disjoint 

Classes 


^ot possible to specify. 


ot possible. 



Necessary & 
Sufficient 
conditions for 
Class 

Membership 



Data Set ordered with the 
<rdf:Seq...> tag 

Exanple can be found here . 


Dannot be stated. 


bt present. 




ossible with the <oneOf 
rdf: ParseType=''daml: collection**. 
.->tag 

See an example here . 

It is also possible to singly point 
to an enumerated data type 
declared using XMLSchema. 


Can use the <rdf:Seq..> tag 


ossible with the 

<daml:TransitiveProperty> tag 
See an example. 


ossible with the 
<daml:complementOf.> tag 


Class can be a union of 2 other 
!lasses. Possible with the 
unionOf.> tag. 

/e can represent disjoint unions 
ith the <disjointUnionOf..> tag. 



13 























2.3 Deriving Trust Ratings Based on UserAnaiyses 

In the past, sources consulted by intelligent analysts were often authoritative and often 
government-controlled. Today, many sources consulted by intelligence analysts are open 
source (i.e., not controlled by a traditional information source). As a result, the 
information they provide may not be correct, reliable, and very importantly may be prone 
to deception. We developed in TRELLIS facilities to enable users to express their trust 
on a source and the statements made by it, and to combine individual views into an 
overall assessment of each source of information. 

Our work addresses a different issue regarding whether to trust the content of a Web 
resource depending on its source. It seems that people reach some times informal 
consensus on how and when to trust what a source says. Many qualifiers about sources 
seem to be common knowledge only to those familiar with the topic. Some sources are 
generally considered more trustworthy or reliable than others. Some sources are 
considered authoritative in specific topics. Some sources are preferred to others 
depending on the specific context of use of the information. Some sources are considered 
pretty accurate but it is understood they are not necessarily up to date. Finally, specific 
statements by traditionally authoritative sources can be proven wrong in light of other 
information, while the source's reputation will still hold. In this sense, there is a finer 
grain of detail in attributing trust to a source with respect to specific statements made by 
it. 

The extensions of TRELLIS that we have developed allows users to annotate the source 
attribution for each statement used in the analysis, to describe the source, and to make 
qualifications about it. 

For each document indexed in TRELLIS, the user can annotate meta-data regarding its 
attribution using the Dublin Core [8]. The Dublin Core (dc:) was developed as a 
standard to describe resources (e.g., documents). A document is described with 15 main 
attributes: dcrtitle, dc:creator, dcrsubject, dcrdescription, dc:publisher, dc:contributor, 
dc:date, dc:type, dc:format, dc:identifier, dc:source, dc:language, dc:relation, 
dc:coverage, and dc:rights. Five of them are concerned with attribution of information. 
The dc:creator is an entity primarily responsible for making the content of the resoiuce. 
The dc:publisher is an entity responsible for making the resource available. The 
dc:contributor is an entity responsible for making contributions to the content of the 
resource. The dc.source is a reference to a resource from which the present resource is 
derived. The dc:relation is a reference to a related resource. 

In TRELLIS, each document used in an analysis is first indexed with a short statement, as 
a way to summarize the particular aspect of the document used in the analysis. The 
statement points to the document, and must become part of an analysis unit. In the unit, 
the user can specify a source for that statement. This TRELLIS source can be any of the 
five fields in the Dublin Core metadata that are related to attribution and that we 
mentioned above, but can also be any other entity that is not indicated in it. TRELLIS 


14 




gives the user this flexibility because the user may trust (or distrust) any of these sources 
enough to take some stand about the statement. 

The user can also qualify the source of a statement by its reliability and credibility, which 
are standard in military intelligence manuals. Reliability is typically based on credentials 
and past performance of the source. Credibility specifies the analyst’s view of probable 
truth of a statement, given all the other information available to the analyst. Reliability 
and credibility are not the same, for example a completely reliable source may provide 
some information that may be judged to be not very credible given other known 
inf ormation. Reliability is specified by a six-valued scale ranked A to F (completely 
reliable, usually reliable, fairly reliable, not usually reliable, unreliable, and not possible 
to judge). Credibility can have one of six values on a scale (confirmed by other sources, 
probably true, possibly true, doubtfully true, improbable, and not possible to judge). 

As many users create multiple analyses that refer to common sources, TRELLIS creates 
an overall consensus assessment about each somce as we explain in this section. We 
have developed an algorithm to derive and update source ratings automatically as users 
enter different analyses that rely on those sources. The next section shows how these 
ratings are used and shown to the users to help them make decisions about what sources 
to trust. 


Trellis Web 

Purpose: SEAL) 

Enter 8 Query [s 
No. of Results |l0 | 

Conclusion : 

tone 

ESEQI KESESSli CSCBl 


^http://e«caliburJsi.edu;B888/cgi-Wn/lr^lls_web/dotd4>l - Microsofl: Intcrnel EHplom’ 


Rating Details for METOC Rota : Overall Rating of (9.8/10) 







Statement 

Credibility 

R.eliability 

Used for conclusion 

Tainted 

Not used 

QQI 

Avg Wmd speed in March around 14 Knots : 

6/6 


1/1 

QQIIIIIIIIII 

0/1 

WSM 


6/6 


1/1 

EH 

0/1 



5/6 


1/1 

0/1 

0/1 

QQQI 

Avg Dublin temperature in March is 46 F : 

6/6 


1/1 

0/1 

0/1 

IQQI 

Avg wave heicht in March is 6 ft ; 

6/6 

6/6 

1/1 

0/1 

0/1 

10/10 


NOTE: Toua = (2/3}*(Cr€d.+Rtt.) + 2*Ui€4^ -1 *Not. 


Gibraltar temperafaire 60 F 


Gfl>raltar avg temperature in March is 60 F 


Dublin temperature is 48 F 


Avg Dublin temperature in March is 46 F 


Water Temperature it 80 F 


Temperature must be between 90 and SO F 


Sourco 


□ NWS Internet Weatfier Source 


□ METOC Rota 


□ NWS Internet Weather Source 


METOC Rota 


E3 NWS Internet Weather Source 


D Unofficial Special Operations Site 


Rating 


(9.3/10) Detafls 


(10/101 Details 


(9.3/101 Details 


(10/101 Details 


(9.3/101 Details 


(8.6/101 Detafls 


Statement 


Itamperalure 


i 


Figure 3. TRELLIS shows users its assessment of a source based on previous 
analysis by other users, showing both an overall rating and the details about how 
the rating was derived. 


15 






































































As a user is considering a topic for an analysis, he or she may wonder what sources were 
considered by other users on topics relevant to their analysis, as well as how those 
sources were rated by users in light of what they were considering and in light of their 
expertise on the topic. TRELLIS allows users to search for sources on specific topics, 
see how they rank based on their overall ratings, and view the details of a soxnce's ratings 
based on the individual factors considered in deriving the ratings. 

Suppose an analyst is trying to choose a drop site based on wheather conditions. Suppose 
at some point the analyst needs to find out the average water temperature in the Dublin 
area. He now invokes the “source query tool” by pressing the ‘Import Src’ button in the 
bottom right frame of the main window. Figure 2 shows the user query for “temperature” 
and the results that are returned. TRELLIS shows the rating of all sources that are related 
to the topic (here “temperature”), based on how other users refer to temperature in their 
analyses. The analyst then selects the sources that he considers appropriate and imports 
them to his selection of statements and sources in the ‘Statement Editor’ (bottom-left 
fi-ame of the main TRELLIS window). 

The user can also see further details about the ratings of a source, shown at the top of the 
figure. This shows the detailed factors and ratings of the source for all statements that it 
has been used with. 

In summary, our work has concentrated on extending TRELLIS with learning and 
proactive capabilities. TRELLIS can capture in a finer grain the sources of each 
statement within an analysis and derives ratings of the trust in each source as the source is 
used by various users in different analyses. 


2.4 TRELLIS: Helping a User Annotate Information Analysis 

TRELLIS is an interactive environment that will allow users to add their observations, 
viewpoints, and conclusions as they analyze information by making semantic annotations 
to documents and other on-line resources. We view this as a knowledge acquisition 
problem, where users are adding new knowledge to the system based on their expertise as 
they analyze information. 

TRELLIS has been used to annotate tradeoffs and decisions (e.g., travel), organizing 
materials (e.g., search results), analyzing disagreements and controversies on a topic 
(e.g., political debates), handling incomplete information (e.g., genealogy research), etc. 
In this section we use an example from an analysis for feasibility of a special operations 
plan to describe how users can annotate decisions with TRELLIS. Appendix II shows a 
screen walkthrough demonstration of how to use TRELLIS illustrated with an analysis of 
whether Irak used biological weapons during the Gulf War. 


16 




In our example, the user wants to analyze the feasibility of a mission to Athens involving 
a SEAL team. The mission is stated as follows^: 

An FID mission for the SEALS will be to instruct the Greek Naval Special 
Forces to land at a designated beach, by a SEAL Delivery Vehicle (SDV) 
and conduct surveillance on a road junction at (38 2 6 05N 023 38 3IE). 

The FID has been approved. 

A US Navy submarine with an SDV and SEAL team will depart Norfolk, 

Virginia (36 51 25N 07613 41W) in early March. After a week of travel, 
the submarine will arrive at a port in Athens, Greece (37 55 3IN 023 41(8E). 

SEAL team will spend several days in Athens providing instruction 

to Greek Naval Special Forces and on the third day, the SEAL team and a 

Greek Naval Special Forces team unit will be transported by submarine to 

an offshore area (38 21 37N 023 43 3IE), where the SDV will be released 

with the seal's and Greek Naval Special Forces land at a beach (38 24(9N 023 38 09E). 

The combined team will proceed to the surveillance site and conduct 
three days of surveillance training on the designated road junction. 

The combined team will then egress to the beach landing site, rendezvous 
with the SDV and return to the submarine. 

The submarine will return to Athens for one day to support debriefings 
and a review of the training and operations. 

Once instruction has been completed, the SDV along with the SEAL team 
will continue routine deployment operations in the Mediterranean. 

The FID will be completed at this time. 

In this mission, the SEAL team is required to use a Seal Delivery Vehicle (SDV), which 
is shown in Figure 3. The SDV is like a small submarine, except there is water inside and 
the SEAL team is wearing diving equipment. The SDV enables the divers to approach 
the coast closer than they could with a bigger ship or submarine. 

The user is looking into whether this mission is feasible for a given platoon. The user 
will check the requirements for using an SDV and check whether the location where the 
SEAL team is to be deployed would be adequate for using an SDV. Some of the 
requirements include: 

■ Current > 2.5 kts 

■ Wave Height > 3 ft combined seas 

■ Tides Low water < 8 ft 

■ Tidal range > 2 ft 

■ Water Clarity > 10 ft visibility from surface 

■ Water Ten^erature 50° - 60°F, wet suit; < 50°F, dry suit 

■ Lunar Illumination: Full moon, clear sky 

■ Bioluminescence: any conditions that allow visible detection submerged 10 ft in ambient light 


^ This example was proposed by Fred Bobbitt, a retired Special Operations officer that we had access to 
during this work. 


17 




The user would check the water and astronomical conditions in the Athens area. In this 
case, the SDV can be used in principle, but it turns out that the platoon commander 
recommends that the platoon does not do well in water temperatures below 65°F. 
Therefore, the mission is unfeasible due to the low water temperature expected in the area 
at that time of the year and the requirements posed by the platoon commander. 


A summary of the analysis is as follows: 

> Mission to Athens results in unfeasible mission for SDV 
> because conditions inappropriate 

according to source Col Dyer which is 
Very Reliable 

and Grade A Credible because Col Dyer is responsible for recommending 
course of action 

> conditions inappropriate is elaborated in water conditions inappropriate and 
lunar illumination is ok and bioluminescence is ok and tides ok 

> water conditions inappropriate is elaborated in water temperature unsust... 
and water currrent is ok 

> water temperature unsust... is elaborated in avg march water 
temperature 55-60 and platoon recpiires min water te... 

according to source Cmdr Bobbitt which is 

Very Reliable because Cmdr Bobbitt has 15 years exp... 

and Grade A Credible because Cmdr Bobbitt has been platoon 
commander for 15 years 

> platoon requires min water te... conceding min water temp requd 

is 50-60 

according to source Cmdr Bobbitt which is 

Very Reliable because Cmdr Bobbitt has 15 years exp... 

- and Grade A Credible because Cmdr Bobbitt has been platoon... 

> water current ok is elaborated in required current < 2.5 kts 


18 



because average march current 2 kts 


according to source METOC Rota which is 

Very Reliable 

and Grade A Credible 

> lunar illumination is ok is elaborated in avg lun ill anticipated that week 
is 30% 

because avg lun ill anticipated that week is 30% 
according to source Cmdr Bobbitt 

> bioluminescence is ok stands though contradicted by bioluminescence is 
inadequate feb-oct 

> tides ok 

We use now this example to describe how a user can specify this analysis with TRELLIS. 


Each analysis that the user performs has a purpose that is used to describe the issue 
analyzed. TRELLIS asks the user to specify a purpose, which is a short sentence that 
summarizes the issue or hypothesis in question. 

Each piece of information or data that is used in the analysis is called a statement. For 
example, a statement is: 

Min temp required by SDV is 50-60 

A statement can be linked to a Web resource, in this case it could be a manual or 
authoritative source about SDV requirements, in this case: 

http://www.specialoperations.com/Navy/SDV/default.html 

TRELLIS allows the user to access a Web search engine and use the results of the search 
to create new statements. 

Users can also enter statements that are not Web pages but instead have text such as an 
email message, or a note about a conversation, or any other text. The user can specify a 
URL but it is not necessary. For example, the user could add a statement such as: 

Mission to Athens 

This statement would point to the text describing the mission shown above. 


19 




In addition to input information and data, the user can add statements that indicate 
intermediate conclusions or hypothesis. For example: 

Bioluminescence ok 

indicates the user's summary of the analysis regarding astronomical data. 

Statements can also be used to indicate the sources of some information. For example, if 
a meteorological Web site such as METOC in the Rota, Spain center is used to check the 
water conditions, the user can describe this source in a statement and use that to annotate 
the analysis. Sources can be qualified according to the user's view on their reliability and 
credibility (as shown in Appendix I). As we mentioned earlier, we use the Dublin Core 
vocabulary to describe sources. 

The user can define new statements or modify existing ones at any time. 

An analysis is composed of units, which are composed in turn of sub-units. Each umt 
relates individual statements using a construct from the TRELLIS vocabulary. For 
example, the following unit captures the analysis of water temperature requirements: 

water temperature unsustainable for SDV divers 

is elaborated in 

average march water temperature 55-60 

and 

Platoon requires min water temperature of 65 
according to source 
Cmdr Bobbitt which is 
completely reliable (A) 

because Cmdr Bobbitt has 15 years experience with JSOC 
and 

probably true 

because Cmdr Bobbitt has been platoon commander for 3 years 

All the statements are underlined, and are always linked to some Web source or user- 
provided text. Users can provide reasons ("because...") or not, depending on the amount 
of detail that they wish to capture in this part of the analysis. 

Notice that only the portions of this unit that are shown in italics and bold are part of the 
TRELLIS language. The rest of the components of the unit (i.e., the statements) are 
treated as strings and TRELLIS will not process them further. 

At any time, users can compose their analysis from the statements that they have selected 
and created. The analysis of a purpose is made of units, which may have sub-units in 
turn. Users can collapse or expand any portions of the analysis and manipulate units and 
subunits to refine their interdependencies. Users can also rearrange the umts in the 
analysis by dragging and dropping them in the analysis window. This is useful in cases 


20 




where the analysis is done bottom-up and the users wants to relate units that were ereated 
previously separately. 

Sometimes a user does not know yet how to use a statement in an analysis but would like 
to have that statement included in the analysis frame. Users can select statements and 
include them in the analysis imder a "Notes and other information' category. This facility 
is also useful to drag and drop statements into the analysis. 


Users can also import statements and imits from other users if they are relevant to their 
purpose. The user can do keyword search in either purpose names or statement titles 
entered by other users. 

TRELLIS can be used offline if the user asks the system to cache Web pages before 
disconnecting from the network. Statements can be selected and a cached copy of their 
corresponding Web pages is created and used until otherwise indicated. 

Users can view the results of their analysis annotated in several markup languages: XML, 
RDF, and DAML, corresponding to the Schemas and ontologies that define the TRELLIS 
vocabulary. 


2.5 Future Vision: Educating Knowiedge Bases 

Large knowledge bases contain a wealth of information, and yet browsing through them 
often leaves an uneasy feeling that one has to take the developer's word for why certain 
things are represented in certain ways, why other things were not represented at all, and 
where might we find a piece of related information that we know is related under some 
context. Although the languages that we use are quite expressive, they still force 
knowledge into a straightjacket: whatever fits the language will be represented and 
anything else will be left out. Many other things are also left out, but for other reasons 
such as available time and resources or perhaps lack of detailed understanding of some 
aspects of the knowledge being specified. 

Furthermore, knowledge ends up represented piecemeal, compartmentalized in whatever 
expressions the modeling language supports. Many of the connections between different 
pieces of knowledge are never stated, nor can they be derived by the system given what it 
knows. We see no value in representing redimdant information or alternative ways to 
deduce the same facts: if the system can derive something in one way that may be more 
than sufficient. 

Knowledge base developers may consult many sources presenting contradictory or 
complementary information, analyze the different implications of each alternative belief, 
and decide what and how to model the knowledge. In essence, developers often capture 
in the knowledge base only their final beliefs about some body of knowledge. The 
rationale for modeling the knowledge the way it appears in the knowledge base is not 


21 





captured declaratively. Only consistent and complete information is captured. No 
indication of inconsistent but possible statements is added to the knowledge base. 

As Minsky argues it [Minsky, 1970]: 

There is a real conflict between the logician's goal and the educator's. 

The logician wants to minimize the variety of ideas, and does not mind 
a long thin path. The educator (rightly) wants to make the paths short 
and does not mind — in fact, prefers — coimections to many other 
ideas. 

Knowledge base developers seem to prefer the role of logicians rather than seeing 
themselves as educators of intelligent systems. 




tv 




Rea<yask /study/listen. 



. analyze/group/index... 


€) 

... structure/relate/fit... 



■♦.reason/deduce/solve 





Knowledge 

Engineer 



Figure 4 How Knowledge Bases are Built Today 


Figure 5 illustrates the limited kinds of knowledge that are captured in the final 
knowledge base. Developers (at least non-experts) start by consulting manuals and 
tutorial material, asking questions, and requesting clarifications. Their main task is to 
analyze and different information sources, grouping information, indexing related 
definitions and terms, and gathering as much raw material as possible in order to 
understand what needs to be represented and how. Next, they organize the information in 
semi-formal ways by structuring it in tables, itemized lists, and detecting opposite and 
complementary descriptions. Finally, they build the knowledge base itself by turning the 
refined results of this analysis into formal expressions that fit in the particular knowledge 
representation language used. Whatever documentation ends up in the knowledge base 


22 





will be the only trace left of all the design and analysis process that was done to create it. 
None of the documentation is captured in declarative languages. The rationale of the 
knowledge base design is lost: the original sources, the analysis and structuring of the 
knowledge therein, and the tradeoffs that were considering before deciding on the final 
formalization. As a result: 

■ It is hard to extend knowledge bases. When the knowledge base needs to be extended 
or updated, the rationale for their design is lost and needs to be at least partially 
reconstructed. The knowledge sources are no longer readily available and may need 
to be accessed. 

■ It is hard to reuse knowledge contained in knowledge bases. While it is the case that 
entire knowledge bases can be reused and incorporated into new systems, it is harder 
to extract only relevant portions of them that are appropriate in the new application. 
Parts of the knowledge base may be too inaccurate for the new task, or may need to 
be modeled in a different way to take into account relevant aspects of the new 
application. 

In summary, knowledge has a very modest degree of mobility once it is incorporated into 
our current systems. Some researchers are creating shared upper ontologies that can 
serve as a common substrate for the more detailed knowledge in specific knowledge 
bases, thus facilitating interoperation and reuse. Some have argued that the brittleness in 
our knowledge bases can be addressed by providing common-sense and other 
background knowledge to these systems. These approaches may be part of the solution, 
but it will not address some of the issues brought up here. Current intelligent systems are 
hard to integrate, maintain, and imderstand because their knowledge bases have not been 
truly educated on the topics they are supposed to know about. 

Early work on knowledge-based systems already revealed that one of the important 
concerns for users to accept knowledge based systems is understanding the answers they 
provide. Explanation generation systems were developed to describe the contents of the 
knowledge base as well as execution traces. Requirements engineering is very useful to 
describe the criteria used to define the scope and competence level of the application. 
Other development methodologies can be used to capture a trace of the design and 
software development process. 

In the past few years, we have developed several large knowledge bases with EXPECT in 
different application areas. We foxmd that users were interested in understanding a 
system's answers fi'om quite a different perspective. WTiat they often find most important 
in understanding an answer is to know what sources were consulted in creating that 
reasoning, and what choices were made in the presence of contradictory or missing 
information about certain aspects of the problem domain. Consider, for example, a 
system to estimate the duration of carrying out specific engineering tasks, such as 
repairing a damaged road or leveling uneven terrain. Users wanted to know whether 
common manuals and/or sources of expertise were consulted, which were given more 
weight, whether practical experience was considered to refine theoretical estimates, and 
what authoritative sources were consulted to design the content of the knowledge base. 


23 




We noted that they would be satisfied even if we indicated that no good source was found 
to describe a certain estimation and so we had interpolated from other estimates. 

We believe that what was missing from our knowledge bases were the fine-grained, 
detailed analysis, assumptions, and decisions that knowledge engineers made in 
designing knowledge bases. We had not recorded in enough detail what were the original 
sources consulted, what pieces seemed contradictory or vague, which were then 
dismissed, what additional hypotheses were formulated in order to complement the 
original sources. As knowledge engineers we had a sense for what topics or areas within 
the knowledge base we were more confident about, either because we had spent more 
resources developing them, because we had found better sources, or because as engineers 
we had assessed the end result as more complete and consistent. It turns out that this 
information is key to put the answers of a knowledge based system in context. In other 
words, the analysis process that knowledge engineers perform during the implementation 
phase is part of the rationale of a knowledge base, and needs to be captured in order to 
justify answers to users. There are several other potential benefits to including such 
rationale within a knowledge base, such as supporting its maintenance, facilitating its 
integration with other knowledge bases, and transferring (and translating) knowledge 
among heterogeneous systems. 

In summary, the goal would be to capture the results of analyzing various information 
sources consulted by knowledge engineers as they design the detailed contents of a 
knowledge base. 

In order to empower intelligent systems, we believe we need to allow them access to the 
roots and rationale of the knowledge they contain. Furthermore, the knowledge base 
should not just contain a body of formalized expressions; rather, we should extend our 
view of a knowledge base to include a variety of formats and representations as well as 
alternative renderings of the same (or related) knowledge. They should include as many 
connections as possible, as stated in the original sources and as they result from the 
analysis of the knowledge base developer. This approach would create a new generation 
of knowledge bases: Resilient Hyper Knowledge Bases (RHKBs), that will be more 
resilient to change and reuse and will be heavier in connections and hyperlinks. 

Figure 4 depicts a Resilient Hyper Knowledge. Originally, the development of the 
knowledge base starts with documentation, examples, dialogues (perhaps with experts), 
detailed explanations of special cases, notes on exceptions, hints and comments on 
specific topics, etc. From these, the developer will extract templates, relevant dialogue 
segments, itemized lists and tables to organize information, ete. This should be done 
while always keeping a trail of connections to the original sources. The developer will 
also indicate some connections between different portions of the original sources. It is 
our experience that many of the original sources either exist or are converted into 
resources on the Web, and as a result the developer can exploit the hyperlinks and 
connections that already exist in these original sources. As the developer continues this 
analysis, additional sources may be sought and incorporated at the higher levels, further 
enriching the grounding of the final knowledge base that is being developed. 


24 





\ 

(defconcept 
bridge 0)) 


Introductory texts, 
expert hints, explanations, 
dialogues, comments, 
examples, exceptions,... 


Info, extraction templates, 
dialogue segments and pegs, 
filled-out forms, high-level 
connections,... 


Descriptions augmented 
with prototypical examples &| 
exceptions, problem-solving 
steps and substeps,... 


Alternative formalizations 
(KIF, MELD,CML,...), 
alternative views of the same 
notion (e.g., what is a threat) 


1 


t 


Richer representations 
More ambiguous 

More versatile 


More formal 
More concrete 

More introspectible 


Figure 5 A Resilient Hyper Knowledge Base (RHKB) 


Next, the developer can identify descriptions and associate with them prototypical 
examples as well as exceptions, pieces of problem solving knowledge in terms of steps 
and substeps, tables of parameters and values, etc. Any of these new distillations will 
continue to be connected to any other pieces in the knowledge base that they were 
derived from. The developer can also mark alternative views on the same knowledge, 
indicate contradictory statements by different sources, and dismiss some pieces of 
knowledge that may not seem useful for current piuposes. 

Finally, a developer can turn the more structured components into formalized 
expressions, in one or more languages and formalisms. Contradictory statements can be 
formalized and connected and marked as contradictory, for someone to pick and choose 
as they incorporate knowledge into a reasoning engine. 

During this process, the developer can annotate the reasons for making certain decisions 
regarding which knowledge to model and how to model it. These annotations will help 
further in understanding the rationale for the development of the knowledge base. 

We have described here the process with four stages to show the incremental nature of 
this analysis, but there may be as many levels of refinement as the nature of the 
knowledge and the final system may require. 


25 






Notice that in the higher levels of refinement, the representations may be richer, more 
versatile, but at the same time more ambiguous. In some sense, plain human language 
(i.e., text) may be the most mobile vehicle to state knowledge. The many users of the 
World Wide Web use the same pages for a variety of purposes and tasks, the ultimate 
signature of true knowledge reuse. At the lowest levels of refinement, the representations 
are more formal, more concrete, and also more introspectible, lending themselves more to 
automated analysis and reasoning. 

There are many benefits to this approach: 

■ Knowledge can be extended more easily. The formalized, final expressions may 
not necessarily contain every detail in every knowledge source, but if the need arises 
the system is better positioned to digest additional knowledge. This could be done in 
two ways; the developer could incorporate the additional knowledge or perhaps the 
system could use some automated tools to extract that knowledge itself (since it has 
access to the sources and how they were originally processed). 

■ Knowledge can be reused and translated at any level. Another system can be built 
by reusing only the higher levels of the design process and incorporating other 
sources to create different final formalized expressions. Other developers can tap into 
any intermediate results of the analysis and do not have to start from scratch. 
Knowledge does not have to be reused only at the lowest level as it is today. 

■ Knowledge can be integrated and translated at any level to facilitate 
interoperability. Translators can be built to transform and map knowledge at higher 
levels. The rationale and meaning of different pieces of knowledge can be available 
to support translation and interoperation. 

■ Intelligent systems will be able to provide better explanations. We find that many 
users are reluctant to accept the solutions presented by the systems and ask for 
explanations not of how the system derived an answer automatically but instead ask 
for explanations of why the system starts out with a certain fact or belief. When users 
are shown the reasons for certain assiunptions and the fact that certain sources were 
consulted to make that assumption they are reassured in the competence of the system 
to provide those answers. Capturing this trail within the knowledge base will enable 
the system to generate these liids of justifications and explanations. 

■ Content providers will not need to be knowledge engineers. Although only those 
trained in the art of designing, modeling, and writing formal expressions can build the 
more refined portions of RHKBs, anyone can contribute to the higher levels. Many 
people in diverse disciplines acquire the analytical skills that suffice to organize and 
digest knowledge sources. 

Many existing tools for text extraction (e.g, to extract significant event descriptions from 
news articles) and discourse analysis (e.g., to segment text into meaningful portions) 
could be used to support these earlier steps of the analysis. Existing approaches to derive 
interdependencies among pieces of knowledge may be used to help users create 
connections among diverse pieces of knowledge. Other tools can be developed to 
support transformations at the lower levels (e.g., to turn tables into instances and role 
values). The overhead that may be incurred in creating knowledge bases using this 
approach is, in our view, not as significant compared to the analysis efforts that 


26 



developers undergo. It may even save developers time if others can look up the rationale 
trail instead of asking them directly detailed questions about the portion of the knowledge 
base they are developing. 

The approach presented here has many relations to software engineering methodologies 
to capture the rationale for software development, and to higher-level languages and 
frameworks to develop knowledge-based systems. Unfortunately, these methodologies 
are not common practice among developers of knowledge bases for lack of adequate 
tools to support developers in this process. Moreover, these methodologies are aimed at 
software and knowledge engineers and are not very accessible to other potential 
knowledge base developers, such as end users and/or domain experts. 

The Semantic Web will provide an ideal substrate to ground knowledge bases into their 
original knowledge sources, and to contain the progressively defined pieces of knowledge 
and the connections among them. More and more every day, knowledge originates and 
ends in the Web, and we find ourselves extracting knowledge from the Web, processing it 
inside of a knowledge base, then putting the results back on the Web. It only makes 
sense to integrate knowledge bases (their content and their reasoning) more closely with 
the Web. 


3 Personnel Supported 

Faculty: 

■ Yolanda Gil 

Research scientists: 

■ James Blythe 

■ Jihie Kim 

Postdoctoral Researchers: 

■ Tim Chklovski 

Graduate students: 

■ Larry Kite 

■ Varun Ratnakar 

■ Dan Wu 

■ Ronggang Yu 

■ John Lee 


4 Publications 


27 




“TRELLIS: Supporting Decision Making via Argumentation in the Semantic Web”, 
Timothy Chklovski, Yolanda Gil, Vanin Ratnakar and John Lee. To appear in 
proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge Capture (K-CAP), 
October 2003. 

"Knowledge Mobility: Semantics for the Web as a White Knight for Knowledge-Based 
Systems", Yolanda Gil. In "Spinning the Semantic Web", D. Fensel, J. Hendler, H. 
Lieberman, and W. Whalster (Eds), MIT Press, 2003. 

“TRELLIS: An Interactive Tool for Capturing Information Analysis and Decision 
Making”. Yolanda Gil and Varun Ratnakar. n**" International Conference on 
Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management. Siguenza, Spain. October 
2002. 

“IKRAFT: Interactive Knowledge Representation and Acquisition From Text”. Yolanda 
Gil and Varun Ratnakar. 13^ International Conference on Knowledge Engineering 
and Knowledge Management. Siguenza, Spain. October 2002. 

“Trusting Information Sources One Citizen at a Time”, Yolanda Gil and Varun Ratnakar. 
Proceedings of the First International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC), Sardinia, 
Italy, June 2002. 

"A Comparison of (Semantic) Markup Languages", Varun Ratnakar and Yolanda Gil. 
Proceedings of the 15 th International FLAIRS Conference, Special Track on 
Semantic Web, Pensacola, FL, May 2002. 


5 Technology Transitions 

The TRELLIS concept and technology was transitioned into a new project to develop 
analytical tools for intelligence analysts. This project, called JIST (Just-In-caSe just-in- 
Time Intelligence Analysis), is building on TRELLIS to develop a new approach to 
intelligence analysis that provides an emerging-self-organization of knowledge regarding 
analysis topics and areas of interest, individual expertise, and teaming assignments. 
Under JIST, we are extending TRELLIS with natural language processing and machine 
learning capabilities to discover regularities across arguments constructed by different 
users. 


Appendix I: An Initial Vocabulary to Annotate Decisions 


Discourse Relations 

A provides background for B 
A is elaborated in B 


28 



set:members 
abstract instances 
wholerpart 
process: steps 
objectiattribute 
gralizrspec 
A is solved by B 
A shows how to do B 
A is motivation for B 
A depends on B 
A otherwise B 
A causes B 
A causes choice of B 
A resulted in B 
A results in B 
Choosing A resulted in B 
A happened and resulted in B 
A is purpose ofB 

A stands though contradicted by B (= B dismissed given A) 
A conceding B 

A can be interpreted through B 
A evaluated by B 
A restates B 
A summarizes B 
A in contrast with B 
A. B (no relation) 

Logic Connectives 
Not A 
A and B 

A or B but not both 
A or B or both 
A therefore B 

If A therefore B then Not B therefore Not A 
If A and A therefore B then B 
If Not A and A or B but not both then B 
If Not B and A therefore B then Not A 

Temporal Relations 
A is before B 
A is after B 
A meets B 
A is met by B 
A overlaps with B 
A is overlapped by B 
A starts B 


29 



A is started by B 
A is during B 
A contains B 
A ends B 
A is ended by B 
A equals B 

Qualifiers 

A definitely {not} true/false because B 
A is probably {not} true/false because B 
A may be {not} true/false because B 
A is {not} likely because B 
A is {not} impossible because B 
A is {not} surprising because B 
A is {not} shocking because B 
A is {not} reassuring because B 
A is {not} believable because B 
A is {not} absurd because B 
A is {not} accurate because B 
A is {not} dismissable because B 
A is {not} salient because B 


Descriptions of Sources 
Title 
Creator 
Subject 
Description 
Publisher 
Contributor 
Date 
Type 
Format 
Identifier 
Source 
Language 
Relation 
Coverage 
Rights 

Qualifiers of Sources 
Credibility 

confirmed by other sources 
probably true 
possibly true 


30 



doubtfully trae 

improbable 

not possible to judge 

Reliability 

completely reliable (A) 
usually reliable (B) 
fairly reliable (C) 
not usually reliable (D) 
unreliable (E) 
not possible to judge (F) 



Appendix II: A Screen Walkthrough Demonstration of TRELLIS 


TRELLIS can be accessed from the main project page at 

http:// www.trellis.semanticweb.org . or from http:www.isi.edu/expect/projects/treIlis. 
Start with the Login Screen: 


I '3|http;//excalibur.isi»edu;8888AreMis_wefa/indeK.html - Microsoft Internet EKplorcf 


Ne Etft View Favorites Tools Help 


4* Back ^ Q I j^F^ites ^Medta ^ | ^ ^ §1 ® Q __ 

;/idclress © http://excalibur.tei.edu:8888/trellis_wrf3/index.httnl__ . 

Tiriks @ Frec;Ho^il @ Google ® Local Trellis' ® Sign in - Yahoo! Mai ©Trellis Web © Windows © WWoWs © Trelts 


13 ^ 





32 













Each analysis that the user performs has a "purpose" that is used to describe the issue 
analyzed. After logging in, you are presented with the purposes which you have (or a 
person with your login ID has) made so far. By default, there are 3 purposes which are 
added for each new user. 


hltp://excalibur.isi.edu;8888/cgi’bin/trelli5_web/lQgin.pl - Microsoft Internet Explorer 


fk m Vfew Favorites Tools Hdp 




4=^ Back - -► - Q [gl fa} I OaFavorites .^Mecfa 0 | Ig)- # - jg ® Q ^ 


http: //excalbur.!«. edu :8888/cgi'bin/trelli5_web/login. pi 




®FreeHot^ gjGoogle gLocalTrefe @ Sign in-Yahoo! Mail gtrefeWefa jjWndowsMedia gwinclows g}Tregis 


Trellte Web 


User varunr 


NetM Purpose 


Restore ■ toisour 


ms 


DAHL Ontology 


Should I Hire Bill Gates 


Buffer Overrun Paper 


Mission To Athens 


Test Purpose 


Which Car Should I buy 


Should I Visit India 


Use of biological weapons 
by Iraq 


Test purpose 


Explanation of the Bermuda 

Triangle 




jmisi 




mol 


ims 




na 


mm 


■nmfl 




RDF Tfipmi 


RDF Tfipifts 


RDF Triples 


RDF Triples 


RDF Triple* 


RDF Triples. 


RDF Triples 


RpfTnples 


RDF Ttiplw 


fc&iiliilH 


jBsoa 


EEsmi 


m 




m 




I3SBI 




Note: 

All the Mj*<up files Jtc kept on the server in a r^on web-shared directory. K the files are required to be hosted, they oan be saved locally. 
Any Commentsdr Suggestions. Please mail me 


a 


(eoono ^ ^ : :PL L 

ijfistartl l I ^ (6 ijl' 11 TPYahool Meg... I Quniiti<!d-Mot...| B?- MyOwnP...j pK|x-Sesstoo ‘ | f^excaltourt/f/...) ij^IrtfjQx-Oi^...| [^ht:^i//eKca»; 12:CMPM 


33 

















































You can make a new purpose with the "New Purpose" button, which prompts for the name 
of the new purpose. 


I Explorer User Prompt 


? .-Script Pfocnpt 

If Name trf the New Purpose ? 


" 13 ® ^ Iff _ 

^Windows Media ^Windows ^Trellis 








































After creating a new purpose OR when editing an existing purpose, you end up with the 
main purpose editing window shown below. The left side of the screen Is used to find, 
select, and edit the statements used in analyzing the purpose. The right side of the screen 
is used to construct and view the details of the analysis. 


A query frame is in the top left hand side, in which you can fire off queries to a search 
engine (in this version of TRELLIS the search engine is Google), and get the results in the 
results frame below. There is nothing in the current selections here, since this is a new 
purpose. Nor is there anything in the statements frame, which is the frame shown in the 
lower left of the screen. 


'3 http://e«calibur.lsi.edu:8888/cg»-binA«'eHis_web/main.pl - Microsoft Internet Enplorer 


File Edit Yiew Favorites Tools He^j 

» @ 0 & I ^Search ^Favorites Q j ^ M ^ @| 0 ^ 

Address http:f/excafibtr!lsl.edu:88e8/cgi-birVtrdt5_web/rnah 

©FrecHobnai! g|Google gLocalTrdlis Qsjgnin-Va hoQlMaa gjT rdtsWeb gjWndowsMeda jjwindows HTfellis 

= g 

Purpose : ttee of Chemical Weapons by Iraq 

Enter a Query [Use of Chemical Weap 

No. of Results |To 

Conclusion : Add Conclusion J 

IMH IBBM ^ 


■rjiiins'iifai'f.i'.'n a l ia t Mis ti aai 

CNS ' Evidence Iraq Used Chemical Weapons 
Duiing the 1991 ... 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even If Iraq intended to 
make extensive use of chemical weapons, a number of 
factors precluded this option. The remarkable speed 


The Chemical Weapons Convention - A guided . 

tour r |r| 






A<^ .^1 $ub‘Uhlt 


R^oye^.,;^ 


ESI 


I <■* Extract:;; 


•»YahoolMt...| ^Unttted-... [ B? MyOw...| ^X-Sessioo | i!^lnbox-C^..,[ |jQhtti[^!//bc- 12!07PW 


35 

















The results from the search engine that you find relevant can be selected by clicking their 
icon and clicking on 'Add Selections'. The Web pages selected are added to the 
statements frame at the bottom left. 


'3 http://eKcalibur.isi.edu:8888/cgi-btn/trellis_web/main-pl - Microsoft Internet Enplo 


He' Edit View Favorites Tools 




4-Back T H ^ @ ^ I ^Search Favorites ( ^Madia 0 | # [gg ^ Q 0 ^ 


Address|^http://excalibur.»sl.edu:8888/cgi-bin/trellis_web/main. pi 


“M ^go 


Links ®FreeHotmalI ©Google © Local TrelHs ©Sign In • Yahoo! Matf ©Trellis Web ©WIndws Media ©Windows © TrelHs 


Trellis Web 




Purpose : 

UsG of Chemical Weapons by Iraq 


Enter a Query 

jUse of Chemical Weap 


No. of Results 

f>0 ^ '■ “ 

h. 

Conclusion : 

Add ConrJusion 



.i 

—.— 



OgESESSSI^ 


■ 


0 


IHie! Ch«mira) Weapons CiJom'ention - A. guided 

tmir ^ ^ 


CNS - Evidence Ii-aq Used Chemical Weapons f" 

During tlie 1991 ... 


CNS * Evidence Iraq Used Chemical Weapons 
Daring the 1991 ... 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even if Iraq intended to 
make extensive use of chemical weapons, a number of 
factors precluded this option. The remarkable speed 


jKBgBSHj 


IJ 2 J 23 I iKSSSSOi JESSSBISi J 

















The selected pages can be renamed to reflect the salient fact that they contain that needs 
to be brought up in the analysis of the overall purpose. You can rename something by 
selecting it and pressing Ren (one of the buttons for editing of current selections). A 
selected page can also be deleted (selecting it and then clicking on the Delete button). 
Anything in the statements frame can also be moved to the analysis frame on the right 
hand side to start building the analysis (by selecting it and clicking the "Move ->" button). 






RIfv' tdit View T.3VoritB5 Too!? Holp ___ 

i^dross http://excalibur W.edu:8ee8/cgt-bin/trelli$_^ . 

Unks ^Free Hotmail ©Goo^ Local Trellis Sign in - Yahoo! Map ^ Trellis W eb ^ Win dows Med ia ^W indows ^T rellis 


























Not all statements come from Web pages. You can also add new statements manually, for 
example an email message, or a note about a conversation, or any other text. This is done 
by ciicking on "Add user data". You can specify a URL if you wish, but it is not necessary. 

Any new statements entered manuaily aiso have to be selected in order to be added to the 
statements frame and ultimately to the analysis. 



[ll <21 I ^Search fife'j Favorites ^Media ^ | ^ ^ Q ( D ^ ^ 


Addresshtt p;//excalibur.isi.edu:88Se/cgi-b<n/tre ffis_web/main.p< ______ .. 

Links ^Free Hotmail ^Google 0Local TroBis ^Sign In - Yahoo! Mail .(|]l TreBis Wob ^Windows Macla ^Wl^ows 


TroUis Web ^ 

Purpose : Use of Chornfea? Weapons by Iraq 

Enter a Query |Use of Chemical We 


No. of Results jlO 
Conclusion ; Add Crmrlustoa 

££321 jElESSSSaS! JOS 232 I 

CNS > Evidence Iraq Used Clieuiic 
Doling the 1991 ... 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even 
make extensive use of chemical weapor 
factors precluded this option. The remar 


User Data £dit Window > Microsoft Internet 


[Event at Al Jubayl 


URLCifany): |hltp;//vvww. gedcom.org/ 


The Chemical Weapons Convention - A guided 


■aiTBial KTwa vmi ■'.'.wm al SiBsnal KgiHEa r 


CJSI5> Evidence Iraq Used Chemical Weapons P 

Duiingtlie 1991 ... 



Soldiers at Ai Jubayl, after a bonto 
reported a caustic swell and skin 
rashes on 15th Hay] 


trnmmm M iBgaa igiw t i l imi ■M ' iHsa maBKM Mawwi 



















Some statements denote a source (e.g., CNN) that you want to cite in your anaiysis. You 
can describe a source in detail using the 'Desc' button as shown. This description wiii be 
shown whenever you click on this source statement. 




Address http: //excalibur .isi. edu :8888/cgi-bin/trelfis_web/main .pi 

Links FreeHotmal ^Gooflle ^LocalTreb @agnln--Yehooj Hall @ 


Trellis Web 

Purpose : Use of Chemical Weapons hy Iraq 

Enter a Query |use of Chemical Weap 

No. of Results (To 
Conclusion: Add Condraon 



CNS - E\ideiice Iraq TFsed Chemical Weapons 
During the 1991 ... p 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even if Iraq intended to 
make extensive use of chemical weapons, a number of 
factors precluded this option. The remarkable speed 

The CheiniraJ Weapons Com'ention - k guided 


i$l 11 TgYalwo!... I Quntiaed -I B|x-S«slon | gexoBiu 





y-AwA.illglteurce-: fl 1:51 W' 


39 































You can also view user-entered statements by clicking on them. 


3 http://eKcaIibur.isuc<iu:8888/cgt>bift/trell«_web/maiitpl» 


m Edfl: View Tools ^ 




Address [@ http://excatour 

ihks ^FreeHotmaS ©Google ^ 


^Back «4 T (Q ^ ^ I Ct 


3 http;/7eKcalibur.isledij:8888/treilis_web/cdched/varunrjdirt0_998S848St.html - Mkrpsdft 


Fte Edt View Favorites Tools 




Trellis Web I 

Purpose : Use of Chetiit 

Enter a Query |use o(ciemi 

No. of Results |l0 

Conclusion: Add Conclus 


Add Selections 


iwmm 


C]S[f3 Etadeucp Iiaq U.sed C 
Duiing the 1991... 

... of chemical weapons occurrec 
make extensive use of chemical 
factors precluded this option. Tht 


The Cheimcal Weapons Con 
tour 


]|g| 


Evidfiuf R CNS 


Event at Al Jobavl 


4-Back - 4 - Q tS I gjSearth (^Favorites ^Media (g | Ife" #1^ jg ® ^ 


Address j© http://excafibur.l$i.edu:8888/trell»s_web/cached/vafunrjirl0_99868‘l851 .html 




Unks ©FrccHotmal ©Google ©LocalTrelis ©Signin-Ydhoo! Mail ©Trelts Web ©Windows Mecfa ©Windows ©Trellis 




Title : Event at Al Jubayl 


■3 


Text: 

Soldiers at Al Jubayl, after a borab, reported a caustec smell and skin rashes on ISth Hay 
Reference URL: 
http ://www. ge dc om. org 
EdH| 


if 


I Internet 


UpST 


Add Unit I Add Sub-Unit ; I | ItopOirt | Re^toi^ 


f — f~~ I jjjO lfttfemet ; 


^ iI ^Yahoot I ^Uriaied m 4 1 g^Inboxr;.. I ©http!//e..>} P^Oemo;f.4.|rBT-Av^,,| |©httpV^/^^^^ 


40 


kill' 


































To modify a user-entered statement, select it and click on the Edit button, then enter the 
new information. 


3http://eKCallbur.iSi.ifdu:8880/cgi7bin/tr^feiilWcb/i^tMaii!^: 


'3 User Data Edit Window - Microsoft Internet Explorer 




He Edit Vi^ Favorites Tools 


4- BiKk ^ r Q [g I ^ 




Address http://excaibur,i$].edu;888 
Utks ^FreeHotmail ^Google ^ 


He E(k View Favorites Tools Hdp 


4^Back ’ *4 ® ^ I ^Search [iJFavorites ^Media Qf | iBj» ^ j3 (p ^ ^ 


Trcllb Web 

Purpose : Ust> of Clieml 

Enter a Query 
No. of Results 
Conclusion: Add Conclus 


[UseofDiennj 


Add .Seloctiori6 


CWS - Evideuce Iraq Used C 
During the 1991... 

... of chemical weapons occurred 
make extensive use of chemical 
factors precluded this option. Th( 


The CKeinical Weapons Con 
tour 


liEBiHl EBII IBS KJEtSI 


EridencehyCNS 


Event at Al Jubayl 




Address http://excalib«jr.isl.edu:e888Arellis_web/cached/varunr_dirl0_998684851,html 

Links gPreeHotmal ©Google ©local Trelis © Sign in > Yahoo! Mail ©TrelisWeb © Windows Media ©Windows ©Trellis 

Title: 

Event at Al Jub ayl J:; 

UKLCf any): 

http://www.gedcom.org 


Soldiers at Al Jubayl^ after a bomb, 


reported a caustec smell and skin 

Text: 

rashes on ISth Hay 


BSMS 


\ s 

.S' 

^. 

; 1: f 1 . ^Internet _ J 


Add Unit | Add SubtUnlt % | 


iBsimi 


It]Dm ’~ ;■ .\ 

idBaartj ll ^ |j ~»ralx)Ol... | ,^L>iBtlMl ...I |jc)x-Sw5iori | @excatbu...j ilgllntox- ... | j]http!f/e..; [|^t>^ ; L.| |j ?-tjnui... | |^]|jlier D^^^ 1;53PH ; 


41 














At any time, you can compose your analysis from the statements that you have selected 
and created. The analysis of a purpose is made of units, which may have sub-units in 
turn. Click the "Add Unit" button, where you can select statements and constructs from 
the TRELLIS language in order to create an expression. You can also annotate the source 
of the analysis and qualify the source for its reliability and credibility. 

You can build a unit using the default TRELLIS constructs, but you can also define your 
own by selecting "New". 





€ 

Trellis Web 

Purpose: 


Enter a Query 

(Us. 

No. of Results 

IF 

Conclusion: 

Adi 

mm 




^ Unit Editor Window - Microsoft Internet EKplorer 






File Edit, View j^awrites Tools Help 


Add Se!e<*ons 


CNS - Ewlencelra 
During the 1991.,. 
... of chemical weapor 
make extensive use ot 
factors precluded this 


The Chemiral We a 
toiu 


^^Add another source in LHS 

lEElMi 



pi ^Go 


According to Source | Evidence by CNS \ Which is 

_use a user defined_ 

construct r 




none« 




Because 


- none - 


And 


U 


Because 


-B 




■3ir 




l EBaiiiESa r 


Evidence bj’ CNS 


Event at AJ Jubayl 


I ml 


I Edit I Import ■ Rpstow | <-Extract,- 


I^Done ^ ^ ^ ^ 

StartII ] [SJ ll£l 11 V?Yahool... | T^Urttted |^X-Session | [^excatbu.,. | g^IrAox-... | ^http!//e... ( p^Demo i f...j Q ?>.Sout... ||Qun>t Edi>.^ liZSPM 


2 































Units are normally shown as a collapsible list that the user can select and expand. If any 
sub-units are added after selecting a statement, they will be added under this statement in 
the collapsible tree. 


^hltp://eHcalibur.isi.edu:8888/cgi-bin/trellis web/maifi.pl - Microsoft Internet Explorer 






Ne, E(St View Favbrites Tools Help 


^ JQ 21 SaJ I ^Search ^Fworltes ^Meda 0 | ^ -- 3 ® Q "V? 


Address http://excalibur.isl.edu;8888/cgi-bin/trellis_web/main.pi 


3 ■^^} 


Lhks ©FreeHotmiri g Google gj Local Trellis g) Sign in-Yahoo! Mail ©TreiltsWeb ® Windows Media ©Windows ©Trefc 


TrdlLs Web 

Purpose : Use of Chemical Weapons by Iraq 

Enter a Query |Use of Chernical Weep 
No. of Results |To ' 

Conclusion: Add Conchision 


JKBBliJ 


Msser 3 


Evidence b}' CNS 


Event at AI Jnbavl 


CNS - Evideo c e .tr aq Ifs e d Ch e nii c al W e ap ons ’;; ■ 

During the 1991... j- ' 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even if Iraq intended to 
make extensive use of chemical weapons, a number of f 

factors precluded this option. The remarkable speed r; ; - 

The CheniiraJ Weapons Convention - A guided 
tour r* 


^ Ev ent at AI Juba yl is elaborated In Evide nce by CN S 
^ I morD 1 

yccutdiritJ }>t ;f.o<jn:e bvid enci; by CNS 


Add Unit I Add S^-Unit. I Renrov^ 


imij 


Import I RcstpTO , I <• Extract . 


pi Done ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ; ' •; ' y 

■ f^Startl lj ^ ^ iiJl I I IffYahool... | ^Undtied...| ^X-Sessiw | Bexcaitoo.., | '^Inbox- 


bInternet 


I:25PM 


43 


















You can also use statements and units from other users if they are relevant to your 
purpose. To do this, click on the "Import" button and you will be prompted for a keyword 
to search (here 'Iraq') in either Purpose names or Statement titles entered by other users. 




I 3| http://eHcalib uris(.edii:8888yc0-^m/ti^li»iji|(cb/iiii^tiiH.tf%i^i^ft^^%^^fp^^j^ 

[^http;//excaliburJsleda* 8888 /cgi-binArellis_web/data 4 )l?user==vanjnr 8 ;pdu‘=:dirl 08 ;op~a^u^^ijit‘::,Mi^^.<^ 


r;:j. i:*: 


t^ile EcRt .Vi^ 



























From the results obtained, you can select a purpose. The system will show an uneditable 
version of the analysis frame. You can select any unit and import it. Notice that if you 
select the top unit the entire analysis is imported. 




1 

|^http;//excaliburJsUdiK8888/cgi-binAi-enis„web/data4)»?user=varunrikpdiJ‘=:dirlO«;Qp=^adduser^H 


file Edit View 
^Badc ^ » 

Address |Q http:/ 
Uiks ^Free Hob 

Trdlls We 

Purpose; 
Enter a Query 
No. of Results 
Conclusion: 





Iraq Used Ch e mical Weapons is probably true 

K If.gq bas cliojnjc is elaborated in observed and 

^ Ciiemicaf Warfare Activity At T alil and Chemical roun ds vve re fouivd in 15 bun kers 

^ Iraq Used Choinlcal Weapons Is elaborated In Re ports from the field feua r dlnq affoctetl porsonn ej 

> Iraq U sed Chemica l Wea pons Is supported by Iraqi So urc e 

^ Iraq has a hi stoiy of aggre ssion is elaborated in Iraq attacketf Ir an in 1986 

. Iraq Used Chemtca! Weanons stands though contradicted by Irak said cliomical y/oapcms wm o not used 
^ in the Gulf War 


CNS - Evide^ 
During the 1' 
... of chemical' 
make extensiv; 
factors preclud 


The Chemirr 

totir 

1122231JII2 

Evidence by' 

Search Word(s) 

Event at A1J 

|lraq 

Any Word 



[. and Keywords to see all ] 

'BSSIBSaH 

AH Words C Keywords ^ 


























After importing, the selected units and sub-units (aiong with the statements used in them) 
as well as the sources are added to your own set. 


http://excalibur.i5i.edu:8B88/cg»-bin/trcllis_w€b/mairLpl - Microspn: Internet Explorer 


File Vi^ Favorftes Tools Help 




4=»Back » © [2 ta} I ^Favorites ^Meda | ^ ^ " {3 ® Q 


Addrws |@ http: //excalibur bi edu:&B88/cgi-bln/tre!lis_w^ 




U*s ©FreeHottiw^l ©Google ©Local Trellis ©Sign in-Yahoo! Mail ©Trellis Web ©Windows Media ©Windows ©Trellis 


rrcllte Web 

Purpose : Uso of Weapons by Iraq 

Enter a Query juse of Chemical Weap 

No. of Results |10 

Conclusion: Add Concbision 


■'iHBBi tsaai Bga i 


■iJBMBsagaa ■ramEg.Eaa 

CNS - Evidence L'aq Used Clieinical Weapons 
During tJte 1991 ... 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even if Iraq intended to 
make extensive use of chemical weapons, a number of 
factors precluded this option. The remarkable speed 

The Chemical Weapons Convuutioa - A guided 
tour 


Evidence by CNS F 

Event at A1 Jubayl 

F 

Iraq Used Dieinical Weapons 

F 

Iraq has chemical WTiapons 

F 


Two cheimcal decontamination sites were obseiTod F 




jJ' 




Event at A! Jjibayl is elaborated in Evide nc e by CNS 
(more) 

:jircord'ng io scsurce EyidjjnceJiif .ONS 

Iraq Used Che mica l Wea pon s Is probably true 

Iraq has chem ic al wea pons is elaborated in Two chem i cal de contamination 
^ sites were observed and Chemical Warfare Actlvitv At Tatil and Chento l 
rounds were found iti 15 buiikers 

K Ira q U sed C h emical W e apons is elaborated In Re port s from the field 
^ reoardinu affected personnel 

^ I r a q Use d Chemicaf Weap orts is supported by ira(iI_Source 
^ Iraq has a history of aggression is elaborated in Iraq attacked Iran In 19B6 


Import, J Restore 






















You can also rearrange the units in the analysis by dragging and dropping them in the 
analysis frame. This is useful if you do your analysis bottom-up and want to relate units 
that you created previously separately. 

To move a unit, select it first by moving the mouse to the left side of the triangle widget 
and clicking on it. Hold down the mouse and move it to the place where you want the unit 
to be. A black line shows the position where the unit would be dropped. A transparent 
box shows its future parent unit. (So you can either drag to, or into). 


There are 2 modes of dragging : Left-click and drag drags the whole tree (as shown), and 
right click and drag just drags the particular unit. 


3 hktp://excalibur.isi.edu:8888/cgi-bin/trel!is web/main.pl - Micf osoft Internet Explorer 


Ffe; Edt View Favorftes Took Help 




D 


<i=*Back ^ ^ I^Favorfces ^Media ^ j ^ ^ (D ^ ^ 


(fiddress lttp://excaHxr.isi.cdu:8888/cgi-bn/trellis_web/mair>, pi 


HI- 


;iH <5 ©FreeHotroal ©Google ©LocalTrels ©Signin-yj^lMaa ©Trefe Web ©Windows©Wi ndows ©Tr dlis 


Trellis Web 

Purpose : of Cbemloal Weapons hy Iraq 

Enter a Query |Use of Chemical Weap 

No. of Results (l0 

Conclusion : Add Caiidusion 


Add ScledipTis,' 


CNS - Evidence Iraq Used Chemical Weapons 
During the 1991... p 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even if Iraq intended to 
make extensive use of chemical weapons, a number of 
factors precluded this option. The remarkable speed 

The Chemical Weapons Conventioti - A guided 
tour 




Evidence by CNS 


r 


Event at Al Jtibayl 


Iraq Used Chemical Wr?ajKins 


Iraq has chemical weapons 


Two chemical decontamination sites were obseived U 


zl 


' Event at Al Jubavl Is elaborated in Fvicience by CNS 
^ [ more j 


rated in Two chemical deco nt aminatio n 



► I more ] 

^ Chemical Warfare Activity At Talil overlaps with Possible MunHions 
Storauc al Rumavlah 

> [ more ] 

C hemical r ounds were fouml in 15 bunk ers . 

^ [ more j 

^ Two ch emical de contamin ation sit es were observed . 


K Iraq Used Chemical Weapons Is elaborated In Reports from the field 
^ reuarding affected personnel 

^ Ira q Used C h emi c al Weapo ns Is supported by Iraq i S ource 
Iraq has a history of aggression Is elaborated In Iraq attacked Iran in 19Bd 


KSEESai 


I JBBSSi 1S&9 El 


pi]Done 

;flBstart| |J i5i ^ Cj) || ’^Yafiool... | (^UnKted,..) [^X-Session | @excdbu...| 1)^Inbox , 


I J^'lntefnot 


{cl30 1:34 PM 


47 





















After the unit has been moved: 


'31 http;//eKCdIibur.i5i.edu:8888/cgi-b}n/lrel!lsjweb/mam.pl - Microsoft Internet Btplorer 


f=le Edit View Favorites Tools Help 


. 


<}=*Back ^ I QSeych pypavorites ^Medla :0| W ^ ^ O © Q ^ 


Adless I® http: //excalibur.isi. edu :8888/cgi-biiVtreSs_web/mah. pi 




'irts .©FreeHobMil ©Google ©LocalTrdk © Sign m-Vahoo! Hoi ©TreHlsWeb ©Windows Media ©Wndowi ©Tfelis 


Trellis Web 

Purpose : Use of Chemical Weapons by Iraq 

Enter a Query |Use of Chemical Weap 

No. of Results [io 

Conclusion: Add Conrhision 


Ad^^eloctipns /, J P|ito 


CNS - Evidence Ii^aq Used Chetnical Weapons 
During the 1991 ... p 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even if Iraq intended to 
make extensive use of chemical weapons, a number of 
factors precluded this option. The remarkable speed 

The Chemical Weapons Com entiDn * A ginded 
tour ^ 


iMBJ CBS EtBSKl 


i BBaiBgaM r 


EridencebyCNS 

r 

Event at Al Jubajd 

r 

Iraq Used Chemical Weapons 

r 

Iraq has chemical weapons 

r 


T'wo chemical decontamination sites vvere obseived T 


M 


f vent at Al >lubavl Is elaborated in F.vidence bv CNS 
[ more ] 

.iiC AMillng to sojico f vld ertce by C NS 

Iraq has chemical wcanon s Is elaborated In Two chem i cal decontaminatio n 
^ sites were observed and Chemical Warfare Activity At Talil and Chemical 
roun ds wore fo u nd in 15 bunkers 

> [ more | 

^ Chemlca! Warfare Activity At Talil overlaps with Possible Munitions Stotaqe 
at Rumavlab 
> (more ] 

Chemical roundsS were found in 15 hunkers . 
b [ more ] 

^ Two chemical tiecontamination sites were observed . 

Iraq U sed Chemical We apo ns is probably true 

K Iraq Used Chemical Weap ons is elaborated In toiqjrtsIrom_tb.efield 
^ regardlno affected personnel 

> Iraq Used Chom ic al Weapon s Is supported by Iraqi Source 

b Iraq has a hisfory of aonression is elaborated in I rag attacke dlrari in 19116 


Add Sub'UnH; | pterndve 


( GSBI IfliEHlH I 


; I h*act 


IT 


t^; internet 


'iil^aitl ll 0 I$1 || •gyjhool... I ^linaded...! 3§X-^sion | ^exciAu...| |$|Inbox- ,., | |©tittp;//._ P^Dt^ ! f...| fi? 1:38PM 


48 

















TRELLIS can be used offline if you cache Web pages before disconnecting from the 
network. Select a statement and click Toggle'. This link now points to a cached copy. A 
link pointing to a cached copy is highlighted in a darker green color. 


http://cxcalibur.isi.edu:8B88/cgi~bin/trellis_web/main.pI - Microsofl: Internet Explorer 


Nc Edit View Favorites Tools Hc%) 


mwmsK’Ts .nifii 


^aBack ^ © Hi I CtSeardi gjFavorltes f^Metia ^ j ^ ^ |3 © Q 


http://excalibijf.i5i.edu:8888/cgi-bin/trel!is_web/maln.pl 




® Free Hotmail ©Google © Local TreSs ©Signin-Yahool Mafl ©Trellis Web ©Windows Media ©Windows ©Trellis 


Trellis W'cb 

Purpose : Use of Chemical Weapons by Iraq 

Enter a Query juse of Chemical Weap 
No. of Results ITo" 

Conclusion: Add Oonnlusioit 




IIESMM 


CNS * Evidence Iraq Used Clieuucal Weapons 
During the 1991... p 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even if Iraq intended to 
make extensive use of chemical weapons, a number of 
factors precluded this option. The remarkable speed 

The Clieminal Weapons Courenlion - A guided 
tour f” 






Evidence by CNS 


Event at Al Jubayl 4“ 

© 

Iraq Used Clmmical Weapons 

F 

Iraq has chemical weapons F 


Two chemicai decontamination sites \\^re obseized F 




Event at Al Jubayl is elaborated In Evidence by CNS 
[ more ] 

af c-crciing tc acuice fMd e nee by..CN S 

Iraq has chemical vveanons Is elaborated In Two chemical decontamination 
^ si tes were observed and Chemteal Warfare Activi ty A1 Talil and Chernical 
rounds were tounrl in 1fi bunkom 

> [ more ] 

^ C hemical Warfare Act ivity At TalM overlaps with Possible Munitions Sto ra ge 
at Rumavlah 

> [ more | 

^ Chemical rounds were found in 15 hunkers . 

> {more } 

Two chemical deconta min a tio n sites were observed . 

^ Iraq ll«od Chemical Weapons is firohably true 

K Iraq Used Chemicai Weanorts Is elaborated in Reports from the field 
^ rena rdi no affec ted ners onn el 

^ Iraq Us ed Chem ic al Weap ons is supported by Ir aqi Source 
^ Iraq has a histor y of aq tires sio n is elaborated in Iraq attacke d Iran in 198 6 


issaffl ai 


^d, SidJ-.UnH- I llanv^yR 


Bai Ksaagf n gi aai MBsaBai 

.o. 


(ipkjoc 

iil^aartl 


j nil ^ l5l ll 'VyYahool... | /^Untided ...| |X]x-Session | [^excaEbu... | i!!^If^ox- ... | |©http://., ’^■••1 3 


|(|S|;iriternet 

: TI42PM 


49 























Sometimes you do not know yet how you want to use a statement in an analysis but you 
want to include it in the analysis frame. You can select statements and move them to the 
analysis frame with the 'Move->' button. These selections go under a 'Notes and other 
information' category. 

This facility is useful to drag and drop statements into the analysis. 


I ^ h»p://excalibur.isi.edu;8888./cgi-b(n/trelljs_web/iiiairM)t > Microsoa Internet Exirforef 


Fte Edit View Favorites Tools Help 


<=«Back ^ ^ ID I QSearch (^Favorites @r4edio 0 | 1^ " ^ ^ ^ 3 ® Q ^ _;_ 

'il^ess ■ |^http://excalibur.lsl .edu!8888/cgl-b{n/tre8is_web/maln.pl 

lW<s ® Free Hotmd © Google g) Locd Trefc g] Sign In • yahooj Mail @ Tr^ Web ig]Window5M^ g[Winctows ^Tr^ 



Trellis Web 

Purpose : Usf of Chornic/il Weapons hy Iraq 

Enter a Query juse of Chemical Weap 
No. of Results flO 


yccOffiTtCi fo <ourr e CN 

I raq lias chemical wea pon s Is elaborated in Iwo.c|iemicM,,(lecpjM 
V sites were ohseived and Chnnrica! Wariaie Activity A1 Talil and Chemical 
rounds we re fo und In 15 hu nkers 



> (more j 

^ Chomicai Warfare Activity At Talil overlaps with Possible Munitions Slo iMfi 
at Ru ni avia h 
tr { more | 


CNS • Evidence Iraq Used Choitiical Weapons 

Dating the 1991... p- ;; 

... of chemical weapons occurred. Even if Iraq intended to 

make extensive use of chemical weapons, a number of 

factors precluded this option. The remarkable speed 

The CUeiniral Weapons Convention - A ginded r 

tour 


^ Chemical rounds were found in 15 bunkers . 

> [ more j 

Tw o che mical ilerontatn i natio n sites were. pbserved . 

Iraq Used Chemical Weapons is probably true 

K Iraq Used Chem ical Weapons is elaborated in R eports fr om the field 
reuardinu affected personnel 



Evidence by CNS 

© 

Event at M Jubayl 

© 

Baqirsed GieiuicaJ Weapons 

r 

Iraq has chemical weapons 

r 

Two chemical decontamination sites were 

observed F 














You can modify units in the analysis frame by clicking on the "Edit" button. 

The "Remove" button deletes the selected unit and all of its sub-units. 

The "Restore" button is used as a single-step undo. 

The "Extract" button is used after selecting a statement. Then all the sources that it finds 
inside the statement are added to the current selections. 




/ 




You can also view the results of your analysis annotated in several markup languages. To 
view this, go back to the Main Screen where you can see the marked up versions of the 
purposes that were just edited, by clicking on the 'XML' button for the XML markup, 'RDF' 
button for RDF markup and ’DAML' button for the DAML version. 


In this example, the XML version of the 'Use of chemical weapons by Iraq' purpose is 
shown: 


'll httpi//excalibur.lsi,edu:888B/cgi«bin/l:rellisjweb/mtBn.pl ” Microsoft Internet Btplorer 




Fie Edit View Favorites Tools He^ 




4='Back ^ (0 ^ I ^Search Favorites. f§?Mle<ia ^ j ^ ^ (D 


Ariiress http: //excalibur isi : 8^/cgi-birvftrel^^^ . pi 


gjFreeHotrnaa g| Google Local Trellis gjSgn in - Ya^! Mai #] Trelis Web @ V»Mows Media ® Vfindows @ Trellis 




<?xml version="1.0’' ?> 

<IDOCTYPE trellis (View Stwrce for full doctype...)> 

- <trellis xmlns:xsi="http://www.vv3.org/2001/XMLSchema-lnstance" 

xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation=*http://excallbur.lsLedu:8888/trellis_web/trellis.xsd“> 

<purpose>Use of Chemical Weapons by Iraq</purpose> 

<conclusion /> 

~ <statGment> 

“ <lelement> 

<title>Event at Al Jubayl</title> 

<link>/trellis_web/cached/varunr_dlrl0_99B684851.html</link> 

<data /> 

</lelement> 

<relation>fs elaborated m</relation> 

- <relement> 

<tit!e>EvIdence by CNS</title> 

<linl<>http://cns.mlls.edu/pubs/npr/tucker97.htm</iirik> 

<data /> 

</relement> 

- <stsource> 

<titlB>Evldence by CISIS</title> 

<lin(<>http://cns.mils.edu/pubs/npr/tucker97.htm</!ink> 

<data /> 

</stsource> 

<substatements /> 

</statement> 

- <statement> 

- <lelement> 

<title>Iraq Used Chemical Weapons</title> 
<link>/trellis_web/cached/varunr_dlr7_990639718.html</link> 

<data /> 

</lelement> 

<qualifier>ls probably true</qualifier> 

- <substatements> 

- <statement> 


[l^Doiie 


....i 


Internet 


iistartl ll ^ iSl |j ^Untitled-... i B X-Sesskm | |llexcalbu:/...| i!^lnbo»-C>j...| |^htt^^^ B?-lWant ...| tahtdocs | ^Demo;file... j 


52 













You can also see the Schemas (DTD, XML Schema) for the XML data, the RDF Schema for 
the RDF data, and the DAML ontology by clicking the respective buttons on top of the 


screen. 


I 'g|http://eKcalibur.isi.edu;8B88/cgi»bin/treltisjweb/login>p> > Microsoft Internet Explorer 


File Edit View Favorites tools Help 

4='Back <4 21 tIaJ I ©Search ^Favorites 

Address 1^ http: //excalibur isl edu:8eB8/cgi-bin/trellis_web/login. pi 






ilHd ©FreeHotmil ^Google €l'-'*«'Treb ® Sign in-Yahoo I Mail ^TtdlisWeb ® Windows Media ^Whdows ©Trellis 



Trellis Web 


Schemas and Ontologies 

I 




XMl , 

*>pH 


Should I Hire Bill Gates 
Buffer Overrun Paper 
Mission To Athens 
Test Purpose 
Which Car Should I buy 


Should I VisK India HEHiM ' 

Use of biological vireapons 

by Iraq mi™ 

Test purpose lijlSiSSli 


Sr°" " EM msmmsrn 

Note: ^ 

All the MiiiVup files jre kept on the server in a non web-shired directory. If the files are required to be hosted. theycJrHi^^^Wsl^JlIy. 
Any Comments or Suggestions, Please mail me 


PAML‘.Dntpfogy^^ 

RDP Triplps 


BDP 

"r^ 

"551 

" 5 ^ 

ijfil 

Rf)F 


RflPynpl^ 




DAML ; 
DAML; 
DAHUill 

DAML;^ 


Rename 

Beoame 

Bertame ; 

Rename 

Rename 

Rename 


Delete 
Delete; 
Delete; 
Delete; 
Peiete> 
Delete J 



JKSSSQSI JElSISlSIi 


Instance documents 








































t 


The 'Save' Button is used to take a single backup of all your purposes. If at a later time, the 
'Restore' button is clicked, all the purposes from the time that 'Save' was clicked are 
restored. 


The 'Help' Button brings up a User Guide. 

The 'Logout' Button brings you back to the Login page. 


I htt:p;//eKcalibur.isi.edu;8888/cqi-bin/t:rellis_web/logiiM>l - MicrosoR: Internet Exploret 


Edit, ^View.; favorites Tools ’Hdp ’ ' . 

^ :4 - ^ l^t^vQrjtes; . 0 |! 6 " #1^ - ^ 

Address http://excaibur.lsi.edui8888/cghbinArellis j»iieb/!oQin.pl _ .. 

'Mrfe ® ft’ee Ho^ ® Google ©Local Trefe ©Sign in - yahoo! Ha3 © Trelfis Web © Windows Media © '^ows © Tr^s 





All th* MjAup files are kept on the server in a non »Meb-shJfe<J directory. If the files are required to be hosted, they can be saved locally. 
Any Comments or Suggestions, Please mail tne 



































