AD-A228 053 


AFHRL-TP-90-74 


AIR FORCE 





CONTINGENCY SCENARIO GENERATOR 
USER S MANUAL 


Todd S. Dart, ILt, USAF 
Jody A. Guthals, 2Lt, USAF 

MANPOWER AND PERSONNEL DIVISION 
Brooks Air Force Base, Texas 78235-5601 


DT1C 


jtf«k!?.LECTF j 

IJVjV 02 19901 


D 


November 1990 

Final Technical Paper for Period April 1988 - September 1990 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


LABORATORY 


AIR FORCE SYSTEMS COMMAND 
BROOKS AIR FORCE BASE, TEXAS 78235-5601 





NOTICE 


When Government drawings, specifications, or other data are used for any purpose 
other than in connection with a definitely Government-related procurement, the 
United States Government incurs no responsibility or any obligation whatsoever. 
The fact that the Government may have formulated or in any way supplied the said 
drawings, specifications, or other data, is not to be regarded by implication, or 
otherwise in any manner construed, as licensing the holder, or any other person or 
corporation; or as conveying any rights or permission to manufacture, use, or sell 
any patented invention that may in any way be related thereto. 

The Public Affairs Office has reviewed this paper, and it is releasable to the Nai.onal 
Technical Information Service, where it will be available to the general public; 
including foreign nationals. 

This paper has been reviewed and is approved for publication. 


WILLIAM E. ALLEY, Technical Director 
Manpower and Personnel Division 


ROGER W. ALFORD, Lt Col, USAF 

Deputy Chief, Manpower and Personnel Division 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information <s estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding This burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, To Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports. 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Hignway. Suite 1204, Arlington. VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188). Washington, DC 20503. 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

November 1990 Final Paper - April 1988 to September 1990 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Contingency Scenario Generator User’s Manual 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

PE - 62205F 

PR - 7719 

TA - 19 

WU - 11 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Todd S. Dart 

Jody A. Guthals 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Manpower and Personnel Division 

Air Force Human Resources Laboratory 

Brooks Air Force Base, Texas 78235-5601 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

AFHRL-TP-90-74 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAMES(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY 
REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

The Contingency Task Training (CTT) Scenario Generator was developed in response to Request for 
Personnel Research (RPR) 84-02 from Headquarters Air Training Command (HQ ATC) and the USAF 
Occupational Measurement Center (USAFOMC). The intent of the scenario generator is to develop simple 
contingency scenarios which, when attached to standard task surveys, could be used to determine the critical 
wartime tasks needed in all Air Force Specialties (AFSs). The scenario generato. is a user-friendly, 
microcomputer-based program written in Pascal 4.0. The User’s Manual provides step-by-step instructions on 
creating a scenario using the scenario generator. Three types of conflict scenarios can be created: high-, mid-, 
and low-intensity conflicts. An easily accessible, on-iine help file provides definitions of all variables used in 
the scenarios. Appendices provide a listing of the variables, directions on using the on-line help file, and 
instructions for modifying the scenario generator. 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

contingency tasks task surveys 

microcomputer program training technology 

scenario generator 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

40 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

UL 


NSN 7540-01 -200-5500 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18 
298-102 
























AFHRL Technical Paper 90-74 


November 1990 


CONTINGENCY SCENARIO GENERATOR USER’S MANUAL 


Todd S. Dart, ILt, USAF 
Jody A. Guthals, 2Lt, USAF 


MANPOWER AND PERSONNEL DIVISION 
Brooks Air Force Base, Texas 78235-5601 


Reviewed and submitted for publication by 

Timothy M. Bergquist, Major, USAF 
Chief, MPT Technology Branch 



SUMMARY 


The Contingency Task Training (CTT) Scenario Generator 
User's Manual is written to accompany the CTT scenario generator 
developed by the Air Force Human Resources Laboratory (AFHRL) at 
the request of the Headquarters Air Training Command (HQ ATC) and 
the USAF Occupational Measurement Center (USAFOMC). The intent 
of the scenario generator is to develop simple contingency 
scenarios which, when attached to standard task surveys, could be 
used in determining critical wartime tasks for all enlisted Air 
Force Specialties (AFSs). 

The manual provides step-by-step instruction on loading and 
running the program. Following that, specific instruction on 
creating a scenario is given. The generator can create three 
types of conflict situations; high, mid, and low-intensity 
conflicts. High and mid-intensity scenarios are the easiest to 
create. The first section dealing with scenario creation 
therefore builds a high-intensity conflict scenario. Each 
scenario category and variable are displayed and discussed to 
make building a scenario easier. Once a high-intensity scenario 
has been created the manual will then discuss building a low- 
intensity conflict (LIC). Building a LIC requires more variables 
as the situations are much more specific. 

The scenario generator is designed to be easy to use and 
maintain. The program consists of two parts, the scenario 
generator and the help file. The help file contains definitions 
of all variables listed in the scenario and can be directly 
accessed from the scenario program by pressing the FI key at any 
time. The program fits easily onto a floppy disk and runs from 
any DOS compatible computer. Scenarios can be printed out once 
completed or saved on disk. 

Appendix A contains a listing of all variables and their 
definitions. Appendix B describes in detail the workings of the 
on-line help program and how to use its features. Finally, 
Appendix C tells how to maintain or gain access to the program 
for modification for those with the expertise and desire to do 
so. 


Accession For .✓'J 

N VIS GRA&I 
DTI'.' TV 

Uu\.ri v- inch'd 
Jv : l ■ e r A i o 

□ 

□ 



‘*y - - ■ 

:>■ t 1 -- it. 1 on/ 

A'•'n ’} nMJ.it 

0 • S v <-■ pj 

d_j 

Y Cod©3 

ti’J/or 

i.al 







PREFACE 


The Contingency Task Training (CTT) scenario generator was 
developed under Work Unit 77191911, "Measurement and Analysis of 
Job and Mission Requirements." It was initiated in response to 
Request for Personnel Research 84-02, "Contingency Task Training 
Requirements," to provide a valid methodology for determining 
critical contingency or wartime tasks. The User's Manual was 
written to make the scenario generator easy and simple to use. 
The use of scenarios coupled with task surveys is not a new 
concept, yet it is' relatively unused. The scenario generator 
provides a consistent means of producing simple and effective 
scenarios. All the research associated with creating a scenario 
has been worked out and placed in the generator. The manual 
further eases the discomfort of creating a scenario from scratch 
by guiding the user through building a contingency situation. 
The authors would like to thank the following AFHRL personnel for 
their professional assistance: the Information Sciences Division 
for providing components used in the scenario generator, and Amns 
Chris Lennon and Robert Zook for their help with some of the 
programing details. 


ii 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

I. THE PROGRAM . 1 

II. LOADING THE PROGRAM. 1 

Initial Set-up . 1 

Running The Program . 3 

III. STARTING THE PROGRAM .3 

IV. THE HIGH AND MID-INTENSITY CONFLICT . 5 

V. THE HIGH-INTENSITY CONFLICT SCENARIO . 10 

VI. THE LOW-INTENSITY CONFLICT . 11 

VII. THE LOW-INTENSITY CONFLICT SCENARIO . 14 

APPENDIX A: CONTINGENCY DEFINITIONS . 15 

APPENDIX B: THE ON-LINE HELP FILE . 25 

APPENDIX C: MAINTENANCE AND MODIFYING THE CONTINGENCY 

SCENARIO GENERATOR . 29 


iii 
















CONTINGENCY SCENARIO GENERATOR USER'S MANUAL 


I. THE PROGRAM 

The Contingency Task Training (CTT) scenario generator is a 
Pascal program designed to produce simple wartime scenarios. The 
scenarios are intended for use with task surveys at the USAF 
Occupational Measurement Center (USAFOMC) at Randolph AFB, TX to 
determine which enlisted Air Force Specialty (AFS) tasks are 
critical during a particular wartime contingency. Subject Matter 
Experts (SMEs) would be given a survey and asked to rate training 
emphasis for each task required for the given scenario. Results 
would then be used in assessing training requirements for 
enlisted specialties. 

The program was written using Turbo Pascal version 4.0 and 
consists of two parts. The first, CTT.EXE, is the main scenario 
generator program. The on-line help is stored as CTT_REV.HLP and 
must be on the same disk as the main program to access the help 
function. Appendix A contains a list of all variables and their 
definitions as found in the on-line help. Refer to Appendix B 
for more information on using the help file. Both programs are 
easily stored on one 5 1/4" floppy disk. 

The program will run on any IBM (DOS) compatible machine 
with a minimum of 512K RAM. A color monitor is recommended but 
the program will work with a monocrome screen. The program 
should be run from a hard disk or preferably a RAM disk (also 
called a virtual disk) as this will greatly increase the on-line 
help access time. The program is a compiled version and as such 
it is not readily accessible for program modification. Refer to 
Appendix C for information on program maintenance. 


II. LOADING THE PROGRAM 

The Contingency Task Training scenario generator is very 
easy to use. Advanced computer users should skip down to the 
paragraph entitled "Running the Program". 

Initial Set-Up 

After turning the computer on wait for it to finish booting up, 
after which the following prompt will appear on the screen: 

C> 

[NOTE: This is assuming the computer has a hard disk drive. If 

it does not then consult the DOS manual for appropriate loading 
requirements.] 


1 



Next, place the floppy disk containing the scenario 
generator program into the floppy drive designated as the A: 
drive. For systems with two floppy drives this is usually the 
one on the left or on top, depending on how the machine is 
configured. Now, enter the following at the C> prompt: 

COPY A:*.* <press ENTER> 

This will copy the entire floppy disk contents onto the C: or 
hard drive. 

It may be beneficial to place the program into a separate 
directory (a directory is like a file in a filing cabinet). To 
do so, before copying the program onto the hard disk a directory 
must be created. The directory may be given any name up to 8 
characters long, but for now call it CTT. To make the directory 
enter: 

MD CTT <press ENTER> 

A directory entitled CTT has now been created. To enter the new 
directory type: 

CD\CTT <press ENTER> 

The following will appear on the screen: 

C:\CTT> 

The computer is now in the directory CTT. Now copy the contents 
from the floppy disk using the command already given. 

The computer's memory may also be used as a disk drive. 
This is called the RAM drive or virtual drive. However, all 
information stored here is only temporary and will be lost when 
the computer is turned off. The advantage of using the RAM drive 
is its speed. The computer has instant access to all the 
necessary information. The RAM drive is usually designated as 
the D: drive or sometimes the E: drive if the computer has two 
hard drives. Copying to the RAM drive is a simple matter of 
entering: 

D:(or E:) <ENTER> 

and then copying the floppy as before. 

Be sure the computer has a RAM drive installed before 
attempting to copy into one. The command for creating a RAM 
drive is contained in the CONFIG.SYS file of the root directory. 
Consult the DOS manual or someone more knowledgeable in this area 
if unsure how to create one. 


2 




Running the program 

Once the program is loaded and the appropriate drive and 
directory are selected simply type in: 

CTT <ENTER> 

and the program is off and running. 


I.II. STARTING THE PROGRAM 

Creating a scenario may appear difficult at first. Once all 
the terms and definitions become familiar creating simple 
scenarios can be done with speed and ease. Before running the 
program it is a good idea to read all the scenario variables and 
their definitions provided in Appendix A. This will help in 
creating a viable scenario from the start. The definitions are 
also stored within the program and may be accessed at any time by 
pressing the FI key. The help window will allow direct selection 
of variable definitions should any assistance be needed during 
scenario creation. Now that the program is up and running and all 
definitions have been read the next step is to create a scenario. 
The first screen of the program will describe the intent of the 
Contingency Task Training project: 


CONTINGENCY SCENARIO GENERATOR 

This program will provide you with a simple method of 
generating contingency scenarios. It was designed to 
be used with Job Inventories and provides a scenario 
where tasks are measured with chosen situations in 
mind. It may also be used for other occupational and 
research needs. 


PRESS ENTER TO CONTINUE 





Pressing ENTER switches to the next screen which will 
display a warning about using the help file: 


HELP: Procedures for creating the situations are 

simple; however, should you encounter any 
difficulties, you can access the on-line help 
by pressing the function key FI. The on-line 
help provides definitions for various scenario 
choices. (WARNING: The CTT_REV.HLP file must 
be installed on the same disk as the scenario 
generator to access the on-line help.) 

EXIT: To exit the program press Ctrl Break. 

PRESS ENTER TO CONTINUE 


Refer to Appendix B for more information on using the help 
file. The last introduction screen gives general instructions 
for running the program: 


The following screens will present various 
contingency alternatives. Make your choice and press 
ENTER. 

PRESS ENTER TO CONTINUE 


The main program itself is nothing more than a series of 14 
categories each with a number of variables. Depending on the 
type of conflict selected, not all categories will be displayed. 
The program does not actually build the scenario, the user does. 
The computer simply provides a thought out list of variables 
considered important for any scenario. For the novice scenario 
generator the program allows logical decisions to be made in 
building the scenario. The computer will guide the user through 
each scenario category, only displaying those variables pertinent 
to the conflict selected. The first screen of the actual scenario 
generator will allow a choice between three levels of conflict 
intensity: high, mid, and low. 

The conflict level selected will determine which variables 
the computer will choose to ask. The only difference between 
high and mid-intensity conflicts is the inclusion of nuclear, 
biological and chemical (NBC) weapons defense for high-intensity 
conflicts. Recent changes to conflict intensity definitions have 
included NBC weapons in mid-intensity conflicts. The Iran-Iraq 
war is cited as an example of a mid-intensity conflict in which 
chemical weapons were used. The low-intensity conflict (LIC) 
options contains the most variables. This is due to the large 
number of possibilities which constitute a LIC situation. In 


4 






addition to being asked to determine initial conflict intensity 
there are an additional 9 factors for high-intensity conflicts, 8 
for mid-intensity conflicts and 12 for LIC. 

To enter a selection simply type in the number desired and 
press ENTER. If a letter or a number not available is selected 
the user will be prompted to enter a correct number. A flaw in 
the program allows selection of a large number providing all 
digits in the number are the same as the numbers available for 
selection. For example, if there are 4 variables, numbered 1 to 
4, the computer will accept a number of "124" or any combination 
of numbers as long as the numbers are those available for 
selection. If a 1 is entered followed by a 5 the computer will 
give an invalid number prompt for the 5 but will recognize the 1. 
If more than one acceptable number is entered the computer will 
ignore all inputs and give a blank readout in the final scenario. 
If no number is entered and the user simply presses ENTER the 
final output will display ASCII "garbage" for that variable. It 
is therefore recommended some value be input for a particular 
variable, even if there is no intention to use that variable in 
the final product. To start over hit Ctrl Break to exit the 
program. Once the scenario has been developed it may be printed 
out or stored on disk. 


IV. THE HIGH AND MID-INTENSITY CONFLICT 

The creation of a high or mid-intensity conflict is a fairly 
straightforward situation. The first screen presents a choice of 
conflict levels: 


CONFLICT INTENSITY 

1. HIGH INTENSITY 

2. MID INTENSITY 

3. LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT 


(For brevity, the help and enter screen prompts will not be 
displayed here but will appear on the computer screen.) 

For now, type 1 and ENTER. This will select the high-intensity 
conflict mode. As stated, the high-intensity conflict mode is 
identical to the mid-intensity mode except for the inclusion of 
NBC protection. 


5 




The next screen related to NBC threat will then appear: 



HIGHEST 

NBC THREAT LEVEL 

1. 

MISSION 

ORIENTED PROTECTIVE POSTURE (MOPP) 0 

2. 

MOPP 1 


3. 

MOPP 2 


4. 

MOPP 3 


5. 

MOPP 4 



The Mission Oriented Protective Posture (MOPP) level is simply a 
description of the amount of NBC defense clothing worn for a 
given situation. Appendix A contains a complete definition for 
each MOPP level. MOPP level 0 is simply standard duty uniform 
while MOPP 4 is full gear; boots, charcoal activated pants and 
shirt, mask with hood and rubber gloves. MOPP level was chosen 
as an NBC criteria as each MOPP level can be used as an 
indication of the NBC threat level. For those Air Force 
Specialties (AFSs) which must perform tasks in MOPP gear the 
level is extremely important for determining task time and 
training requirements. For this demonstration select the MOPP 4 
option by entering selection number 5. 

The attrition screen will appear next. 


ATTRITION 

1. LOW (0% - 10%) 

2. MODERATE (10% - 25%) 

3. HIGH (25% or greater) 


As it is now defined, attrition is determined to be the amount of 
critical personnel and equipment damage/wounded and 
destroyed/killed per month. Evaluation of this definition by 
experts has shown that attrition of about 2% per day is more 
realistic and a 25% loss would mean losing the war. Users who do 
not feel comfortable with this definition you may change it using 
a word processor (more on this later). For this scenario enter 3 
for high attrition. 

The next screen will be logistics. 


LOGISTICS 

1. EXCELLENT 

2. GOOD 

3. FAIR 

4. POOR 











Logistics is the amount of critical supplies required to perform 
the mission which actually reach the combat area. While listed 
as excellent to poor, logistics is actually expressed in the 
scenario as 25% increments. Excellent is 75% to 100% of critical 
supplies delivered down to 0% to 25% for poor. Attrition and 
logistics go hand-in-hand as each directly affects the other. A 
high attrition rate and poor logistics would certainly affect 
tasks performed and the outcome of the conflict while high 
attrition and excellent logistics would have less of an impact. 
For now, select 2 for GOOD logistics and hit ENTER. 

The computer will next ask for an input on the area and size 
of the environment the scenario is to take place. Area and size 
is the first of 4 categories designed to "paint" the environment 
of the scenario. 


ENVIRONMENTAL 
AREA AND SIZE 

1. MICRO (less than 10 sq km) 

2. SMALL (10 to 3000 sq km) 

3. MEDIUM (3000 to 10,000 sq km) 

4. LARGE (10,000 sq km or greater) 


Area and size are the first of many variables taken from work 
done by an Army intelligence group at Fort Huachuca, AZ. A great 
deal of gratitude is owed for allowing the use of their scenario 
variables. The work done at Fort Huachuca was done solely for 
use in determining LIC situations, from which all the LIC 
variables were obtained and many of the common variables. The 
area and size designators cover anything from a small town to a 
full size country. In this scenario, select option 4 for LARGE 
area. 


The next screen concerns sub-terrain. This is slightly out 
of order as the following screen covers terrain. However, this 
does not cause any problems. The sub-terrain lets the person 
reading the scenario know if they are dealing in a natural or 
man-made environment. 


ENVIRONMENTAL 

SUB-TERRAIN 

1. URBAN 

2. SUBURBAN 

3. RURAL 

4. COMBINED: SUB/URBAN/RURAL 


7 









These variables allow the choice of the three main areas of the 
man-made environment. The combined selection was added for those 
operations or working environments which may cover all areas. 
The sub-terrain options are especially important for LIC 
situations as this is the only situation which deals primarily in 
one sub-terrain area. For high and mid-intensity situations the 
COMBINED option is the most realistic. Here, select option 4 and 
ENTER. 

The next environmental option is, as mentioned, terrain. 
The terrain screen presents a list of the 8 most common terrain 
types: 


ENVIRONMENTAL 

TERRAIN 

1. RAIN FOREST/JUNGLE 

2. WOODLAND 

3. SWAMPS/DELTAS 

4. MOUNTAINOUS 

5. DESERT 

6. REMOTE/ISLAND 

7. ARCTIC/TUNDRA 

8. PRAIRIE/GRASSLAND 


The terrain category is unique in that the final scenario will 
not simply regurgitate the terrain selected but will also present 
a short synopses of the climate. The terrain selection, combined 
with the next screen covering season presents a detailed climatic 
description. While some AFSs are not concerned with climate, 
others are very concerned. Maintenance personnel must know what 
conditions they are expected to work under in order to give 
accurate training recommendations and work completion times. 
Select the WOODLAND option 2 for the example scenario. 

The next screen, as mentioned before, covers the season in 
which the scenario takes place. It is also the last of the 
ENVIRONMENT category. 


ENVIRONMENT 

SEASON 

1. FALL 

2. WINTER 

3. SPRING 

4. SUMMER 


8 







This option is intricately tied to the terrain category. The 
computer will take the TERRAIN and SEASON inputs and present a 
temperature range for each specific selection. That is, the 
temperature range for the WOODLAND (or any other terrain) 
selection will vary depending on the season chosen. An average 
temperature range can greatly influence tasks performed, 
depending on the AFS. Temperature, combined with climate, plays 
an important role when considering NBC protection. Even mild 
temperatures can become uncomfortable in full MOPP gear. Select 
WINTER (option 2) for the sample scenario. 

The next screen covers mission duration: 


MISSION DURATION 

1. SHORT (less than 24 hours) 

2. MEDIUM (2 to 30 days) 

3. LONG (30 to 90 days) 

4. EXTENDED (longer than 90 days) 


This screen simply asks how long the contingency scenario will 
last. For high to mid-intensity conflicts the duration will 
generally be longer than 90 days, although a 30 to 90 war is 
possible. The option exists for making a high-intensity conflict 
less than 30 days duration but, barring a nuclear war, this is 
highly unlikely. Most LIC situations are of fairly short 
duration, lasting less than 30 days. Select option 4 (EXTENDED) 
for the example scenario. 

The final screen for high-intensity conflict covers command 
and control of U.S. forces: 


COMMAND AND CONTROL 

1. AIR FORCE 

2. JOINT (JCS) 

3. COMBINED 

4. CIVILIAN 


Command and control is included as a means of painting a more 
complete scenario. Tasks may also vary due to requirements of 
the controlling command. Air Force command and control (C2) is 
self explanatory. JOINT C2 is Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) 
control which is the most typical C2 situation for high and mid¬ 
intensity conflicts. COMBINED C2 is U.S. and NATO or other 
allied forces under control of a multi-national military command. 
The CIVILIAN option is one which is strictly for a LIC. Civilian 
C2 is control of military forces by a non-military government 
agency such as the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) or the Drug 
Enforcement Agency (DEA). This selection can also be used to 


9 






indicate United Nation (UN) control and can therefore be used in 
a mid to high-intensity conflict. However, actual military C2 in 
a UN sponsored campaign will most likely be under a combined 
command structure. Select option 2 (JOINT) for the last of the 
high-intensity options. 


V. THE HIGH INTENSITY CONFLICT SCENARIO 

After having selected all pertinent variables, the computer 
will take all inputs and put them into a standard scenario 
format. The scenario generator does not simply regurgitate all 
information provided. As mentioned, it will also take all 
information on terrain and season and provide a climatic 
description. At present this is the only interactive feature of 
the program. The scenario just created will appear as a set of 
two screen with a bright red background. The scenario is 
presented here in its entirety: 


CONTINGENCY SCENARIO 

The U.S. is faced with a high intensity conflict 
situation. U.S. forces will be involved in an operation 
expected to last longer than 90 days. The entire 
operation will be under joint (JCS) control. 

Main operations will be conducted in a large area 
(range >10,000 sq km). The majority of operations will 
be conducted in a combined (sub/urban/rural) area in a 
woodland region. The general climate for this region is 
a follows: 

Precipitation during all seasons with maximum in 
summer. Warm or hot summers and cold winters. 

It is winter with temperatures ranging from 25 - 40 
degrees F. 

50% to 75% of critical supplies and materials 
will be delivered in this operation. 25% or greater of 
critical equipment/personnel are expected to be 
damaged/destroyed or wounded/killed per month. 

The highest level of Nuclear, Biological and 
Chemical (NBC) mission oriented protective posture (MOPP 
will be MOPP 4. 






Unfortunately, in its present state, the computer does not 
allow backing up once a screen has been passed. Fortunately, 
after the scenario has been presented, the next screen will 
present a printout option so the scenario can be viewed in its 
entirety. After accepting or declining the print option a second 
option to save the scenario on disk will appear. Scenarios saved 
on disk are stored in ASCII and can therefore be called up on any 
word processor program and modified to suit particular needs. If 
selected, the scenario is automatically copied to the primary 
floppy drive (A: drive). A formatted disk must already be in the 
drive, otherwise an error message will be displayed. The last 
prompt will ask if another scenario generation session is 
desired. If accepted, the computer goes directly to the first 
scenario variable screen, CONFLICT INTENSITY. 


VI. THE LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT 

The creation of a LIC scenario is a more complex undertaking 
than a high-intensity conflict scenario because there are more 
factors to consider. For example, in war the level of conflict 
is assumed to by very high with the use of standard tactics. In 
LIC there may be no actual combat, low or sporadic combat, all 
the way to full use of all forces, yet still be in a LIC 
situation. Standard or unconventional tactics may or may not be 
used. The end result is a situation which is unpredictable and 
uncontrollable, which is why it is so important to determine 
which skills are needed to handle a LIC situation. 

The creation of a low-intensity conflict (LIC) scenario is 
initially identical to building a mid-intensity conflict 
scenario. MOPP level is not displayed. To begin building a LIC 
scenario select Low-Intensity Conflict, option 3, on the conflict 
intensity screen. 


CONFLICT INTENSITY 

1. HIGH INTENSITY 

2. MID INTENSITY 

3. LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT 


In addition to the standard scenario screens, 4 more LIC 
specific screens are displayed immediately following the COMMAND 
AND CONTROL screen. Because the definitions of all LIC variables 
are generally long and complex, each individual variable will not 
be discussed as previously done. Refer to Appendix A for 
complete definitions of all variables. Following is a display of 
each category with a general description following. Because of 
the complexity of LIC situations, creating this type of scenario 
will take longer than creating a high or mid-intensity conflict. 


11 






The first LIC screen deals with the 8 most common types of 
situations: 


LIC SITUATIONS 

1. POPULAR REVOLT 

2. POWER GROUP STRUGGLE 

3. STATE OPPRESSION 

4. INTER-GROUP WARFARE 

5. TERRORISM 

6. UNSTABLE TRUCE 

7. ILLICIT NARCOTICS ACTIVITY 

8. MISCELLANEOUS CRISIS EVENTS 


While there are most certainly many more types of situations 
which may constitute a LIC, these variables cover the majority. 
The variables are generally quite straight forward but some, such 
as POPULAR REVOLT, contain a large number of differing sub¬ 
variables. LIC SITUATIONS provide only broad situation 
categories associated with LIC. Specific situations listed in 
Appendix A can only be added to the scenario using the word 
processor option. Situations not covered in the first seven 
variables can be included in the MISCELLANEOUS CRISIS EVENTS 
option. 

The second LIC screen divides the types of operations into 5 
general categories: 


OPERATIONAL CATEGORY 

1. SUPPORT TO INSURGENCY 

2. SUPPORT TO COUNTER INSURGENCY 

3. COMBATING TERRORISM 

4. PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS 

5. PEACETIME CONTINGENCIES 


OPERATIONAL CATEGORY describes the general intent of the military 
operation undertaken to either combat or facilitate the LIC 
situation. For example, a LIC situation of POPULAR REVOLT can 
have an operational category of either SUPPORT TO INSURGENCY or 
SUPPORT TO COUNTER INSURGENCY, depending on national needs. 
Obviously, an operational category of COMBATING TERRORISM only 
applies to a terrorism situation. The option exists to mix and 
match situations to categories which are unrelated. Care must be 
taken, however, to maintain a sense of realism in a scenario. 
The program does not discriminate between situational and 
operational descriptions. It is up to the individual designing 
the scenario to distinguish which situations are appropriate for 
each operational category. 


12 








The next screen is a description of the threat type. That 
is, the type of threat U.S. forces are expected to face during 
the LIC situation: 


LIC 

THREAT TYPE 

1. TERRORIST 

2. INSURGENCY PHASE I 

3. INSURGENCY PHASE II 

4. INSURGENCY PHASE III 

5. PROFIT MOTIVATED GROUPS 

6. NATIONAL MILITARY OBSOLETE 

7. NATIONAL MILITARY MODERN 

8. NATIONAL MILITARY SOPHISTICATED 


For this category it is very necessary to read and review the 
full description of each in Appendix A or from the program help 
option. The definitions for the insurgency phases are especially 
complex. Their definitions should be read thoroughly before 
utilizing them in any scenario. The NATIONAL MILITARY options 
simply describe the level of military technology used by the 
enemy forces. The level of technology is described as World War 
II, post World War II, and NATO and Warsaw Pact forces for 
OBSOLETE, MODERN and SOPHISTICATED, respectively. The TERRORIST 
option is self explanatory. 

The last LIC screen deals with the type of support the enemy 
threat will receive: 


LIC 

THREAT SUPPORT 

1. POPULAR SUPPORT LIMITED 

2. POPULAR SUPPORT MODERATE 

3. POPULAR SUPPORT SUBSTANTIAL 

4. EXTERNAL RESOURCE SUPPORT 

5. CROSS-BORDER SANCTUARY 


The POPULAR SUPPORT selections simply describe the amount of 
support the enemy will receive from the populace in percentages. 
Limited support is less than 5%, moderate 15% to 33% and 
substantial greater than 33%. External support is support by a 
third party. Cross-border sanctuary are bases outside country of 
conflict which aid the enemy. 


13 





VII. THE LOW-INTENSITY CONFLICT SCENARIO 

The LIC scenario looks identical to a high or mid-intensity 
conflict scenario except for the addition of LIC specific 
paragraphs. At present, the program simply restates the 
selection entered without any further description. It is hoped 
that in the future short definitions for each category will also 
be displayed. Until such time, any further descriptions must be 
added using the word processor option. 

For the example shown below, the invasion of Panama in 
December of 1989 was used as a model. This is how the scenario 
generator will describe the Panama situation: 


CONTINGENCY SCENARIO 

The U.S. is faced with a low intensity conflict 
situation. U.S. forces will be involved in an operation 
expected to last 2 to 30 days. The entire operation will 
be under Joint (JCS) control. 

Main operations will be conducted in a small area 
(range 10 to 3000 sq km). The majority of operations 
will be conducted in an urban area in a rain 
forest/jungle region. The general climate for this 
region is as follows: 

At most, one or two dry months. All months 

warm or hot. Some areas may receive less 

precipitation. 

It is Winter with temperatures ranging from 70 - 
80+ degrees F. 

75% to 100% of critical supplies and materials 
will be delivered in this operation. 0 to 10% of 
critical equipment/personnel are expected to be 
damage/destroyed or wounded/killed per month. 

The U.S. is reacting to a miscellaneous crisis 
event situation. The operational category will be 
peacekeeping operations. The type of threat faced is: 
National military modern. 

The support the threat will receive is: Limited 
popular support. 


This scenario, like the others, can be saved on disk or 
printed out once completed. The option to return to the 
beginning to create another scenario or to quit will also be 
presented. 


14 







APPENDIX A 


CONTINGENCY DEFINITIONS 

I. CONFLICT INTENSITY [Army FM 100-20, JUL 88] 

HIGH INTENSITY CONFLICT War between two or more nations and 
their respective allies, if any, in which the belligerents employ 
the most modern technology and all resources in intelligence; 
mobility; firepower (including nuclear, chemical, and biological 
weapons); command, control, and communications; and service 
support. 

MID-INTENSITY CONFLICT War between two or more nations and their 
respective allies, if any, in which belligerents employ the most 
modern technology and all resources in intelligence; mobility; 
firepower (excluding nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons); 
command, control, and communications; and service support for 
limited objective under definitive policy limitations as to the 
extent of destructive power that can be employed or the extent of 
geographic area that might be involved. 

LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT (TYPE A) Internal defense and development 
assistance operations involving actions by U.S. combat forces to 
establish, regain, or maintain control of specific land areas 
threatened by guerrilla warfare, revolution, subversion, or other 
tactics aimed at internal seizure of power. 


II. CHEMICAL MISSION ORIENTED PROTECTIVE POSTURE (MOPP) 


Mopp Level 

Overgarment 

Boots 

Mask/Hood 

Gloves 

0 

carried 

carried 

carried 

carried 

l 

worn, open 
or closed 

carried 

carried 

carried 

2 

worn, open 
or closed 

worn 

carried 

carried 

3 

worn, open 
or closed 

worn 

worn, hood 
up or down 

carried 

4 

worn, closed 

worn 

worn, hood 
down 

worn 


When considering chemical agents one may, on occasion, have to 
consider the type of agent used. Most chemicals will fit into 
one of the five following categories: 

Nerve Inhibits the enzyme cholinesterase, causing general 
collapse of central nervous system. Usually lethal. Long 
uncertain recovery period for survivors. 

Blister Damages body tissues, causing various types of lesions 
on skin, damage to lungs and eyes from vapor: Usually not 
lethal, but long recovery required. 


15 



Blood Prohibits absorption of oxygen by blood, causing 

suffocation. Usually lethal. 

Choking Damages lungs causing fluid build-up, "dry land 
drowning." Usually lethal. 

Incapacitating Various mechanisms, reducing ability to perform 
normally. Not lethal. 

ri) Van Arsdale, Layne A. "A chemical warfare module for the 
Airland Advanced Research Model (ALARM)," Naval Post graduate 
School, Masters Thesis, December 1987, p. 79. 

Common tasks associated with NBC attack (Army STP 21-1-SMCT): 

A. Donning, wearing, and storage of protective mask and 
hood. 

B. Replacing filters of protective mask. 

C. Decontamination of skin and personal equipment. 

D. Donning and wear of MOPP gear. 

E. Drinking, using latrine, and checking sleeping personnel 
in M0PP4. 

F. Recognition and reaction to chemical or biological 
hazard. 

G. Reaction to nuclear hazard. 

H. Use of detector paper to identify chemical agent. 

I. Exchange of MOPP gear 

J. Administer nerve agent antidote to self or buddy. 


III. ATTRITION 

LOW ATTRITION 0 to 33% critical equipment and/or personnel 
damaged, wounded, destroyed, or killed per month. 

MODERATE ATTRITION 33% to 66% critical equipment and/or 
personnel damaged, wounded, destroyed, or killed per month. 

HIGH ATTRITION 66% to all critical equipment and/or personnel 
damaged, wounded, destroyed, or killed per month. 


IV. LOGISTICS 

EXCELLENT 0 to 25% of critical supplies and material not 
delivered — 75% to 100% of logistics demands met. 

GOOD 25% to 50% of critical supplies and material not delivered 
— 50% to 75% of logistic demands met. 


16 





FAIR 50% to 75% of critical supplies and material ..ot delivered 
— 25% to 50% of logistic demands met. 

POOR 75% to 100% of critical supplies and material not delivered 
—0% to 25% of logistic demands met. 


V. ENVIRONMENT 
A. SIZE OF AREA OF OPERATIONS 

MICRO Less than 10 square kilometers. Primarily represents a 
terrorist target such as an airport or military installation. 

SMALL 10 to 3,000 square kilometers. Represents a region of a 
country, anything from a valley to a department. 

MEDIUM 3,000 to 10,000 square kilometers. Basically represents 
several departments or a small country. 

LARGE Greater than 10,000 square kilometers. Represents a large 
country or a region encompassing two or more countries. 

B. SUB-TERRAIN 

URBAN AREAS High density population, densely packed buildings, 
easy access on city streets but restricted freedom of movement 
about terrain. Large number of sanctuaries for enemy forces. For 
low intensity conflict: characterized by close coordination 

between the armed forces, police forces, paramilitary forces, and 
other security forces for the protection of critical 
installations and control of subversive activities. [FM 100-20, 
JUL 88? see pp. E-18 - E-21 for operational requirements.] 

SUBURBAN AREAS Population sparse, few to moderate number of 
buildings, easy to fair access on streets, good to poor freedom 
of movement about terrain. Moderate number of sanctuaries for 
enemy forces. For low intensity conflict: characterized by 

loose to close coordination between armed forces, police forces, 
paramilitary forces, and other security forces for the protection 
of critical installations and control of subversive activities. 

RURAL Sparsely populated, no to few buildings, roads, etc. 
Freedom of movement limited by natural barriers. No man made 
sanctuaries for enemy forces. For low intensity conflict: loose 
to no coordination and control by armed, police or paramilitary 
forces for protection of critical installations and control of 
subversive activities. 


17 



C. TERRAIN/SEASON 


Seasonal temperatures and climate vary from one 
geographical location to the next. Seasonal responses will 
automatically produce a temperature range, while terrain 
responses will produce a general weather description for that 
region. 

RAIN POREST/JUNGLE At most, one or two dry months; All months 
warm or hot. Some areas receive less precipitation. 

ALL SEASONS 70 - 80+ deg F 

WOODLAND Precipitation in all seasons with maximum in summer; 
warm or hot summers, cold winters . 

FALL 40-60 deg F 

WINTER 25 - 40 deg F 

SPRING 40 - 65 deg F 

SUMMER 65 - 75 deg F 

INUNDATED/SWAMPS/DELTAS Precipitation in all seasons with 
maximum in summer; long warm summers, cool winters. 


FALL 

50 - 70 

deg 

F 

WINTER 

35 - 50 

deg 

F 

SPRING 

50 - 70 

deg 

F 

SUMMER 

70 - 80+ 

deg 

F 


MOUNTAINOUS Climate varies with elevation, latitude and 
exposure. Higher altitude tends to be colder and weather harsher 
during all seasons. 

DESERT Light precipitation, warm or hot summers cool or cold 
winters. 


FALL 

55 - SO 

deg 

F 

WINTER 

30 - 55 

deg 

F 

SPRING 

55 - 80 

deg 

F 

SUMMER 

80+ 

deg 

F 


REMOTE/ISLANDS Climate varies with latitude, generally high 
precipitation during all seasons. Note that these areas may be 
populated by ethnic, religious, or other isolated minority 
groups; however, remote area operations may be conducted in 
areas devoid of civilian population in which insurgent forces 
have established training areas, rest areas, logistical 
facilities, or command posts. The remote area tactical force 
should be composed of personnel indigenous to the operational 
area. [ FM 100-20, JUL 88; see p. E-17 for operational 
requirements.] 

ARTIC/TUNDRA Light precipitation; Short cooler or cold summers. 
Long very cold winters; 


FALL 

-20 - 

-40 

deg 

F 

WINTER 

-50 - 

-20 

deg 

F 

SPRING 

-20 - 

-40 

deg 

F 

SUMMER 

40 - 

65 

deg 

F 


18 





PRAIRIE/GRASSLANDS Semi-arid with light precipitation in all 
seasons. Warm to hot summers cool to cold winters; 


FALL 

50 - 70 

deg 

F 

WINTER 

0 - 50 

deg 

F 

SPRING 

50 - 70 

deg 

F 

SUMMER 

70 - 80 

deg 

F 


VI. MISSION DURATION 

SHORT A U.S. forces operation lasting less than 24 hours. This 
applies mainly to LIC situations as any full-scale war will 
generally be greater than 90 days from declaration to outcome. 

MEDIUM A U.S. forces operation lasting 2 to 30 days. 

LONG A U.S. forces operation lasting 30 to 90 days. 

EXTENDED A U.S. forces operation lasting longer than 90 days. 


VII. COMMAND AND CONTROL 


AIR FORCE The U.S. Air Force is the lead agency for conducting a 
particular operation. 

JOINT Multi-service (U.S.) command and control of an operation. 

COMBINED U.S. and foreign forces operating under the unified 
control of a U.S. host nation military command. 

CIVILIAN U.S. forces operating under the control of civilian 
agencies such as the Drug Enforcement Administration or the 
Central Intelligence Agency. 


VIII. LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT SITUATIONS 
C. DEFINITIONS 

POPULAR REVOLT A rebellion of a segment or segments of the 
population against national or local institutions, which aims to 
change the law or unseat the government through unconstitutional 
means. Violence is usually, although not always, employed by the 
rebels to achieve their goals. The size of the rebellion can 
vary from very small groups to a majority of the population. 


19 





POWER GROUP STRUGGLE An attack by one national or local 
institution on another, with the object of divesting it of its 
political or economic power. Although force is always used, 
either by the threat of or actual employment of violence, death 
and destruction are limited or even absent altogether. The 
conflict is usually brief but, if successful for the instigator, 
results in highly significant changes in the distribution of 
political and economic power. 

STATE OPPRESSION The employment of state institutions and 
security apparatus to subjugate the population or segments 
thereof, in order to secure, enhance, or maintain political or 
economic power. The government as aggressor denies basic rights 
and freedoms to its citizens or employs violence against the 
population in order to increase its control. 

INTER-GROUP WARFARE A politically, religiously, or ethnically 
inspired attack by one segment or element of the population on 
another, or an economically motivated condition of widespread 
lawlessness. The object of the instigator is to establish 
dominance by subjugating the opposing group. The government may 
support one group or attempt to establish peace between the 
belligerent domestic forces. 

TERRORISM The unlawful use or threat of force or violence 
against people or property to coerce or intimidate governments or 
societies. The goal of terrorism may be to achieve political, 
social, or religious concessions, or conversely, to maintain the 
status quo through intimidation. 

UNSTABLE TRUCE OR CEASE FIRE A mutually agreed upon, but 
ineffective or doubtful, cessation of armed hostilities between 
two belligerent forces. 

ILLICIT NARCOTICS ACTIVITY The cultivation, processing, 
shipment, and sale of illegal narcotics and associated adverse 
impacts on foreign governments and societies or U.S. interests. 

MISCELLANEOUS CRISIS EVENT Any crisis situation, short of war 
and not covered under previous categories, which occurs on short 
notice and requires some immediate action by somebody to restore 
the peace, maintain stability, or preclude future loss of life or 
destruction of property. 


B. EXAMPLES 

Popular Revolt (People against Institution) 

1. Insurgency (1) 

2. War of Independence (decolonization) (2) 

3. Separatist Uprising (2) 

4. Localized Revolt 

5. Agrarian Land Seizures 


20 






Power Group Struggle (Institution against Institution) 

1. Coup d'Etat (not always cai^ied out by military) 

2. Barracks Revolt 

3. Expropriation of Resources or Property 

4. Disenfranchisement of a Legitimate Power Group 

State Oppression (Institution against People) 

1. Violation of Civil Rights (freedom of speech, freedom of 
assemble, open honest elections, etc.) 

2. Violation of Human Rights (imprisonment or execution 
without trial, destruction of dwellings and crops, 
kidnapings and disappearances, rape, torture, mtilation, 
and murder sanctioned, tolerated, or ordered by the 
state) 

3. State of Siege (temporary suspension of civil rights and 
constitutional guarantees in the interest of national 
security) 

4. Genocide (systematic massacres of an entire segment of 
the population targeted as a threat to national security) 

Inter-group Warfare (People against People) 

1. Civil War (2) (religiously, politically, or ethnically 
motivated) 

2. Inter-tribal Warfare 

3. Banditry (condition of widespread lawlessness) 

Terrorism 

1. State Directed Groups 

a. Death Squads 

b. Transnational Hit Teams 

2. State Supported Groups 

3. Independent/Autonomous Groups 

Unstable Truce or Cease Fire 

Illicit Narcotics Activity 

1. Narco-trafficking 

2. Narco-terrorism 

3. Narco-insurgent Alliance 

4. Narco-extortionism (Government held at siege) 

Miscellaneous Crisis Events 

1. Hostage-taking 

2. Natural or Man-made Disasters 

3. Cross-border COIN Operations (2) 

4. Population Dislocation (Refugees) 

NOTES (1) Can escalate to Mid-Intensity in final phase. 

(2) Some will be Mid-Intensity Conflicts. 


21 


C. OPERATIONAL CATEGORIES OF LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT 

[FM 100-20, JUL 88] 

U.S. MILITARY SUPPORT TO INSURGENCY The United States supports 
selected insurgencies opposing oppressive regimes who work 
against U.S. interests. INSURGENCY: An organized movement aimed 
at the overthrow of a constituted government through use of 
subversion and armed conflict. Insurgency focuses on radical 
change in political control and requires extensive use of covert 
instruments and methods. 

U.S. MILITARY SUPPORT to COUNTERINSURGENCY The United States 
will use its military resources to provide support to a host 
nation government's counterinsurgency (COIN) operations in the 
context of Foreign Internal Defense (FID). FID is the 
participation by U.S. civilian and military agencies in any of 
the action programs taken by another government to free and 
protect its society from subversion, lawlessness, and insurgency. 
COUNTERINSURGENCY: Those military, paramilitary, political, 
economic, psychological, and civic actions taken by a government 
to defeat insurgency. Counterinsurgency uses principally overt 
methods and promises orderly change within the existing system. 

COMBATING TERRORISM (CT) Air Force programs to reduce the 
vulnerability of installations, units, and personnel to 
terrorism, during peacetime, mobilization, and war; includes 
antiterrorism (defensive) and counterterrorism (offensive) 
actions. 

PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS (PKO) Military operations conducted with 
the consent of the belligerent parties to a conflict, to maintain 
a negotiated truce and to facilitate diplomatic resolution of a 
conflict between the belligerents. 

PEACETIME CONTINGENCIES (PTC) Politically sensitive military 
operations normally characterized by the short-term rapid 
projection or employment of forces in conditions short of war. 
They are often undertaken in crisis avoidance or crisis 
management situations requiring the use of military instruments 
to enforce or support diplomatic initiatives. 

D. TYPE OF THREAT [FM 100-20, JUL 88] 

TERRORISM The unlawful use of, or threat of, force or violence 
against people or property to coerce or intimidate governments or 
societies, often to achieve political, religious, or ideological 
goals. 

INSURGENCY, PHASE I The latent or incipient phase of a Maoist 
(1) or mass-oriented insurgency. This phase involves no major 
outbreak of violence or uncontrolled insurgent activity. Typical 
activities include organization, recruitment, infiltration of 


22 




government and other organizations, creation of local cells, 
training, and open political activity, such as: labor 
organization, political front organization, and strikes. Bank 
robberies and kidnapings may be carried out to obtain initial 
funding. 

INSURGENCY, PHASE II The guerrilla warfare phase of a Moaist 
insurgency. Violent acts, ranging from sabotage and terrorism 
through large-scale guerrilla attacks occur in the phase. Base 
areas are created and expanded. In the political arena, the 
masses are mobilized and a parallel insurgent government is 
established. 

INSURGENCY, PHASE III The war of movement or conventional phase 
of a Maoist insurgency. Insurgents openly operate in battalion- 
size or larger forces, begin to hold territory as "liberated 
zones," and attempt to establish a national government. When the 
insurgents abandon guerrilla tactics and adopt conventional war 
fighting techniques at some point during this phase, the conflict 
shifts from low-to mid-intensity. 

PROFIT MOTIVATED GROUPS Drug traffickers, mercenary armies, 
bandits, and pirates. Most will possess state-of-the-art small 
arms, communications, and transportation. No political goal, 
unless it serves to further profit-making activities. Terrorism 
and murder are common tactics. 

NATIONAL MILITARY, OBSOLETE (2) Conventional forces equipped 
with WW II technology, weaponry, and equipment. Typically, 
armies of under-developed third world nations. Very limited navy 
and air force. 

NATIONAL MILITARY, MODERN (2) Post WW II technology, weaponry, 
and equipment. Typically, armed forces of developing nations 
(Argentina, Brazil, Chile) and world power surrogate nations 
(Cuba, Nicaragua). 

NATIONAL MILITARY, SOPHISTICATED NATO and Warsaw Pact forces. 
State-of-the-art equipment and highly trained forces. 

NOTES (1) INSURGENCY, MAOIST: It is the Maoist strategy, also 
known as mass-oriented, that more than any other strategy employs 
the three phases of insurgency: incipient, guerrilla warfare, and 
war of movement. The Maoist strategy aims to achieve the 
political and armed mobilization of a large popular movement. 
Great emphasis is placed on gaining popular support through an 
extensive organizational network and on creating a political and 
armed legitimacy outside the existing system. A large armed 
guerrilla force, an administrative and political arm, an 
extensive base of active and passive political supporters, overt 
mass organizations, and a parallel government are typical 
features of the Maoist insurgency. This strategy mobilizes 
popular forces for a direct military and political challenge to 
the government through a protracted campaign of increasing 
violence to destroy the government and its institutions. 


23 




STRENGTHS: Mass organization and support enables the 
insurgent to absorb government tactical successes; extremely 
resilient due to its great depth of organization; mobilizes the 
whole population so that it requires integrated action by all 
branches of government to defeat it; may shift gears through its 
three phases at will in order to adapt to government offensives 
or capitalize on its own successes. 

WEAKNESSES: Requires a favorable environment; external 
support is sometimes required; subject to infiltration through 
its political and mass organizations; the number of prisoners, 
detainees, and defectors with exploitable information will be 
significant. Examples: El Salvador insurgency (FMLN); Viet Cong 
insurgency; Peruvian insurgency (Sendero Luminoso); Chinese 
communist revolution. 

(2) NATIONAL MILITARY: Conventional forces deployed against 
U.S.-supported insurgents or resistance movements. Although U.S. 
forces will not engage conventional military forces in low 
intensity conflict, they may support insurgents against 
conventional, national military forces. 

E. SUPPORT OF THREAT 


LIMITED POPULAR SUPPORT Less than 15 percent of the population 
supports the threat. 

MODERATE POPULAR SUPPORT 15 to 33 percent of the population 
supports the threat. 

SUBSTANTIAL POPULAR SUPPORT More than 33 percent of the 
population supports the threat. 

EXTERNAL RESOURCE SUPPORT Money, weapons, food, advisors, and 
training provided by a third party. 

CROSS-BORDER SANCTUARY Secure training, operational, and 
logistical bases outside the country of conflict. 


24 





APPENDIX B 


THE ON-LINE HELP FILE 

Variables contained in the scenario may sometimes require 
explanation. To deal with these questions, an on-line help file 
was created providing definitions for the variables. This 
information is contained in the CTT_REV.HLP file. Additionally, 
it can answer any questions on operating the scenario generator. 
Some features of the on-line help are on-line help for running 
the scenario generator, a dictionary containing definitions for 
each variable, multi-page help screens for each topic, and direct 
linkage of several help screens from topic to topic. Also, with 
the source code, the user can define window attributes and 
highlighting capabilities. Below is a diagram of the information 
contained in the on-line help. 

MAIN MENU 


DICTIONARY MENU 


HELP WITH GENERATOR 


-CONFLICT INTENSITY 
-NBC THREAT LEVEL 
-ATTRITION 
-LOGISTICS 
- ENVIRONMENT MENU 

—AREA AND SIZE 
—SOB-TERRAIN 
—TERRAIN/SEASON 
-MISSION DURATION 
-COMMAND AND CONTROL 
- LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT MENU 

—LIC DEFINITIONS OF SITUATIONS 
—EXAMPLES OF LIC SITUATIONS 
—OPERATIONAL CATEGORIES OF LIC 
—TYPE OF THREAT 
—SUPPORT OF THREAT 


In any screen of the scenario generator to access the on¬ 
line help press the FI key. Press ESC at any time to return to 
the scenario generator. The help window will be displayed in the 
center of the screen covering the topic and variable choices. 
Because the topic and variable choices are covered, it is 
advisable to remember which topic and variables are of interest. 

The first window is the Main Menu which will look exactly 
like the diagram on the following page. The help file is menu 
driven and to move from menu to menu the letter that is 
highlighted must be selected. From the Main Menu either Help 
With Generator or the Dictionary Menu can be accessed. The "H" 


25 





selection, Help With Generator, will display several screens 
explaining the use of the generator which can be viewed using the 
PgDn and PgUp keys. Select "D" to display the Dictionary Menu 
for questions pertaining to variable definitions. Select "HOME" 
to return to the Main Menu from any help screen. 


If 

II 

fr 


MAIN MENU 


The on-line help provides variable definitions 
and help in operating the contingency scenario 
generator program. To access either of these 
enter the highlighted letter of your choice. 
NOTE: The + and - features are inoperative 

in this help file. 


Help With Generator 
Dictionary 


ESC-Exit 


Fl-Help 


The Dictionary Menu, below, contains several topic choices. 
To select one of the choices press the highlighted letter. This 
letter is usually the first letter of the topic; however, in the 
case of a duplicated letter, another letter contained in the 
topic will be highlighted. The selected choice will give further 
information on the variables of the topic selected. In some 
cases, the definition presented is very extensive and the PgUp 
and PgDn keys must be used to view the entire definition. To 
return to the Dictionary Menu from any screen, press "D". 


=n 


DICTIONARY MENU 


Press the letter of your choice to display 
information contained on that topic. To return 
to this menu at any time, press D. 

Conflict intensity 

Nbc threat level 

Attrition 

Logistics 

Environment Menu 

Mission Duration 

command and Control 

Low Intensity Conflict Menu 


HOME-Main Menu Fl-Help 


Esc-Exit 


26 












These menus operate in the same way as the Main Menu and the 
Dictionary Menu. Select the letter of the topic for which 
information is desired. Again, the selected choice will give 
further information on the variables of the topic selected. 
Because there is extensive information in these two areas, it is 
especially important to remember the topic and variables for 
which you want information. To return to the Dictionary Menu 
press "D" at any time. To return to the Environment or Low 
Intensity Conflict Menus, from any of their sub screens, press 
"E" or W I" respectively. 


27 









It is easy to maneuver within the on-line help. If you need 
help with using the on-line help, press FI at any time and a help 
screen will be displayed. The two types of commands used in the 
on-line help are 1) general and 2) special commands. 

General commands are displayed at the bottom of the screen 
(not at the bottom of the on-line help window). They include: 


+ 

HOME 

FI 

F2 

ESC 


To view the next the next screen 
To see the previous help screen 
To return you to the main menu 

To see the help screen for on line help procedures 
To search the entire help file to locate a word or 
group of words 

To exit the help module and return to the generator 


Because the HELP software was designed to be used in other 
software, the + and - may be confusing. If they are used, 
several definitions may be inadvertently skipped. To avoid this 
problem, do not use these commands. 


Special commands are displayed on the bottom line of the on¬ 
line help window. These commands are peculiar to a specific 
topic since some topics in the dictionary contain too much 
information for one help screen. Special commands include: 

PgUp - To view the previous page 

PgDn - To view the next page 

It is easy to get the two types of commands confused. If 
you are not able to read an entire file on one topic you are 
probably using the + and - general commands instead of the 
special commands. 


In addition to the general and special commands for moving 
through the on-line help, dictionary screens are "linked" to 
other dictionary screens directly. To access other screens press 
the highlighted key to view the help screen for the item 
associated with that key. The Dictionary Menu and the Main Menu 
can be reached from any screen by pressing "D" and "HOME" 
respectively. Press "Backspace" after selecting a topic to 
return to the Menu for that topic. 


To return to the generator press the Esc Key. When the 
procedure ends, the screen is restored to its original appearance 
before the on-line help was accessed. 

To change the on-line help file refer to Appendix C. 


28 




APPENDIX C 


MAINTENANCE AND MODIFYING THE CONTINGENCY SCENARIO GENERATOR 

The Contingency Scenario Generator was first designed in 
1989 by 2Lt Jody Guthals and lLt Todd Dart of AFHRL/MOD, Brooks 
AFB, to provide a simple method of generating contingency 
scenarios. It was designed to be used in conjunction with USAF 
Occupational Measurement Center Job Inventories and provides a 
scenario where tasks are measured with chosen scenario in mind. 
It could also be used for occupational and research needs. Since 
it was created, there have been no major changes made. 

All of the information contained in the Contingency Scenario 
Generator and in the related programs and products are 
unclassified and contain no privacy act information. 

The Contingency Scenario Generator is written in Pascal 
using Turbo Pascal 4.0, a Borland software package. The scenario 
generator can be compiled and run on any IBM compatible computer 
with 512k of Random Access Memory and Turbo Pascal 4.0 software. 
To compile the program in TURBO, the linker options should be set 
to disk. A color monitor is preferable to a monochrome. Any 
printer can be used in conjunction with this program. Support 
software is not required to run the scenario generator. 

Maintenance is not required to keep the generator in top 
operating condition, however, it is highly recommended to make 
backup copies on either floppy or hard aisk in case the original 
programs are damaged. Additionally, the program will run much 
quicker on a hard drive. Accessing the on-line help (help files) 
will be slower if the program is not loaded on the hard drive. 

Modifications to the Scenario Generator are easily 
accomplished by any person familiar with Pascal. There are 24 
files used for the current scenario generator. Two files are 
used to run the program, 11 files contain the source code for the 
program, 9 are mini users manuals for some of the UNITS, and 
finally, 2 files support the software. 

The files are broken up into four groups, each of which is 
on a separate floppy disk. The first group contains the files 
necessary to run the program. The second contains source code 
files that pertain specifically to the scenario generator. The 
third group contains files that are used for the on-line help. 
They are more generic, and can be used in different programs to 
provide on-line help. The fourth group contains files that 
create .HLP files to be used in other programs or to alter the 
help file used by the generator. 


29 



PRTDOC.EXE is a program that will print out .DOC files. To 
execute this program enter PRTDOC. 


File Name 


Length (in bytes) 


1. CTT.EXE 81616 

CTT_REV.HLP 69760 

2. CTT.PAS 5890 

CONTUNIT.PAS 49388 

VARUNIT.PAS 15036 

CTT_REV.TXT 15036 

3. HELPUNIT.PAS 33459 

HELPUNIT.DOC 7794 

INPUT.PAS 24441 

INPUT.DOC 20801 

MISC.PAS 34147 

MISC.DOC 21391 

SCREEN.PAS 18075 

SCREEN.DOC 15076 

STRINGS.PAS 30595 

STRINGS.DOC 27733 

STQ.PAS 8537 

STQ.DOC 19430 

WINDOWS.PAS 23580 

WINDOWS.DOC 20703 

4. GENHELP.DOC 13080 

GENHELP.EXE 76112 

GENHELP.TXT (example) 2147 

PRTDOC.DOC 7389 

PRTDOC.EXE 39904 


The third and fourth group of files above were developed and 
are maintained by AFHRL Information Sciences Division, Software 
and Data Base Development Branch. They will accomplish all 
updated versions of this software. 

The CTT.EXE program, the Contingency Scenario Generator, is 
an executable program. This means that no other software is 
required to run this program; however, you will not be able to 
access the on-line help if the CTT_REV.HLP file is not loaded on 
the same drive as the generator. Both files should be kept on 
the same floppy or the same drive so that the option to use the 
on-line help remains open. 

The .PAS files in groups two and three contain the necessary 
code to create CTT.EXE. They must be compiled to disk separately 
prior to compiling CTT.PAS. When these files are compiled, .TPU 
files will be created to be used by CTT.PAS during it's 
compilation. 


30 





The code that drives the program is contained in the CTT.PAS 
file. It also contains a listing of all of the variable names 
and their description. It contains a description of the units 
called in the program. Finally, it contains the code for 
setting the colors in the help screen. To change the colors, 
refer to the HELPUNIT.DOC file for code instructions. After 
changing the colors, the program must be recompiled to disk with 
all of the software on one drive (to ensure ease of compilation). 
When CTT.PAS is compiled to disk, a new executable file will be 
created. 

The CTT.PAS file calls several *UNIT.PAS files and each in 
turn calls several others. On the following page is a list of 
those called (note, the .PAS has been left off). 


Units Called 


CONT 

HELPUNIT 

MISC 

CRT 

CRT 

DOS 

CONTUNIT 

INPUT 

STRINGS 

HELPUNIT 

SCREEN 

CRT 


STQ 

WINDOWS 

CONTUNIT 

STRINGS 


CRT 

WINDOWS 

SCREEN 

HELPUNIT 

INPUT 

CRT 

INPUT 


DOS 

PRINTER 

CRT 

MISC 

VARUNIT 

STRINGS 

MISC 

STRINGS 

VARUNIT 

WINDOWS 

STQ 

none 


CRT 


CRT 

STRINGS 

STRINGS 

INPUT 

SCREEN 


none 

STRINGS 

STQ 

MISC 



All of the files are completely documented and should be 
easy to understand. The CONTUNIT.PAS and VARUNIT.PAS files 
contain the bulk of the code for the scenario generator. All 
other *UNIT.PAS files are used to provide on line help through 
the scenario on-line help. Files in group three and four use 
more intricate programming techniques and may be slightly more 
difficult to understand. 


31 






CONTUNIT.PAS contains the screen format for the program. It 
contains the variable definitions that are used in creating the 
scenario. These definitions may be changed if needed, however, 
screen format will be altered if the length of the variable 
definitions is changed. Additionally, the content of the 
scenario may be disjoint if the definitions are changed. To 
avoid these problems, the text for the scenario in the Fill_In, 
Print_Out, Put_In_Data, and the Temperature procedures must also 
be changed. Each of these procedures are identical in content, 
the difference is in their execution. The first procedure prints 
the scenario to the screen, the second to a printer, and the 
third to a file contained in drive A. If drive A does not have a 
formatted disk, there will be a run time error and you will be 
put back in DOS. 

Note that the definitions for the climate are listed 
differently than all other definitions. This was done so more 
than one line of text could be printed out at once. The 
definitions are consistent in that they each occupy two lines on 
information and each line is listed one below the other. An 
additional line may be added with only a minor modification to 
the program. 

The VARUNIT.PAS contains the information sent to the screen 
that presents the user with variable options. If any variable 
options are added, deleted, or changed, this unit would require 
modification to the procedures containing the topic of desired 
change. Additionally, the Choice procedure in CONTUNIT.PAS will 
require minor numeric changes if variables are added or deleted. 
Minor changes in the array types contained in CONTUNIT.PAS may be 
needed if the variables options or the variable definitions are 
changed. 

The CTT_REV.HLP file contains the information used in the 
on-line help. This file can be modified to enhance any of the 
help screens. To do this, the CTT_REV.TXT file must first be 
edited by the turbo editor. There is a special format for the 
file so it will compile properly in the GENHELP program. To 
change this special file, refer to the HELPUNIT.DOC and the 
GENHELP.DOC file. GENHELP.EXE is an executable program that will 
take any .TXT file in the format specified in HELPUNIT.DOC and 
will create the .HLP file to be used in the scenario generator. 
Directions for operating GENHELP are also located in the 
HELPUNIT.DOC file. 


32 



