

p- 



( 


N89 - 16 3 Og 


S6& 



MANAGING ADA DEVELOPMENT 
by 

James R. Green 
Manager, Standard Products 


Systems and Software Engineering Operations 
Dalmo Victor Incorporated 
The Singer Company 
6365 East Tanque Verde Road 
Tucson, Arizona 85715 
Phone: (602)721-0500 


D. 1.1.1 



Managing Ada Development 


James R. Green 


Introduction 

The Ada programming language was developed under the sponsorship of the 
Department of Defense to address the soaring costs associated with 
software development and maintenance. Ada is powerful, and yet to take 
full advantage of its power, it is sufficiently complex and different from 
current programming approaches that there is considerable risk associated 
with committing a program to be done in Ada. There are also few 
programs of any substantial size that have been implemented using Ada 
that may be studied to determine those management methods that resulted 
in a successful Ada project. 

As the Manager of Standard Products, I have the responsibility for 
developing software products that will be offered for sale on the open 
market. One of the products which has been developed is implemented 
entirely in Ada and its success demonstrates that a project can be 
successfully done using Ada. The program itself comprises over 130,000 
source lines of Ada code. This project, although not large by today’s 
standards of software development, did cause me to face the frustrations 
and the difficult management tasks associated with implementing an 
entire program in Ada at a time when the Ada development environment 
was less than desirable. The items presented in this paper are my 
opinions which have been formed as a result of going through this 
experience. The difficulties faced, risks assumed, management methods 
applied, and lessons learned, and most importantly, the techniques that 
were successful are all valuable sources of management information for 
those managers ready to assume major Ada developments projects. 


Managing Ada Development 


James R. Green 


People - A Key Ingredient 

Projects are implemented by people. The right people are definitely a key 
ingredient to the success of any project. Ada is no different. Management 
must realize this at the beginning of a project and ensure that "the right 
people" are selected. Ada has new concepts which are different from other 
languages. Concepts such as packages, specifications, body, information 
hiding, generics, instantiation, and multi-tasking are all examples of 
concepts and features of the Ada language. Since many of these concepts 
do not exist in other languages, management must be prudent in selecting 
personnel for assignment to the Ada project itself. 

The real power of the Ada language lies in the concepts not necessarily 
available in other languages. The people in key positions of the project 
must relate to these concepts and management must ensure that the 
people that are initially selected do relate to these concepts. It is 
possible to write code in Ada that utilizes only the most elementary 
concepts. An analogy to this would be writing Ada code using only the 
constructs allowed by FORTRAN. Clearly, the code may work, but you will 
not realize the benefits of the Ada language. 

Those people selected to work on an Ada project most probably will have 
prior working experiences in other languages. Their effectiveness on the 
Ada project will be related to how easily they accept the new language 
features and strive to use them effectively. As a manager, you do not 
want the powers afforded by Ada, to be eclipsed by an engineering staff of 
parochial vision. 

I have found that people who have recent degrees in computer science 
relate well to these concepts. In addition, personnel who are well versed 
in Pascal programming, seem to transition quite easily into the Ada world. 
In my experience, I was fortunate to find talent that related these 
concepts. At the beginning of the project, no one on my team had any Ada 
experience, and further, few of them had any knowledge of what Ada was 


D.1.1.3 


Managing Ada Development 


James R. Green 


all about. The success of this project is a tribute to their talents. 

Management must seriously scrutinize the qualifications of those people 
they select to implement Ada projects. Selecting the right people will 
definitely increase your probability of implementing a successful Ada 
project. 

Training Programs - A Kev Ingredient 

Ideally, you would want to hire people who have performed successfully on 
other Ada projects. However, there is a limited number of people who are 
proficient in Ada and I highlight the word proficient. Proficient means 
that the people understand the complex concepts of this new language and 
understand how to apply them. This is different than just knowing the 
syntax and semantics of the new language. There is a large body of 
software people that are well versed in FORTRAN, JOVIAL, COBOL, and 
other well established, high-level software languages. Many of these 
people will be transitioning to work in the Ada environment. Management 
must provide a means for these people to transition successfully into the 
Ada world. This leads me to the second key ingredient to success-- 
training programs. 

The program which I managed began with people that were unfamiliar with 
Ada. There was a wide variety of background experience among the people 
selected for the project. It was clear at the outset that a key ingredient 
to the success of the program would be the implementation of an effective 
training program. The training program would provide two benefits. First, 
it would establish a common baseline of knowledge for all people on the 
project at that time. The varied experiences of the people, and their 
knowledge of software engineering was an unknown. By covering these 
topics in a training course, I could be sure that every one on the project 
was in synch with respect to vocabulary, concepts, approaches, 
methodologies, and techniques. The Ada programming language and the 
concepts and methodologies to be used when designing Ada programs could 
be covered in detail. In addition, there would be a benefit of discussing 




9 





Maoaalna Ada Development James R. Green 


application techniques-that is how to implement certain features using 
the Ada language in practical applications. The training program that l 
implemented actually consisted of five courses and conv.ised 122 
classroom hours of instruction. 

The courses developed and given were: 


Introduction to Software Engineering 32 hours 

Software Design Methodology 40 hours 

Coding Methodology 16 hours 

Ada Programming Support Environment 4 hours 

Ada Programming 40 hours 


The Software Engineering, Design Methodology and Coding Methodology 
courses were developed in-house. These courses are specifically 
designated to provide a sound understanding of the software development 
process, software life cycle and design methodologies. The Ada courses 
used books and lecture material that was available at the time. It dwelled 
primarily on the syntax and semantics of the Ada language. 

The length of time that was taken for training may seem excessive, and 
indeed, at the time I thought it was excessive. However, during later 
stages of the project, it was clear that the time spent at the front-end of 
the project for training, was time well spent. 

I cannot stress strongly enough the need for the development team to 
understand good software engineering principles and design methodologies 
To fully realize the power of Ada in your program, these principles must 
be understood and used. Although, in my case, all individuals went through 
the same level of training, I would recommend different levels of training 
for different project people. I would recommend two to four weeks oi 
intense training for key technical people on the project, and possibly one 
to two weeks for junior people. The Ada training for the junior people will 
be augmented through on-the-job-training and the assignment of tasks 
under the guidance of the more senior and more experienced project 


D.1.1.5 



Managing Ada Development 


James R. Green 


personnel. 

The training issued, and the time and money which should be allocated 
during the project for training, is quite controversial. There are a number 
of training programs currently available. However, many training courses 
are short and cover the syntax and semantics of the language primarily. 
For the training program to be truly successful, it must include the 
software engineering and design principles needed by those people 
designing the Ada program. These people must understand these 
principles, and they must understand how they relate to Ada and this 
means that significant time must be spent on the software engineering 
aspects of software design. 

I recognize that the effectiveness of a training program is largely 
realizable only after you are well into your project. 

The 1 32 classroon hours that I allocated for training at the front-end of 
my project, was excruciatingly difficult to justify at the time. It 
appeared for several weeks that the project was making no progress in 
accomplishing its real objective of designing and implementing a software 
program. However, I now firmly believe that the time spent on the basic 
fundamentals of software design reaped enormous benefits later in the 
program. The issue of training must be taken seriously by management as 
well as the training programs themselves. How well the skills and 
methodologies are learned by your personnel will greatly affect the 
success of the project. The training must be effective and the personnel 
assigned to the Ada project must be aware that management considers the 
training crucial to success and that they must take it seriously. I believe 
that training related exercises may indeed be integrated with initial 
project tasks in a sort of a real laboratory exercise. 

At this point, you as a manager would theoretically have qualified people 
who are trained and capable of implementing an Ada project. The next 
issue you may worry about are the schedule issues. How can you best be 
assured that the project is progressing on schedule and whether the 


D.1.1.6 



Managing Ada Development 


James R. Green 


schedule is realistic. There are numerous models and rules of thumb 
which apply for FORTRAN and COBOL and other languages as to the relative 
amount of time that is spent during the requirements and design phase of 
the project, how much time is spent during the actual coding, and how 
much time is spent during the test and integration portion of the project. 
I have traditionally used the 40-20-40 rule-of-thumb, where 40 percent 
of the time is allocated to requirements and design, 20 percent to code, 
and 40 percent to test and integration. It is my experience, however, that 
when implementing a program in Ada, significantly more time and effort 
should be expended during the requirements and design phase. Possibly as 
much as 55 percent to 60 percent of the time should be allocated and 
expected to be spent during the requirements and design phase. Only 1 5 
percent of the time need be allocated to code, and 25 percent to 30 percent 
of the time should be spent in testing and integration. 

It has been the experience of people on my project, that if the Ada code 
compiles, chances are good that it will run. I had teams of workers 
implementing different elements of the program. All of the parts of the 
program had to work successfully together in order for the entire project 
to work. We have found that the test and integration phase is extremely 
shortened using Ada. If a module compiles, chances are very high that it 
will run except if there are design errors which go back to the extra time 
spent for requirements and design. You must ensure that your design is 
correct and sound. 

There are many features in Ada which will result in the program being 
accomplished very quickly. One of these features is a concept called 
"generic." The concept of generics is that you design a template to do a 
certain function, and each time the template is invoked at various places 
in the program, it is instantiated or initialized to the values needed for 
that particular function. Generics are extremely powerful. However, in 
order to get the most benefit from this feature of the Ada language, a lot 
of effort must be put in the design of these generic packages. This is an 
example of how the training and the software engineering elements work 
together to ultimately benefit you project schedule. Approximately, 50 


D.1.1.7 



Managing Ada Development 


James R. Green 


percent of the program I was responsible for, is implemented in generics, 
and the success of a particular generic was largely dependent upon the 
amount of time that was spent in determining the requirements of each 
instance that generic would be used and ensuring that the design of that 
generic package was sound for all instances. 

Another key consideration for successfully managing an Ada project, has 
to do with creating an atmosphere which is conducive to accomplishment. 
When management is planning the schedule for an Ada program, there must 
be enough time at the front-end for the technical people to be accustomed 
to and familiar with the new language. Progress on the project may be 
excruciatingly slow during this time period, but as the technical people 
become more accustomed to the features and capabilities of the Ada 
language, they will be able to better apply this knowledge during the 
actual application required in the project. An atmosphere for 
accomplishment, I believe, will encourage experimentation and pushing the 
language to its limits. In my particular instance, the Ada compiler which I 
had available at the time that training was occurring, was of poor quality 
and several of my people found that the Ada compiler really did not 
operate in accordance with the Ada Language Reference Manual. They took 
it upon themselves, as part of their training exercises, to determine all 
those features of the Ada Language Reference Manual which did work, i 
encouraged this sort of activity as it broadened their horizons and it held 
their interest in the project during the period of time that training was 
occurring. This atmosphere of accomplishment meant that the technical 
people were not afraid to try things and risk new methods of 
implementation. They became less fearful of failure and concentrated 
more on success. This attitude is extremely important to maintain for a 
successful Ada project. The technical people will engage in frustrations 
and difficult things, but they must be able to experiment and they must be 
able to feel the freedom to try new things. You must develop a "can do" 
attitude in your technical people. 


Risks and Cost Considerations 



Managing Ada Development 


James R. Green 


An area of major concern to management to committing a project in Ada is 
the unquantified cost associated with it. There will be cost associated 
with training, there will be cost associated with new compilers and 
software tools, computers, and there is not guarantee that the people that 
are hired on the project will be able to accomplish the project. Indeed, the 
risks to doing a project in Ada are formidable. In order to control these 
risks, and maintain the project on cost and schedule, management must 
aggressively be involved with all aspects of the project. By this. I mean 
you don't have to know how to program in Ada. Indeed, I do not. However, 
you must be able to relate and understand those concepts and those 
methodologies which are successful. 


Managing Ada Development 


James R. Green 


Management should consider that doing a project in Ada will involve many 
risks that are not present in projects using other traditional languages. 
The risks to be faced are not unmanageable, and as a result, the aggressive 
manager-that is one who can quickly spot trends leading to success as 
well as trends leading to failure and can direct actions appropriate to 
either trend, will be able to successfully complete an Ada project. 

Since risk equates to cost, the Ada project manager will want to reduce 
risk as much as possible. I believe this may be done through prudent 
selection of personnel, good training programs and agressive involved 
management. 

This short discussion on Managing a Program in Ada has touched only a few 
of the elements management must be concerned with. These, however, are 
keys to success. 



