
Professional 


Bulletin 


Artillerymen 


• November-December 2009 


-* * 

1 






* 






Report Documentation Page 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 


1. REPORT DATE 

NOV 2009 


2. REPORT TYPE 


3. DATES COVERED 

00-11-2009 to 00-12-2009 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Fires. A Joint Publication for U.S. Artillery Professionals. November 
December 2009 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 


5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 


6. AUTHOR(S) 


5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Fires,Building 652, Room 203, McNair Road,Fort Sill,OK,73503 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS (ES) 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 


11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


14. ABSTRACT 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 

unclassified 


b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 


c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER 

ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Same as 

52 

Report (SAR) 



19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





o 


A Joint *—< 
Professional 
Bulletin 
for U.S. Field 
& Air Defense 
Artillerymen m 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 


FIRES UP FRONT 

I Mud to Space: The Senior NCO’s Perspective on the State of the Fires Center of Excellence 

By CSM Joseph D. Smith, Command Sergeant Major of the Fires Center of Excellence and Fort Sill, Okla. 

3 2009 State of Air Defense Artillery: a new era of change 

By CSM James T. Carr Sr., Command Sergeant Major, U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery and 
Air Defense Artillery School 

6 2009 State of the Field Artillery: aggressive and adaptive for today and tomorrow 

By CSM Daniel R. Willey, Command Sergeant Major, U.S. Army Field Artillery and Field Artillery School 

SILHOUETTES OF STEEL 

9 3rd Battlefield Coordination Detachment-Korea 

10 5th Battlefield Coordination Detachment 

II 11 th Air Defense Artillery Brigade 

12 31st Air Defense Artillery Brigade 

13 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command 

14 35th Air and Missile Defense 

15 94th Army Air and Missile Defense Command 

16 108th Air Defense Artillery Brigade 

RED BOOK 2009 SPECIAL SECTION 

24 2008-2009 photo history: A look back at our journey forward 

Maps of air defense artillery and field artillery units 

FIRES FEATURED ARTICLES _ 

31 Fires Modernization in the 21st Century 

By MAJ Tony Dedmond and LTC Jon R. Milner 

35 Is the Army training system Millennial friendly? 

By COL James Lackey, Gene Kamena and CPT Robert B. Lackey 
41 Intermediate Level Education: helping to combat field artillery atrophy 
By COL (Ret.) James L. Davis 
44 Winning World War IV: part I of II 
By MAJ David Haynes 

46 Man versus Nature: surviving high altitude, cold weather battlefields 

By CPT Coley D. Tyler, CPT Russell G. Nowels and Dr. Phillip L. Henson 

FIRES DEPARTMENTS 

34 Fires Bulletin Author’s Guide 


17 1st Infantry Division 
19 17th Fires Brigade 
21 18th Fires Brigade (Airborne) 
25 41st Fires Brigade, III Corps 

27 210th Fires Brigade 

28 214th Fires Brigade 

29 434th Field Artillery Brigade 

30 11th Marine Regiment 


Headquarters, Department of the Army • PB644-09-6 


















T his 2009 Red Book edition of the Fires Bulletin is 
dedicated to the U.S. Army’s Noncommissioned 
Officer Corps which has DISTINGUISHED 
ITSELF for more than 200 years. The NCOs put forth A 
GREAT EFFORT on this issue and in true “backbone” 
fashion produced an outstanding product. It is clear that the 

Fires NCOS understand the Fires Strategy 

AND WHERE WE ARE HEADED as a Fires Center and 
Fires Force. 


Since the inception of the Fires Center of Excellence, the 
synergies between the two branches, the field artillery and air defense artillery, have continued 


DISCLAIMER: Fires, a professional bulletin (PB), is 
published bimonthly by Headquarters, Department of the 
Army under the auspices of the Fires Center of Excellence 
(CoE) (Building 758, McNair Road), Fort Sill, OK. The views 
expressed are those of the authors and not the Depart¬ 
ment of Defense or its elements. Fires' content doesn’t 
necessarily reflect the U.S. Army’s position or supersede 
information in other official Army publications. Use of news 
items constitutes neither affirmation of their accuracy nor 
product endorsements. 

By Order of the Secretary of the Army: 

George W. Casey Jr. 

General, United States Army 
Chief of Staff 


Official: 



Administrative Assistant to the 
Secretary of the Army, 0930803 


David D. Halverson 

Major General, United States Army 
Commanding General 
Fort Sill, Okla. 


to grow especially in our capabilities development. There’s never been a more exciting time to 
be a Fires professional. NCOS, KEEP UP THE GREAT WORK, this RedBookis dedicated 
to you in the “Year of the Noncommissioned Officer” and THANK YOU AGAIN FOR YOUR 


Editor-in-Chief: Sharon McBride 
Managing Editor: Jennifer M. Blais 
Art Director: Jason Kelly 
Assistant Editor: Tonya S. Goforth 


DEDICATION TO OUR ARMY. 


Agile - Decisive - Anywhere - Anytime! Fires Strong! 


David D. Halverson 


Major General, United States Army 


Commanding General 


PURPOSE: Founded in 2007, Fires serves as a forum 
for the professional discussions of U.S. Army and Marine 
Field Artillery (FA) and Army Air Defense Artillery (ADA) 

S )rofessionals, both active and Reserve Component 
RC); disseminates professional knowledge about the 
A’s and ADA’s progress, developments and best use in 
campaigns; cultivates a common understanding of the 
power, [imitations and application of joint fires, both lethal 
and nonlethal; fosters joint fires interdependency among 
the armed services; and promotes the understanding of 
and interoperability between the FA’s and ADA’s active and 
RC units—all of which contribute to the good of the FA and 
ADA, Army, joint and combined forces, and our nation. 



THE NCO - THE “BACKBONE” OF OUR ARMY 


FA Marine regiment ; 


OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION: Free copies are sent to USA 
and USMC FA units: 7 per corps artillery, FA/fires brigade, 
brigade combat team (BCT), Stryker cavalry regiment 
(SCR), FA Marine regiment and battlefield coordination 
“'“nent (BCD) headquarters; 13 per FA/fires/battalion/ 
_on- 3 per fire support element (FSE) fires and ef¬ 
fects cell (FEC), effects coordination cell (ECO) fire support 
cell (FSC), fire support coordination center (FSCC). force 
fires coordination center (FFCC) and separate battery or 
detachment; 3 per fire support team (FIST) and combat 
observation lasing team (COLT); and 1 per Master Gun¬ 
ner and Fire Support Officer (FSO). Free copies to Army 
ADA units: 7 per Army air and missile defense command 
(AAMDC) and ADA brigade headquarters; 13 per ADA 
battalion; and 3 per air defense airspace management 
(ADAM) cell and separate battery or detachment.The FA 
and ADA Schools’ departments, directorates and divisions 
each get 2 copies. Other U.S. Army and armed services 
units/organizations and U.S. government agencies that 
work with FA or ADA personnel, equipment, doctrine, 
tactics, training organization or leadership issues may 
request a free copy—including, but not limited to, ROTCs, 
recruiting commands, libraries, attaches, liaison officers, 
state adjutants general, public affairs offices, military 
academies, laboratories, arsenals, major commands, etc. 
Contact Fires at http://sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/. 

SUBSCRIPTIONS: Those not eligible for official distribu¬ 
tion may subscribe to Fires via theTJ.S. Superintendent of 
Documents, P.O. Box37154, Pittsburgh. PA 15250-7954 
A -866-512-1800) or via membership in the U.S. Army FA 
Association (www.fieldartillery.org). 

SUBMISSIONS: Email to the Editor, Fires, at firesbul- 
letin@conus.army.mil; mail to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, 
OK 73503-0311; overnight to Building 758, Room 7, 
McNair Road, Fort Sill, Ok 73503-5600- or call at DShl 
639-5121/6806 or commercial (580) 442-5121/6806. 

REPRINTS: Firesls pleased to 
please credit Fires, 




s pleased to grant permission to reprint; 
f, the author(s) and photographers. 

POSTMASTER: Fires( USPS 309-010) (ISSN 1935-4096) 
is published bimonthly; periodical postage paid by Depart¬ 
ment of the Army at Lawton OK 73501 and an additional 
mailing post office. Send address chanqes to Fires, P.O. 
Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311. 


ADA 24/7 Hotline & Email 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 

DSN 978-5312 or (915) 
568-5312 

ada_fires@bliss.army. mil 


FA 24/7 Hotline & Email 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 
DSN 639-2204 or (580) 
442-2204 

redleg@conus.army.mil 










ooens oi pnui iMEOinig oeq 



The Senior NCO’s Perspective 
on the State of the 
Fires Center of Excellence 


By CSM Joseph D. Smith, 
Command Sergeant Major 
of the Fires Center of 
Excellence and 
Fort Sill, Okla. 


W hat is the Fires Center 
of Excellence? What 
can and will it do for 
me, the Fires Soldier? These are 
just a couple questions that some 
of you near and far from the flag 
pole might be wondering. Most 
of you know that the FCoE includes both air defense and field 
artilleries, but again what does that mean for you? In this article 
I will give you, “The senior NCO’s perspective on the state of 
the Fires Center of Excellence,” and the discussion will include 
what the Fires center is about and what it can do for you. 

Initially, the Fires Center of Excellence became a reality on 
Aug. 14, during a flagging and patching ceremony. The unveiling 
of the new unit colors and donning the new patch signified the F ires 
Center of Excellence’s headquarters detachment achieving initial 
operating capacity. Oct. 1,2009 marked the effective date of the 
unit operating with an approved organizational structure of more 
than 1,300 Soldiers and Department of the Army civilians. 

The Fires Center of Excellence is working hard to support 
the warfighter. The commanding general has started a blog in 
order to interact with Fires Soldiers throughout the world. The 
blog is your chance to ask the CG a question or let him know 
how the Fires Center of Excellence can better support you. You 
can find the CG’s blog here: usacac.army.mil/blog/blogs/fires/ 
or you can follow the link from the Fires Knowledge Network. 
The Fires center also has a Facebook page. We are posting 
stories and pictures that are relevant to the Fires community. 
Log onto www.facebook.com/home.php#/pages/Fires-Center- 
of-Excellence/129815299935?ref=nf. Become a fan and tell us 
what you think. Most of you have probably noticed the “Message 
to Observer” message that comes to your Army Knowledge 
Online e-mail address has changed names. It is now called “Fires 
Forward” and contains links to articles relevant to not only the 
field artillery but also the air defense artillery. And, as always, 
the Fires Bulletin continues to publish information and new 
articles for the warfighter. 

Probably the single most important part of an NCO’s career 
is professional education, and we have made several adjustments 
to keep up with our warfighting missions. With the addition of air 




defense artillery NCO Education System courses, Fort Sill’s NCO 
Academy will soon be known as the Fires NCO Academy. Within 
the next year, under U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command’s 
transfer plan, the Fort Polk, La., and Fort Hood, Texas, NCO 
Academies and Warrior Leaders Courses will fall under the Fires 
Center of Excellence’s command and control. The Warrior Leaders 
Course has transitioned from 30 to 15 days, and will increase to 17 
days by January 2010. The change in length of the Warrior Leaders 
Course will provide our junior NCOs more opportunities to receive 
valuable training. The Basic NCO and Advanced NCO Courses are 
also being revamped, 
and will be renamed 
the Advanced Leaders 
Course and the Senior 
Leaders Course, re¬ 
spectively. The length 
of these courses is 
being extended by an 
average of about two 
weeks. We have also 
scheduled several air 
defense artillery and 
field artillery mobile 
training teams for the 
next year to help the 
warfighter at home 
station. We are also 
working to acquire 
funding for a brand 
new NCO Academy, 
as part of the fiscal 
year 2013 Military 
Construction Project 
here at Fort Sill, Okla., 
giving us a general 
instructor building of 
over 107,000 square 
feet as well as billets capable of holding more than 200 students, 
he end game. The Directorate of Training and Doctrine has 
developed a computer simulation/game, called “Danger 
Close,” that encompasses training aimed at platoon-level leaders 
(lieutenants and sergeants first class) in leadership skills. These 
are the skills (knowledge on topics such as equal opportunity, 
suicide prevention, family issues and fraternization) needed by a 
platoon leader in both tactical and administrative environments. It 
has recently been introduced into the NCO Academy curriculum; 
and has received very positive comments. We are continuing to 


A Soldier scans his sector on perimeter 
defense as others attend to wounded 
comrades in the background during simulated 
firefights at the Warrior Leaders Course at 
Camp Eagle, Fort Sill, Okla., Aug. 31. (Photo by 

James Brabenec, the Cannoneer) 


1 


November-December 2009 • Fires 

























grow this new product and expand training, embracing gaming 
technology that will allow intelligent tutoring, aspects of artificial 
intelligence and web connectivity. 

Our Directorate of Training and Doctrine has also led the 
way in the Fires Center of Excellence’s efforts to develop four 
courses related to electronic warfare. The “Electronic Warfare 
Integrators Course” provides the skill identifier “1J” to those who 
successfully complete it. Designed to meet the needs of battalion 
and brigade commanders, this course graduates leaders who are 
qualified to perform the function of integrating electronic attack 
with the maneuver commander’s scheme of Fires. Three additional 
courses were developed and piloted during fiscal year 2009, and are 
interrelated to the establishment of a new electronic warfare military 
occupational speciality. Called 
the “Functional Area 29 Course,” 
it will develop electronic 
warfare officers. This course 
has completed three pilots and 
is in the process of receiving 
Training and Doctrine Command 
validation as an approved course. 

The “Military Occupational 
Speciality 29E Course” and “Warrant Officer 290A Course” also 
provide the full circle of courses needed in the establishment of a 
new military occupational speciality that supports the Army. Still 
in development and will be executed in the future are the NCO 
Education System courses and the Warrant Officer Advance Course 
for this new and exciting field of electronic warfare. 

Our Directorate of Training and Doctrine has also been 
developing other new training for our officers by working closely 
with 428th Field Artillery Brigade and 6th Air Defense Artillery 
Brigade. New Captain Career Course materials as well as modifying 
the Basic Officer Leader Course are currently underway. After 
analyzing the course materials of Basic Officer Leader Course II, 
it was terminated and absorbed into Basic Officer Leader Course 


III, but a new course, Basic Officer Leader Course B, is currently 
under development. Our Captain’s Career Course continues to 
mature and change based on the needs of the leader and the needs 
of the warfighter. 

elebrating our heritage. Remembering and celebrating the 
rich histories of our branches will enable us to make our own 
great history as Fires Soldiers. The Fires Center of Excellence is 
making great progress in developing its museum complex. The Fort 
Sill Museum has new galleries — the new Field Artillery Museum 
on Randolph Road opened this past June during the annual Fires 
seminar. The Field Artillery Museum continues to evolve and 
grow with new exhibits, dioramas, scene replications and other 
improvements. A valuable part of this, the new Artillery Park area 

north of the museum, is ready to 
begin construction in fiscal year 
2010 and will result in a new 
location for the famous “Cannon 
Walk.” Additionally, plans are 
in the works for unveiling of 
the Field Artilleryman Statue in 
June 2010, and the relocation of 
Constitution Park and related 
memorials to the museum complex. The Air Defense Artillery 
Museum is scheduled to begin construction adjacent to the Field 
Artillery Museum in 2011, and is projected to be open by 2013. 
This will make the Fires Center of Excellence the largest Army 
museum complex west of the Mississippi River. Our goal is to make 
it a premier location for students, Soldiers, families, historians and 
researchers to be drawn to the Fires Center of Excellence to use 
these great resources. 

The biggest thing to remember is that the Fires Center of 
Excellence is here to support you, the warfighter. By embracing 
change, the F ires Center of Excellence will ensure that F ires Soldiers 
remain the most lethal and well trained Soldiers in the world. 

Fires strong! 


“Remembering and celebrating the rich histories 
of our branches will enable us to make our own 
great history as Fires Soldiers. ” 




An artist sketch of the Air Defense Artillery and Field Artillery Museums. The Air Defense Artillery Museum is scheduled to begin construction adjacent 
to the Field Artillery Museum in 2011. The Field Artillery Museum opened this past June. {Fires archives) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 2 



















OaO [MESIMfe state of the branches 



“It takes a lot of courage to release the familiar and seemingly secure, 
to embrace the new. But there is no real security in what is no longer 
meaningful. There is more security in the adventurous and exciting, 
for in movement there is life, and in change there is power.” 



The solid rocket engine lights and propels the Stinger missile launched from the Avenger 
weapons system platform at McGregor Range, N.M., during a live-fire exercise conducted by 
3rd Battalion, 265th Air Defense Artillery Regiment, May 1. (Photo by maj Deanna Bague, u.s. Army) 


November-December 























By CSM James T. Carr 
Sr., Command Sergeant 
Major, U.S. Army Air 
Defense Artillery and 
Air Defense Artillery 
School 


I 


n 2009, we saw a lot of 
change; the biggest to 
date is our collocation 
with the field artillery here 
at Fort Sill, Okla. This move 
was the culmination of many 
hours of effort and hard work for the entire 
air defense artillery community and enabled 
us to create a new beginning, together, with 
the field artillery. Our focus, for several 
years to come, will be on effectiveness and 
efficiency as a Fires force in a variety of 
situations and with a variety of partners. 

The air defense artillery leadership is 
now in the process of concentrating on 
implementing the Air Defense Artillery 
Strategy as pennedby BGRoger F. Mathews, 
Chief of U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery. 
To read the full strategy, log onto Army 
Knowledge Online and the Fires Knowledge 
Network homepage located at https ://www. 
us.army.mil/suite/page/1030700. 

This strategy is our blueprint and 
our steering mechanism for fielding new 
organizations and new weapons systems 
while establishing a new home here at 
Fort Sill. But as we continue to grow 
and adapt, we won’t lose sight of our 
priorities — growing leaders, honoring 
our past while fully engaging in our future 
and, most importantly, taking care of our 



families, because without 
the full support of our 
Soldiers and our families, 
nothing else matters. Our 
world-class treatment of 
our families will include 
providing never before seen 
resources and our exclusive 
reach-back guarantee; that’s 
how important our Soldiers 
and their families are to us. 

G rowing leaders. The 
branch is implementing a 
new system to grow enlisted 
leaders that will create less of a “bottleneck” 
at the top once a Soldier desires to reach 
the rank of command sergeant major. This 
new system was created to get some of our 
junior Soldiers coming up the ranks more 
opportunities for promotion and experience 
that didn’t exist before. The junior enlisted 
Soldiers are our future; by taking care 
of them, we are ensuring we have a 
professional Fires force that can carry us into 
the 21 st century. Additionally, air defense 
artillery Soldiers have the opportunity to 
perform missions supporting our branch in 
a variety of occupational specialties from 
“mud to space.” Our Soldiers, once again, 
can look forward to permanent change of 
station assignments in several locations 
in the Continental U.S., as well as being 
assigned to Germany and the Pacific Rim. 

I am proud to say our female air 
defenders are setting standards within 
the corps. This past year, two female air 
defenders were selected for promotion to 
the rank of sergeant major and attendance 
to the U.S. Army Sergeants Major 


Academy. Moreover, female air defenders 
continue to do great work in both Military 
Occupational Specialties 14J Air Defense 
Tactical Operations Center Operator and 
14S Avenger Crewmember for the last six 
years; female air defense artillery Soldiers 
have served as MOS 14E Patriot Fire 
Control Enhanced Operators/Maintainers 
and 14T Patriot Launching Station 
Enhanced Operators/Maintainers from the 
beginning. 

Growing leaders also means providing 
educational opportunities. Being a 
professional means more than gaining 
military occupational specialty skills; it 
also means taking advantage of civilian 
college courses. That is why, as NCOs and 
leaders, we must provide every opportunity 
for our Soldiers to participate in civilian 
training and college education, avenues of 
self-development and experience for them 
to continue to achieve success. Proactive 
leaders should be able to think beyond Army 
regulations, to be able to get outside of their 
comfort zones and outside the traditional 
mindset. And it is only through these other 
types of experiences and education a Soldier 
can gain insight and maturity to know when 
is appropriate to deviate from a set course 
of action. 

Along those lines, we also will continue 
to work with civilian institutions to ensure 
“credit” for our military occupation specialty 
courses. We will continue to provide 
incremental updates to our professional 
developmental career maps. 

R emember the past, engage the future. 

Every great leader has one thing in 
common — they never lose sight of where 









they came from, and the men and women of 
air defense artillery should be no different. 
Just because we now make our home at Fort 
Sill, it doesn’t mean we are destined to forget 
about our history as air defense artillerymen. 
Fort Bliss, Texas, was just a place — it is 
not what makes us who we are. It doesn’t 
matter where we hang our hats; it’s what 
we carry inside us that is essential. 

Everyone has heard the expression 
“home is where the heart is,” and having 
heard it hundreds of times before doesn’t 
make it invalid or irrelevant. We carry in 
our hearts a rich heritage of supporting 
the maneuver force since our inception 
as anti-aircraft artillery in World War I. 
We defended the Ludendorff Bridge at 
Remagen, as the Army advanced to end 
World War II. We employed Duster 40- 
mm guns in Korea and Vulcan alongside 
the infantry in Vietnam. We intercepted 
scuds in Operation Desert Storm, and 
we prevented the “decapitation strike” in 
Operation Iraqi Freedom by intercepting a 
ballistic missile just hundreds of feet above 
the land component commander’s morning 
battle update brief. Time and time again, 
we provided freedom of action from the 
tactical to the strategic levels, and this will 
not change just because we now call F ort Sill 
home. It’s essential not to get mired down 


with ties to a place, but move forward and 
embrace our future. Don’t forget what’s in 
our hearts, and be ready to engage no matter 
where our operation tempo takes us. 

old up traditions. Even though we are 
busy gearing up for operations now 
and in the future, I encourage you to don’t 
forget the simple traditions that come with 
life in the Army — traditions such as NCO 
inductions, Soldier and NCO boards, and 
dining-in ceremonies. Don’t get so caughtup 
in day-to-day operations that these types of 
traditional gatherings are forgotten about or 
fall to the wayside. If they do, it is doing our 
younger generations a great disservice. 

According to Winston Churchill, “The 
farther backward you can look, the farther 
forward you are likely to see.” As an NCO 
it is imperative to teach young Soldiers the 
significance of pinning on sergeant’s stripes. 
Even though we are in the 21 st century, the 
rank of NCO has been around since the 
Army’s inception. 

Other countries say that one of the things 
that set the American Army apart from all 
others is the strength of its NCO Corps. In 
other armies, it would be unheard of for 
them to give some of the tasks to NCOs 
that routinely are performed by NCOs in 
the American Army. 

The air and missile defense forces are 


entering exciting times and we will continue 
to grow as the missions and demands on our 
force continue to grow more challenging 
and complex. No matter where we are, 
we will continue to defend our maneuver 
forces as we pursue victory — because we 
will accept nothing less. 

First to fire! 


Command Sergeant Major James T. Carr Sr., 
air defense artillery, is the command sergeant 
major, U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery and Air 
Defense Artillery School at Fort Sill, Okla. He 
served as brigade command sergeant major 
of 35th Air Defense Artillery Brigade, Osan Air 
Base, Republic of Korea; command sergeant 
major of 1 st Battalion, 7th Air Defense Artillery; 
S-3 operations sergeant major, 1st Battalion, 
7th Air Defense Artillery, 108th Brigade, and 
quality assurance officer, Title XI Offices, all 
at Fort Bliss, Texas. He also served as First 
Sergeant, 6th Battalion, 52nd Air Defense 
Artillery (Patriot), Ansbach, Germany; Senior 
Drill Instructor, 1st Battalion, 56th Air Defense 
Artillery, Fort Bliss; Avenger Platoon Sergeant, 
5th Battalion, 5th Air Defense Artillery, 2nd 
Infantry Division, Republic of Korea; Avenger 
Squad Leader, 2nd Battalion, 62nd Air Defense 
Artillery, Fort Ord, Cali.; and Stinger Squad 
leader, 3rd Battalion, 79th Field Artillery, 
Giessen, Germany. 




5 November-December 2009 • Fires 









feir 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ 


November-December 2009 


By CSM Daniel R. Willey, 
Command Sergeant Major, 
U.S. Army Field Artillery and 
Field Artillery School 


“The key elements in the art of 
working together are how to deal 
with change, how to deal with 
conflict, and how to reach our 
potential ... the needs of the team 
are best met when we meet the needs 
of individual persons .” 

Max DePree 


T hese are definitely exciting times to be a field artilleryman. 
The Fires force is an adapting force. The nonstandard mission 
is now the standard mission for the foreseeable future. I see 
a lot of goodness and opportunity for our Soldiers as we change 
and adapt during this era of persistent conflict. The fact we can 
understand the significant effects of the right combination of lethal 
and nonlethal fires and apply them accordingly assures me the 
field artillery will remain the premier, worldwide-deployable 
fire support force for now and in the future. Change 
is always good. The challenge is how to deal with 
the unanticipated consequences of change. 


Fire blazes out of the barrel of a 155-mm towed howitzer 
when Soldiers of C Battery, 1-321 Airborne Field Artillery 
Regiment, Fort Bragg, N.C., launch a round at Camp Wright, 
Afghanistan, Sept. 23. (Photo by TSgt Brian Boisvert, U.S. Air Force) 


-"r" ^ ^ * 


















The field artillery has proven during the last eight years our Redlegs 
can integrate and deliver timely joint lethal and nonlethal Fires across 
the full spectrum of operations - offense, defense and stability/civil 
support - better than any other branch or service. Because of this 
innate ability to dominate any environment, we will continue to be 
trendsetters of fires integration tactics on 21st-century battlefields. 
One never can say being a field artilleryman is a boring profession. 

This past year has been fast paced as the collocation of the Field 
Artillery and Air Defense Artillery Schools and Centers at Fort Sill, 
Okla., was completed to create the Fires Center of Excellence. This 
capstone event signaled a new beginning for both the field artillery and 
air defense artillery. Both branches, together, will focus on effectiveness 
and efficiency as an integrated Fires force. 

O ur priorities. F or the next several years, the field artillery leadership 
will concentrate on implementing the Field Artillery Strategy as 
penned by BG Ross E. Ridge, chief of the U.S. Army Field Artillery. 
This strategy defines several priorities and goals that will enable the 
field artillery to best integrate our Fires function into the way we 
fight. The field artillery must take ownership of these priorities to 
achieve this integration. To read the full strategy, log onto the Fires 
Knowledge Network homepage at https://www.us.army.mil/suite/ 
page/1030700. 

Our first and foremost priority is to recruit and retain quality Soldiers, 
leaders and civilians. Then, we must ensure we are in the business 
of growing flexible, adaptable and agile leaders capable of joint and 
combined interoperability and being just as responsive in joint and 
combined operations as we are in Army-only operations. Next, we 
must enhance recruitment, retention and leader development with a 
drive to take care of our families better than we ever have before. We 
are making huge gains in this area. Families matter. We are definitely 
not there yet, but, being a self-described eternal optimist, I view this 
as a half-full glass scenario, with a glass that is getting fuller every 
day. 

Eve chosen to highlight these particular priorities because all 
three boil down to one simple ingredient — taking care of our people. 
That’s what NCOs do best. The bottom line is, if we don’t take care 
of our people — the very reason we are so successful — even with 
the greatest strategy imaginable, we are doomed to fail at being the 
Fires force the Army needs to succeed. 


R ecruit and retain Soldiers. The best way to recruit and 
retain Soldiers is for NCOs to have daily, direct contact 
with their Soldiers. This is non-negotiable. Our NCOs continue 
to strive to understand their Soldiers and their families’ needs, 
wants and desires. This isn’t always an easy thing to do; the 
key to success most of the time is simply to listen. Listen when 
Soldiers talk to you; listen when they talk to each other. You’ll 
be surprised about what you can learn about your Soldiers if 
you just take the time to listen. 

I absolutely believe Soldiers who are in well-led and 
disciplined organizations reenlist even though they might have 
other opportunities. With the war going on for more than eight 
years now, our junior NCOs and Soldiers haven’t known anything 
other than our at-war operation tempo. Constant deployments 
with minimal dwell time have been a huge stress on the entire 
force. Our Soldiers and families are tired. Yet, despite being 
tired, every Soldier wants to serve and be a part of a team - that’s 
why they voluntarily joined our Army while at war. There’s no 
better way to make a Soldier feel like he’s part of team than by 
ensuring him that he or she is value added to the unit. If they 
get this from their leaders, they’ll stick around. An easy way to 
do this is to delegate responsibility and empower Soldiers. Fix 
their mistakes, but ensure they grow from those mistakes. One 
more thing, leaders must always keep the thought that you can 
recruit a Soldier, but it takes work to retain a family. 

G row leaders. With nonstandard field artillery missions now 
being the standard, growing flexible, adaptable and agile 
leaders with joint and combined interoperability skills is tough 
business. The nonstandard missions will remain throughout 
this “era of persistent conflict.” So, put it in your head and 
lock it in. We can choose to gripe about it. We can choose to 
moan about it, but that isn’t going to change anything. The 
field artillery branch is as relevant today as it has ever been. 
If the senior mission commander needs us to perform detainee 
operations, we can do it. When we are asked to perform security 
missions, fixed or mobile - it’s not a problem. We just have to 
be able to shift our focus as needed. In Iraq, we are performing 
nonstandard missions daily. In Afghanistan, we are delivering 
indirect fire in close support of our infantry brothers daily and 


simultaneously performing nonstandard missions. We are the 
primary integrators of all types of fires in both theaters and doing 
it extremely well. The key is capturing as many lessons learned as 
possible and incorporating them quickly into our instruction here 
at Fort Sill. Every course within the schoolhouse now is reviewed 
and updated continually to incorporate changes identified in the 
lessons learned down-range. 

I ndividual responsibility. Each Soldier must take personal 
responsibility for keeping up to date with field artillery news. Just 
as each Soldier is responsible for his own actions, he is responsible 
for a large part of his own education. The Fires Knowledge Network 
is a great tool for Soldiers to stay abreast of actions relevant to our 
branch. Your Army continual learning process starts with Basic 
Combat Training and Advanced Individual Training and continues 
until the day you retire. Strive to be a professional student of your 
branch. Start by going online; read magazines like the Fires Bulletin. 
With Fires Knowledge Online and the Army’s social networking 
sites, there are limitless opportunities to learn about field artillery 
as a profession. We just launched a new media in our continued 
efforts to reach out to the force: “Fires Center of Excellence” blog 
site. Participate in this to help make it better. Self-improvement is 
essential to doing well in any profession. 

Being a professional means more than gaining military 
occupational specialty skills; it also means taking advantage of 
outside college courses. As NCOs and leaders, we must provide 
every opportunity for our Soldiers to participate in civilian training, 
college education and personal avenues of self-development and 
experience to continue to achieve success. Experiences and education 
can give Soldiers the insight and the maturity to know when it is 
appropriate to diverge from the known azimuth - to be adaptive. 

We must be schooled in field artillery basics. But we also must 
become adaptive leaders who are proficient in joint and combined 
expeditionary full-spectrum operations and culturally astute and 
resilient to uncertain and ambiguous environments. 

If you need assistance! with your efforts to execute critical 
training at the unit level, don’t be shy about contacting the school 
to get it. That’s what we are! here for, and the school has good 
reach-back capabilities to execute exportable training and 
mobile training teams. 


P recision is now. At the end of the day, our reputation as the 
world’s best Fires force rides alone on our precision, both in 
terms of target attack and timing. For the past several years, success 
on the battlefield meant the least amount of force to gain significant 
support of indigenous populations. Due to the urbanization of 
the battlefields our enemies operate in, this is unlikely to change 
anytime in the near future. 

Critical for the success of Fires is the integration of the systems 
of the future while sustaining and upgrading our current weapons. 
We must also enable systems that support the current fight. In sync 
with bringing new systems online, we must have the capability to 
train more effectively and efficiently through the use of simulations 
and at combat training centers to get precision, low round-count 
fires. 

This past year has seen several recently-fielded revolutionary 
munitions and systems (Excalibur, Precision-Strike Suite-Special 
Operations Force, Guided Multiple-Launch Rocket System) enhance 
our ability to integrate timely and effective lethal and nonlethal 
fires in support of the maneuver commander. Precision must be in 
our mind set - not just from new munitions and systems, but with 
our legacy equipment well. 

Anticipate - integrate - dominate! 


Command Sergeant Major Daniel R. Willey is the command sergeant 
major of the field artillery and the Field Artillery School at Fort Sill, Okla. 
Previously, he served as Command Sergeant Major of Fort Lewis Gar¬ 
rison, Wash.; and Command Sergeant Major for 3rd Battalion, 319th 
Field Artillery, Fort Bragg, N.C., deploying in support of Operation 
Enduring Freedom. 








OaO BanCiMDEfe silhouettes of steel 


Updates from across the 
air defense and 




D uring the past two years, the 3rd Battlefield Coordination 
Detachment-Korea conducted numerous theater-level 
exercises (both joint and combined), a change of command 
and several local exercises, and hosted two triathlons, two Saint 
Barbara’s Day Balls and two Hill 180 (Battle of Bayonet Hill) 
commemorations along with a long list of military training, 
community and family events. The unit is preparing to move into 
a transitional headquarters in preparation for its new headquarters, 
forecasted to be complete in fiscal year 2012. The 3rd Battlefield 
Coordination Detachment-Korea is poised and ready to Fight 
Tonight. 

xercises. During four peninsula operational exercises, the 3rd 
Battlefield Coordination Detachment-Korea coordinated air 
assets in support of ground operations as well as operational and 
intelligence situational awareness to the air component command. 
The exercises test the AirForce’s ability to execute combat operations, 
receive follow-on forces and defend Osan Airbase from attack. The 
3rd Battlefield Coordination Detachment-Korea participated in 
two peninsula operational readiness inspections, helping the 51st 
Fighter Wing earn a rating of “excellent” in 2008. 

To maintain the Fight Tonight posture, the 3rd Battlefield 
Coordination Detachment-Korea annually conducts two major joint 
and combined exercises. The first, Key Resolve, tests the theater’s 
reception, staging, onward-movement and integration abilities while 
maintaining contact with the enemy. 3rd Battlefield Coordination 
Detachment-Korea provides seamless and timely integration of 
personnel, resources and intelligence to support combined military 


Soldiers of the 3rd Battlefield Coordination Detachment remember the 
veterans who fought during the Korean War Battle of Hill 180, also known 
as “Bayonet Hill,” at a ceremony in February. (Photograph courtesy of the 3rd 
Battlefield Coordination Detachment) 

operations during this March exercise. 

The second major joint and combined theater level exercise is 
Ulchi Freedom Guardian, which normally is held in August. Ulchi 
Freedom Guardian is a joint and bilateral exercise on the Korean 
peninsula. The 3rd Battlefield Coordination Detachment-Korea’s 
pivotal role is providing the coordination link between the ground 
component command and the combined air command to coordinate 
and synchronize the execution of joint fires. Ulchi Freedom Guardian 
2008 was particularly special because it marked the first year the 
Republic of Korea military took the lead role. 

aint Barbara’s Day. The celebration of Saint Barbara’s Day is 
a time-honored tradition shared among all artillerymen. The 3rd 
Battlefield Coordination Detachment-Korea hosted two outstanding 
Saint Barbara’s Day Balls, inducting 16 deserving Soldiers into 
the Honorable and Ancient Order of Saint Barbara. Due to the 
unique combined environment of the 3rd Battlefield Coordination 
Detachment-Korea, it had the honor of inducting seven Republic 
of Korea army officers and NCOs into the order. 

ther events. Each February, the 3rd Battlefield Coordination 
Detachment-Korea hosts a memorial ceremony for the Korean 
peninsula to honor the veterans who took part in the decisive action 
at the Battle of Hill 180, also known as “Bayonet Hill,” on Feb. 7, 
1951. The ceremony remembers the men of Easy Company, 27th 
Infantry Regiment Wolfhounds , commanded by, then, Captain Lewis 
L. Millett, who led a bayonet charge against a well-entrenched and 
larger Chinese force and ultimately prevailed. The event receives 
national coverage and normally is presided over by the U.S. Forces 
Korea commander or the 8th Army commander. 

The 3rd Battlefield Coordination Detachment-Korea hosted 
Osan Airbase’s first and second annual Cold Steel Sprint Triathlon. 
The event featured a 400-meter swim, 20-kilometer bike ride and a 
5-kilometer run. Participation continues to grow as local businesses 
provide sponsorship. The event has turned into an all-day affair 
because of the great sponsorship and support from the surrounding 
Korean community and Osan Air Force Base, culminating with 
the awarding of ribbons and trophies for individual and team 
winners. 

The 3rd Battlefield Coordination Detachment-Korea continues 
to train hard, maintain tactical and technical proficiency, and stand 
at the ready to Fight Tonight. Strike Deep! 




9 November-December 2009 • Fires 


















































T he Army’s battlefield coordination detachments are an essential 
element in today’s joint operating environment. As the Army’s 
newest battlefield coordination detachment, the 5th Battlefield 
Coordination Detachment, Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, is 
assigned to U.S. Army Pacific. The detachment also functions as the 
Army service component command with a liaison mission to the 13 th 
Air Force’s 613th Air and Space Operations Center. 5th Battlefield 
Coordination Detachment’s presence in the Pacific Command area 
of responsibility significantly enhances the theater’s warfighting and 
deterrent capabilities for joint forces. 

xercises. The Pacific Command area of responsibility possesses 
a robust blend of joint and multinational operations, and as 
a result, the 5th Battlefield Coordination Detachment’s relevance 
and roles continue to expand. An essential role for the detachment 
is supporting the Pacific Command theater campaign plan that is 
designed to enhance multinational relationships and combined 
warfighting skills. To accomplish this mission, the detachment 
participates in numerous j oint and combined exercises annually such 
as Terminal Fury in Hawaii, Yama Sakura in Japan, and Talisman 
Saber in Australia. 

The May 2009 Terminal Fury Exercise included the unique 
opportunity to execute the mission with I Marine Expeditionary 
Force as the Joint Forces Land Component Command. During the 
July 2009 Talisman Saber Exercise, 5th Battlefield Coordination 
Detachment worked hand-in-hand with the Australian battlefield 
coordination detachment, helping them establish and improve their 
standing operating procedures. Part of this mission included a visit to 
their battlefield coordination detachment to train with the Australian 
army and air force. Members of the 5th Battlefield Coordination 
Detachment coached and mentored their Australian counterparts 
on all aspects of the battlefield coordination detachment’s mission 
and integration with the 613th Air and Space Operations Center. 

5th Battlefield Coordination Detachment is now in the final 
planning phases for Yama Sakura in December 2009. The battlefield 
coordination detachment will enable joint air support with Japan as 
the regional partner for the training. 5th Battlefield Coordination 
Detachment’s regional focus, integration and expertise afford it the 
flexibility to facilitate the introduction of land component forces 
into the Pacific Command theater, and theater campaign plan efforts 
continue to forge enduring relationships with regional multinational 
partners. 

ther endeavors. Having achieved full operating capability 
in June, 5th Battlefield Coordination Detachment pursued 
several other capability building endeavors in addition to the theater 
campaign plan mission. It supported the Army Joint Support Team 


Soldiers of the 5th Battlefield Coordination Detachment and the Australian 
battlefield coordination detachment stand together at Hickam Air Force 
Base, Hawaii, after the Talisman Saber Exercise in July. (Photograph courtesy 
of the 5th Battlefield Coordination Detachment) 


by sending NCOs to perform the battlefield coordination detachment 
mission during various mission readiness exercises and National 
Training Center, Fort Irwin, Calif., rotations. These exercises help 
the Army Joint Support Team provide realistic training in air support 
coordination for contingency operations. In return, the Army Joint 
Support Team has a comprehensive mobile training team capability 
that the battlefield coordination detachment leverages in preparation 
for joint exercises. 

Another external agency that 5th Battlefield Coordination 
Detachment works closely with is Program Manager Battle 
Command, which provides both battlefield coordination detachment 
and automated systems expertise, and conducts several annual 
assistance visits. Program Manager Battle Command has engaged 
the challenge of “authority to connect” issues for several battlefield 
coordination detachment Army Battle Command Systems within 
the 613th Air and Space Operations Center. This is a common issue 
across all battlefield coordination detachments, and obtaining this 
authority is key to maximizing integration and joint capability. 5 th 
Battlefield Coordination Detachment also is postured to receive 
its ground liaison detachments this year and will ensure they are 
trained and resourced to accomplish their missions as the vital link 
between ground and air assets at the Air Force wing level. 

School training continues to be integral to establishing and 
maintaining operating capability for battlefield coordination 
detachments. The Air Operations Center Initial Qualification 
Course at Hurlburt Airfield, Fla., is the premier course for preparing 
members of the detachment to excel in their missions. 5 th Battlefield 
Coordination Detachment also attended the Joint Operational Fires 
and Effects Course mobile training team along with the Operational 
Fires and Effects Directorate Soldiers from U.S. Army Pacific in 
April. 

It has been an eventful and productive two years for 5th Battlefield 
Coordination Detachment since its inception in July 2007. The 
first commander, Col. Tracy L. Lear, established the battlefield 
coordination detachment with the vision of “building confidence, 
synchronizing efforts and developing leaders.” Col. Dewey A. 
Granger took command in July and forged ahead with the vision 
of, “We represent the Soldier.” Building on a solid foundation, the 
5th Battlefield Coordination Detachment is uniquely positioned to 
play a significant role in improving the joint capability and culture 
of our armed forces. United in Victory! 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 10 



















T he 11th Air Defense Artillery “Imperial” Brigade, 
is located at Fort Bliss, Texas. Today, the brigade 
consists of Headquarters and Headquarters Battery, four 
Patriot battalions, two Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense System 
batteries, one Counter-Rockets, Artillery and Mortars task force, 
and a signal company. The brigade currently has three battalions 
deployed and continues to train for upcoming rotations throughout 
U.S. Central Command. 

1 st Battalion, 43rd Air Defense Artillery. 1-43 ADA 
moved to the train-ready phase in October 2008. The unit then 
conducted pre-deployment training and its mission rehearsal exer¬ 
cise in February 2009, followed by the available phase to deploy in 
March2009.1-43 ADA currently is deployed in the USCENTCOM 
theater of operations. 

2 nd Battalion, 43rd Air Defense Artillery. 2-43 ADA was 
deployed across three countries throughout USCENTCOM, 
Kuwait, Qatar and Afghanistan, from December 2007, to April 
2009. While deployed, Soldiers participated in a combined air 
defense exercise with the Kuwaiti 46th Air Defense Battalion at 
Camp Arifjan, Kuwait. E Battery. 2-43 ADA deployed to Afghani¬ 
stan from July 2008 to July 2009, and performed several missions 
throughout various forward operating bases. 2-43 ADA currently 
is the test battalion for the Patriot force conducting numerous tests 
for future software upgrades. 

3 rd Battalion, 43rd Air Defense Artillery. 3-43 ADA re¬ 
deployed from USCENTCOM April 2008 and in September 
2008 became the test battalion for the Patriot force through August 
2009.3-43 ADAbegan pre-deployment training in September 2009 
to prepare for deployment in the 2nd quarter of 2010. 

5 th Battalion, 52nd Air Defense Artillery. 5-52 ADA Soldiers 
had a unique deployment mission. Instead of deploying as 
a whole battalion, the individual batteries deployed intermittently 
during a nine-month time frame. The unit’s initial deployment con¬ 
sisted of D Battery, and elements of F Company and Headquarters 
and Headquarters Battery left Fort Bliss, Texas, in October 2008. 
The rest of HHB along with C Battery and the battalion’s leadership 
deployed in February, followed by B Battery deploying in June. 


A Battery, 4th Air Defense Artillery Regiment, Soldiers conduct gunnery 
certifications at McGregor Range, N.M., Oct. 14 and 15. (Photograph courtesy 
of the 11th Air Defense Artillery Brigade) 


Finally, readiness-reduced A Battery deployed in July. All batteries 
were placed on 24-hour standing deployment orders beginning in 
October 2008. Finally, the battalion returned home as a whole to 
Fort Bliss in October 2009. 

3 rd Battalion, 3rd Air Defense Artillery. The Counter-Rocket 
Artillery and Mortar task force quickly geared up to a state of 
deployability since being created in August 2008. The provisional 
unit was created from E Battery, 5-52 ADA, Soldiers, from Fort 
Bliss, Texas, 4th Bn., 5th ADA, Soldiers from Fort Hood, Texas, 
and Navy sailors. The unit’s Soldiers and sailors conducted various 
individual training tasks culminating in a series of mission rehearsal 
exercises. In January, the unit conducted two sense and warn mission 
readiness exercises and a tactical area command mission readiness 
exercise with a final set of Joint Intercept Battery exercises. Soldiers 
and sailors from the task force deployed to Iraq less than one year 
later, in April. 3-3 ADA is deployed to Iraq. 

A Battery, 4th Regiment (Terminal High Altitude Area 
Defense). A/4 ADA was activated as the Army’s first Terminal 
High Altitude Area Defense battery in May 2008. Since its activation, 
A/4 ADA has undergone unrelenting tests of the THAAD system 
in conjunction with Lockheed Martin and Raytheon. The first 
launcher maintenance demonstrations were held in December and 
a cold region demonstration exercise conducted in unique training 
in subzero temperatures. The Soldiers have undergone two Table 
VIII certifications, conducted in April and October. 

A Battery, 2nd Regiment (Terminal High Altitude Area 
Defense). A/2 ADA is the Army’s second THAAD battery 
and was activated October 16, 2009. The battery will conduct nu¬ 
merous exercises and tests in the upcoming year including a force 
development exercise and limited user test scheduled for the end 
of 2009 and the beginning of 2010. There will also be a material 
release expected between April and June 2010. 

H eadquarters and Headquarters Battery, 11th Air Defense 
Artillery Brigade. Members of the brigade’s HHB deployed 
to USCENTCOM from Oct. 2008 through Aug. 2009. The Soldiers 
provided command and battle staff functions for the U.S. Army 
Central commander and the Combined Forces Air Component 
commander. They also maintained command and control over two 
CONUS battalions and two separate batteries. 

In addition to deploying combat forces to the USCENTCOM 
area of responsibility, the brigade is the air defense artillery branch 
and U.S. Army Forces Command test battalion for upgrades and 
future systems such as the Surface-Launched Advanced Medium 
Range Air-to-Air Missile and THAAD. Overall, the brigade is ready 
for any mission in support of U.S. allies, equipment developments 
or the development of new units. 

“The Sun Never Sets on the 11th ADA ‘Imperial’ Brigade.” ■ 


11 November-December 2009 • Fires 











































31st Air Defense Artillery Brigade - 
always ready for a challenge 


T he 31st Air Defense Artillery 
Brigade was constituted January 
1, 1918. The brigade underwent a 
series of activations and deactivations, 
reorganizations and numerous deployments 
and a few recent relocations from Fort Hood 
and Fort Bliss, Texas. Today, the 31st Air 
Defense Artillery Brigade is comprised of 
Headquarters and Headquarter Battery; 3rd 
Battalion, 2nd Air Defense Artillery; 6th 
Battalion, 52nd Air Defense Artillery; and 
5th Battalion, 5th Air Defense Artillery. The 
most recent change for the units of 31 st Air 
Defense Artillery is the Base Realignment 
and Closures move to Fort Sill, Okla., 
completing the standup of the Fires Center 
of Excellence. 

Since 31 st Air Defense Artillery Brigade 
arrived, it has been busy with training. 
The brigade began with High-Mobility, 
Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle Egress As¬ 
sistance Training and was the first unit to 
use the U.S. Army Transportation School 
developed equipment. 31st Soldiers were 
trained in the proper procedures for exiting 
a High-Mobility, Multipurpose Wheeled 
Vehicle on dry land and in water in a class¬ 
room setting. Soldiers strapped into a mock 
High-Mobility, Multipurpose Wheeled 
Vehicle and rotated 360 degrees; after the 
first rotation they were rotated again 180 
degrees and were made to exit. They went 
through a second time, running through the 
water egress procedures. 

The 31st Brigade is always ready for a 
challenge with the movement of 6th Bat¬ 
talion, 52nd Air Defense Artillery, to Korea. 
6-52 Air Defense Artillery Soldiers found 
their niche within the mission readiness ex¬ 
ercise, certifying crews on their equipment. 
The 31 st provided scenarios and opposing 
forces that challenged its counterpart’s 
defenses, while the rules of engagement 
were a joint effort. The brigade ensured 
Soldiers’ readiness by conducting yet an¬ 
other training event that was greeted with 
more than a check-the-block routine. They 
were the first to utilize the Joint Kill Chain 
Exercise. The exercise included Fort Sill’s 


SGT Shawn Pelietier of B Battery, 5th Battalion, 
5th Air Defense Artillery, makes some adjust¬ 
ments to his Avenger system before his next 
target comes over the horizon during training 
at Fort Sill, Okla. in late February. (Photo by Jeff 
Crawley, the Cannoneer) 


6-52 Air Defense Artillery Battalion and 
5-5 Air Defense Artillery Battalion based 
out of Fort Lewis, Wash. 

Another first was the use of the Small 
Manned Aerial Radar Target, Model 1. 
Known as the SMART-1, it is the world’s 
smallest manned jet, only 12 feet in size, 
and was used in the exercise to simulate a 
cruise missile. The significance to using the 
Small Manned Aerial Radar Target, Model 
1 was it allows all the units to make initial 
contact with the “missile” and destroy it. In 
31 st Brigade’s previous exercises, the cruise 
missile was simulated, and the headquarters 
that ran the scenario had to send data to the 
individual batteries before they could react. 
With the successful completion of the Joint 
Kill Chain Exercise training, 31 st Brigade 
believes that a future execution of this train¬ 
ing is suited to involving field artillery. 

One of 31st Brigade’s own excelled 
to achieve the dream of making the U.S. 
Olympic team. 1LT Matthew Petrocci is one 
step closer as he attended the World Class 
Athlete Program, where he received top 
notch training in U. S. Army Track and Field 
to help compete nationally and internation¬ 


ally while continuing his military career. 
Petrocciran placed less than a second shy 
of the U.S. Army Track and Field standard 
of 1:48.45 for the 800-meter event. He is 
now training in Colorado Springs, Colo., 
until the 2012 Summer Olympics. 

The brigade has had much to celebrate 
when they unveiled the plans of the future 
31 stAir Defense Artillery Brigade complex. 
The complex will house the brigade head¬ 
quarters, two battalion headquarters (3-2 
Air Defense Artillery and 4-3 Air Defense 
Artillery in fiscal year 2011), three com¬ 
pany headquarters, three tactical equipment 
maintenance facilities and a dining facility. 
The brigade gave multiple tours of the $ 128 
million complex, and BG Robert Woods 
and MG Peter Vangjel gave their approval, 
hailed with high praises. 

31st Brigade is meeting all its chal¬ 
lenges head on. They recently deployed 
to A1 Udeid Airbase to assume the 11th 
Air Defense Artillery area of responsibil¬ 
ity. They assumed command authority for 
the Central Command air defense brigade 
headquarters patriot mission from 11th Air 
Defense Artillery Brigade. ■ 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 12 











□ 


A. 


D uring the last two years, the 32nd Army Air and Missile 
Defense Command Black Jack has been at the forefront 
of training Soldiers and testing missile systems to meet the 
ever-changing enemy forces. Due to this constant enrichment of 
personnel and war-fighting equipment, it has been praised by key 
leaders as the Army’s premier air and missile defense command. 

The 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command has participated 
successfully in numerous combined and joint exercises. Some of 
these exercises include three rotations of the Weapons and Tactics 
Instructor Course; five rotations of Virtual Flag; five rotations of 
joint fleet synthetic training; the Fallon Naval Air Station Exercise 
in Nevada in May 2008; and the Red Flag Exercise in February. 

Black Jack also developed the Air and Missile Defense Joint 
Kill Chain Exercise Program, which trains Patriot forces with joint 
command and control agencies and joint air defense systems be¬ 
tween eight and 11 times annually. These exercises are conducted 
either live or virtually. 

The 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command deployed 
11th Air Defense Artillery Brigade, 5-52 Air Defense Artillery 
Battalion and an element of the 32nd’s headquarters to Southwest 
Asia in support of standing commitments to regional security and 
stability in 2008. They participated in theater security cooperation 
events and multilateral exercises, and they recently conducted an 
in-theater relief in place and transfer of authority with 31 st Air 
Defense Artillery Brigade in August. 

This command also has completed major milestones in setting 
priorities and guiding training plans that enabled the U.S. Forces 
Command to organize, train and deploy air defense artillery bat¬ 
talions to Korea and Central Command in support of the regional 
combatant commander’s mission needs. 

Black Jack is also proud to be the first command to field and 
train Theater High Altitude Area Defense units. The A/4 Theater 



A Counter -Rockets, -Artillery and -Mortars crew, assigned to 32nd Army 
Air and Missile Defense Command, test fires. (Photograph courtesy of the 32nd 
Army Air and Missile Defense Command) 



SSG Patricia Culbertson of C Battery, 2nd Battalion, 43rd Air Defense 
Artillery, unloads rounds downrange during an M-249 semi-automatic 
weapon qualification range at McGregor Range, N.M., Aug. 12. (Photo by 

SGT William Bolderson, U.S. Army) 


High Altitude Area Defense activated in May 2008, and A/2 Theater 
High Altitude Area Defense recently activated Oct. 16. 

The 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command enjoys a 
superb relationship with coalition partners during events such as 
the Ground Component Commander Symposium and the Central 
Command Air and Missile Defense Center of Excellence/European 
Command Interface. 

This command has assumed the training, readiness and author¬ 
ity for all four Forces Command air defense artillery brigades. The 
32nd also manages and has oversight of Forces Command’s air 
defense patch chart. 

The Army Air and Missile Defense Command has provided 
guidance and oversight for the air defense forces relocation in 
accordance with base realignment and closure movements. These 
relocations included 31st Air Defense Artillery Brigade’s head¬ 
quarters movement from Fort Bliss, Texas, to Fort Sill, Okla.; the 
69th Air Defense Artillery Brigade’s headquarters from Germany 
to Fort Hood, Texas; 2-1 Air Defense Artillery’s, 4-5 Air Defense 
Artillery’s and 1-44 Air Defense Artillery’s movements from Fort 
Bliss to Fort Hood, Texas; and the 108th Air Defense Artillery 
Brigade’s and 1-7 Air Defense Artillery’s movements from Fort 
Bliss to Fort Bragg, N.C. 

While serving as the Forces Command air defense expert, the 
32nd has trained, certified and deployed six battalions to Korea, one 
battalion to Japan, four Patriot battalions, five short-range air defense 
battalions to support the Counter-Rockets, Artillery and Mortars 
mission. They also stood up, trained, certified and deployed one 
Counter-Rockets, Artillery and Mortars task force and one Patriot 
battalion to conduct a nonstandard detainee operations mission. In 
other words, whenever and wherever air defense is needed, Black 
Jack Soldiers and war-fighting equipment are ready. ■ 


13 November-December 2009 • Fires 









































The 35th Air and Missile Defense: 
ready in defense 


S ince 1994 and the first Korean 
nuclear crisis, U. S. Army Patriot has 
been providing j oint theater missile 
defense for Combined Forces Command 
critical assets in the Republic Of Korea. 
Throughout the years, the Patriot force 
in the Republic of Korea grew from one 
to two battalions, and in 2004, the 35th 
Brigade Headquarters re-stationed from 
Fort Bliss, Texas, to Osan Air Base. The 
Patriot battalions in the Republic of Ko¬ 
rea continue to provide an active missile 
defense against the vast North Korean 
ballistic missile threat, and these forces 
maintain the highest readiness levels of 
forces on the Korean peninsula. 

The past two years have been full of 
numerous missions and achievements 
for the Soldiers of the 35th Air Defense 
Artillery Brigade. The brigade transitioned 
from battalion temporary change of station 
deployments to battalion permanent change 
of station rotations, forward stationed two 
battalions to Korea and partici¬ 
pated in four combined forces 
training exercises, Operations 
Ulchi Focus Lens/Ulchi Free¬ 
dom Guardian and Key Resolve. 

It also conducted numerous 
non-combatant evacuation and 
base readiness exercises, and 
a brigade change of command. 
Throughout all operations and training the 
35th Brigade maintains three priorities — 
fight tonight, alliance building and tour 
normalization. 

ight tonight. The constant threat posed 
by North Korea requires the brigade 
to maintain the highest possible level of 
operational readiness. North Korea has 
the largest inventory of tactical ballistic 
missiles in the world, and the constant 
antagonistic behavior requires forces on the 
Republic of Korea to able to “fight tonight.” 
Along with the daily mission requirements 
such as crew certifications, preventive 
maintenance, and administrative functions, 
the air defenders of the 35th Air Defense 
Artillery Brigade stand ready to address any 
North Korean missile launch. Monthly j oint 
kill chain exercises with the Combined Air 
Component Command ensure the Patriot 
fire units across the peninsula are ready at 
a moment’s notice. 

otations and forward stationing. 
3 5th Air Defense Brigade is comprised 
of two Patriot battalions, one at Camp 


Carroll in the southern portion of the Ko¬ 
rean peninsula and an air missile defense 
battalion at Suwon, Osan and U.S. Army 
Garrison-Casey in the northern portion of 
the peninsula. The brigade headquarters is 
located on Osan Air Base. During the past 
year the Dragon Brigade executed two final 
battalion rotations and forward stationing 
of two Patriot battalions to Korea — 6th 
Battalion, 52nd Air and Missile Defense, 
and 2nd Battalion, 1 st Air Defense Artil¬ 
lery. Six Patriot battalions have rotated in 
and out of the Korean theater of operations 
during the past two and a half years. This 
equates to more than 4,500 Soldiers in and 
out processed, 3,400 awards presented, 420 
crew certifications completed and 36 bat¬ 
tery-level inventories executed with no loss 
of mission readiness or combat capability 
during the transition periods. Furthermore, 
E Battery, 1 st Battalion, 43rd Air Defense 
Artillery, at USAG-Casey was reflagged to 
E Battery, 6th Battalion, 52nd Air Missile 


Defense, complementing the capability as 
an air missile defense battalion. 

our normalization. During the past 
year, the 35th Air Defense Artillery 
Brigade served as the vanguard for the U.S. 
Forces Korea “tour normalization” initia¬ 
tive with the command sponsorship of 140 
Dragon Brigade families throughout the 
Korean peninsula. As the U.S. Department 
of Defense attempts to make Korea the 
assignment of choice, battalion command 
teams of the 35th Brigade continue to in¬ 
tegrate families in the Republic of Korea. 
Simultaneous to the many transformational 
activities within the Armed Forces, skilled 
leaders take action to ensure Army families 
are cared for regardless of whether they live 
on an Army post, Air Force base or on the 
Korean economy. 

aintaining the alliance. While 
maintaining unit-level training and 
equipment readiness, the 35th Air Defense 
Artillery Brigade trained the Republic of 
Korea Patriot forces as part of a combined 
joint theater air and missile defense team. 


In 2008, the Republic of Korea Air Force 
began fielding eight Patriot batteries with the 
mission of defeating the North Korean air 
breathing threat and tactical ballistic missile 
threat. To help develop a combined mission 
readiness, 35th Brigade units developed 
several training initiatives to ensure U.S. 
and Republic of Korea forces can fight as a 
combined team. Additionally, each battalion 
formed a training and cultural sharing rela¬ 
tionship with local Republic of Korea Army 
and Air F orce units to strengthen the alliance 
and provide and greater cultural experience 
for the Dragon Brigade Soldiers. 

ommunity relations. Just as any other 
military organization, the 35th Brigade 
fostered relations with the local commu¬ 
nities at every opportunity. All Dragon 
Soldiers understand how vital it is to be a 
good ambassador of the U.S; they are also 
cognizant of how important it is to get in¬ 
volved with the community. Each battalion 
and HHB/3 5th sponsor orphanages, support 
people-to-people events, partici¬ 
pate in the annual Pyeongtaek 
marathon. And several Soldiers 
from the brigade are members of 
a Korean adult baseball league. 
These activities maximize the 
Korean experience. 

ragon Brigade events and 
accomplishments. Along 
with mission oriented events, the Dragon 
Brigade has been engaged in a number of 
off-duty events during the past two years. 
The brigade has sponsored two peninsula¬ 
wide combatives tournaments with the 
top active duty mixed martial arts fighters 
in Korea and Japan, participating in the 
tournament with competitors, male and 
female, from the brigade doing well in all 
weight classes. Additionally, Soldiers from 
the brigade have excelled in several Korea¬ 
wide running events and were selected for 
the eighth U.S. Army 10-Miler Team, where 
they placed well. 

Lastly, Soldiers from the brigade com¬ 
peted in the eighth Army NCO of the Year, 
Soldier of the Year and Korean Augmentees 
to the U.S. Army of the Year competition 
with exceptional results. Dragon Brigade 
earned the titles of Soldier of the Year for 
two consecutive years and the Korean Aug¬ 
mentees to the U.S. Army of the Year for 
2008. One Soldier earned second place in 
the 2009 All Army Warrior Competition.- 


“Throughout all operations and training the 35th 
Brigade maintains three priorities —fight tonight, 
alliance building and tour normalization. 99 






sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 14 







I ocated in the heart of Honolulu at Fort Shafter, Hawaii, one 
of the most technologically advanced, well-trained and best 
equipped missile defense units in the world, the headquarters 
element of the 94th Army Air and Missile Defense Sea Dragons Com¬ 
mand stands ready to deter or defeat any adversary’s missile attack on 
U.S. or allied soil in the Pacific theater. 

With threats increasing significantly due to the proliferation of mis¬ 
sile technology, the 94th Army Air and Missile Defense Command 
has proven vital to the entire Asia-Pacific region. Consisting of three 
different subordinate units: Headquarters and Headquarters Battery, 
94th Army Air and Missile Defense Command; 1st Battalion, 1st Air 
Defense Artillery; and 3rd Detachment, 1st Space Brigade. 

The 94th Army Air and Missile Defense Command’s mission is to 
strategically deploy combat ready air defense units and personnel in 
the U.S. Pacific Command’s area of responsibility. In support of the 
combatant commander’s contingency operations, it will conduct joint 
and combined theater air and missile defense planning, coordination, 
integration and execution. 

1st Battalion, 1st Air Defense Artillery (Patriot PAC-3) Snake Eyes 
Battalion joined the 94th Army Air And Missile Defense Command 
Aug. 16,2006, when it transferred from the 31 st Air Defense Artillery 
Brigade at Fort Bliss, Texas. Relocated to Kadena Air Base, Okinawa, 
Japan, the Snake Eyes provide air and missile defense to critical assets 
located on Okinawa. 

The battalion’s presence enhances the security of Japan and deters 
regional powers from the use of tactical ballistic missiles that threaten 
the peace and security of the Pacific region. Under the command of 
the 94th Army Air and Missile Defense Command, located more than 
6,000 miles away at Fort Shafter, Hawaii, the Snake Eyes receive 
administrative support from the 10th Support Group located on Torii 
Station, Okinawa and operational assistance from the 18th Wing on 
Kadena Airbase, Japan. 

With the command post located less than 10 miles from the site where 
U.S. forces landed on April 1, 1945 beginning the Battle of Okinawa, 
1-1 ADA is truly in a joint basing situation. Across the spectrum of 
medical, administrative, logistics and training activities the Snake 
Eyes are in a partnership with every branch of service, as well as a 
partnership with the Japanese Self Defense Forces. 

Travel north from the city of Aomori, Japan, until you reach the 
northern edge of the island of Honshu and you’ll find Shariki, Japan, 
home to the 94th Army Air and Missile Defense Command’s AN/TP Y-2 
Radar, and the premier advanced warning system in the Pacific. 

Three Soldiers and 102 civilian contractors is all it takes to run 
the site of the first radar to detect a North Korean missile launch on 
the United States. The AN/TPY-2 Radar, located in remote Shariki, 
Japan, is an advanced warning, land-based X-Band Radar capable of 
detecting a ballistic missile threat seconds after launch. This radar is 
an Army Space asset but falls under the command and control of the 
94th Army Air and Missile Defense at Fort Shafter, Hawaii. 


In the spring of 2006 the AN/TPY-2 was brought to Japan and 
was stood up on the first military installation to open in Japan 
since World War II. The site is the size of five football fields and 
was chosen for its strategic location on the shore of the Sea of 
Japan adjacent to a Japanese Air Self Defense Base. Since the 
radar was operational in Japan within months of site selection, 
the initial location was very basic consisting of a grass field 
surrounded by a fence. Housing for site personnel did not even 
come to fruition until many months after the radar became op¬ 
erational. Since these humble beginnings, many additions have 
been made and many obstacles overcome to ensure the mission 
was never disrupted while constructing facilities that allow site 
personnel to live and work efficiently in Shariki. 

One aspect of the opening of this radar site that has been given 
a great deal of emphasis over the years is the relationship be¬ 
tween the people of the Shariki and the American Soldiers and 
contractors working there. 

Since inception, the AN/TPY-2 Radar has played a vital role in 
the tracking of several real-world adversary missile launches. Its 
capability multiplies the effectiveness of the Command, Control, 
Battle Management and Communications System adding valu¬ 
able seconds to the decision making process between the time a 
ballistic missile is launched and when it is intercepted. Currently, 
the site is controlled by the Army while the radar operations 
are primarily the responsibility of civilian contractors, but 94th 
Army Air and Missile Defense Command is making constant 
strides to ensure that the Army is ready assume full control over 
the entire operation by 2014. 

The 94th Army Air and Missile Defense Command is respon¬ 
sible for the missile defense of almost half of the earth’s surface; 
an area of over 105-million square miles of territory, the 94th 
Army Air and Missile Defense Command’s area of responsibility 
contains six of the world’s largest armies and 60 percent of the 
world’s population. On top of that, five of the seven countries 
that have signed the mutual defense treaties with the U.S. are 
in the Pacific region: Australia, Philippines, South Korea, Japan 
and Thailand. 

While maintaining a solid footprint in theater and to mark some 
of its work, the 94th Army Air and Missile Defense Command 
has been credited with enhancing the security of the U.S. and 
Japan by providing reliable defense assets and deterrents in the 
region. And the work doesn’t stop at the bounds of the 94th’s 
area of responsibility. Over the past five years, the 94th Army 
Air and Missile Defense Command has trained, equipped and 
deployed more than 300 Soldiers in support of overseas con¬ 
tingency operations. 

Missile defense could be the greatest threat in the pacific region 
today. The Sea Dragons stands ready to defeat any adversary’s 
missile attack on U.S. or allied soil in the Pacific theater. ■ 


15 November-December 2009 • Fires 






























108th Air Defense Artillery 
Brigade - “Spartans” 


H eadquarters, 108th Air Defense 
Artillery Brigade. Headquarters, 
108thAir Defense Artillery Brigade, 
Fort Bragg, N. C., moved from Fort Bliss, 
Texas, in the summer of 2007 as part of a 
Base Realignment Commission initiative. 
During the past two years, the brigade 
has deployed more than 1,800 Soldiers in 
support of Operations Iraqi Freedom and 
Enduring Freedom, as well as more than 
600 Soldiers on a year-long unit rotation 
to the Republic of South Korea. 

3 rd Battalion, 4th Air Defense 
Artillery Regiment. Skystrikers (Pa¬ 
triot/Avenger) had seven batteries deployed 
in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom 
during the past two years, with missions 
ranging from traditional air defense to 
nonstandard operations. These missions 
included Counter-Rocket, Artillery and 
Mortar, early warning, convoy security, 
and detainee operations. In September, the 
Skystrikers reorganized into a composite 
Patriot Advanced Capabilities 3, Patriot/ 
Avenger battalion and soon will begin new 
equipment training on recently received 
Patriot systems. The battalion’s E Battery 
Executioners remains the U. S. Army’s only 
air defense forced entry capable unit and 
supports the 82nd Airborne Division. 

1 st Battalion, 7th Air Defense Artillery. 
No Fear battalion (Patriot) completed 
a one year rotation to the Republic of Korea 
in July 2008. After its redeployment to Fort 
Bliss, 1 -7 Air Defense Artillery re-stationed 
to Fort Bragg and immediately began train¬ 
ing for its next deployment. The No Fear 
battalion deployed to the Central Command 
theater in October, in support of Operation 
Enduring Freedom and is providing air 
and missile defense to critical theater as¬ 
sets, as well as conducting theater security 
cooperation activities with Gulf Coalition 
Counsel partners. 

2 nd Battalion, 44th Air Defense 
Artillery. Strike Fear (Avenger) 
resides at Fort Campbell, Ky. The Strike 
Fear battalion deployed to Iraq in 2008 and 
conducted Counter-Rocket, Artillery and 
Mortar; Sense and Warn; and Joint Intercept 
Battery operations in defense of numerous 
base clusters and forward operating bases. 
Upon its redeployment in 2009, the battalion 
reorganized back into its modified table of 
organization and equipment maneuver air 
and missile defense structure and began 
training core air defense mission essential 
tasks. ■ 



CSM Richard Clem (center) out in the field with his fellow Soldiers of the 108th Air Defense Artillery 
Brigade Headquarters and Headquarters Battery. (Photograph courtesy of 1 08th Air Defense Artillery Brigade) 



3rd Battalion, 4th Air Defense Artillery Regiment, Soldiers in Iraq. (Photograph courtesy of 108th Air Defense 
Artillery Brigade) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 16 



















1 st Battalion, 5th Field Artillery (Paladin). Given its continuous 
service as an artillery battalion since 1776, the 1st Battalion, 5th 
Field Artillery, is steeped in long tradition. From serving in the 
Revolutionary War under Alexander Hamilton, to the first Copperhead 
kill of an Iraqi tank during Operation Desert Storm, Hamilton s Own 
has served in nearly every major U.S. conflict, earning 63 campaign 
streamers and numerous citations for gallantry in battle. Like many 
Army units today, th q Destroyers continue to set standards for America’s 
army in an ever-changing contemporary operating environment. In 
recent years, 1-5 Field Artillery has served faithfully in support of 
War on Terrorism. After a successful deployment in September 2004, 
supporting Operation Iraqi Freedom, 1 -5 Field Artillery returned to Fort 
Riley, Kan. In August 2006, 1st Brigade of the 1st Infantry Division 
was assigned the mission of transition team trainers, for the Army’s 



highest priority mission, advising foreign security forces. 

No stranger to executing nonstandard missions, the Destroyers 
exemplified the characteristic flexibility of artillerymen and began 
training the Army’s transition teams in the fall of2006.1-5 Field 
Artillery trained transition teams consisting of Soldiers, sailors 
and airmen from across the U.S. and outside of the continental 
U.S. for combat operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. 

1-5 Field Artillery employed its knowledge as subject matter 
experts in preliminary marksmanship instruction, basic and 
advanced fire support techniques to train 306 teams, totaling 
more than 3,000 personnel. 1-5 Field Artillery averaged a daily 
expenditure of more than 13,800 rounds during the course of 
this training. 

Regular communications with forward deployed teams and 
after action reviews from teams returning from combat operations 
abroad kept the training current and relevant. Instructors certified 
in the Joint Firepower Course and the Joint Fires Observer Course 
provided quality training to training teams based on the Army’s 
most recent developments in fire support technology and tactics, 
techniques, and procedures. Relentless commitment to training 
Soldiers for war earned the Destroyers numerous accolades and 
awards while serving as fire support mentors. In addition to 
training transition teams, 1-5 Field Artillery maintained the 1st 
Infantry Division’s Salute Battery and the high-profile use of “Old 
Thunder,” a replica six-pound field piece from the Revolutionary 
War. The need for additional combat brigades to support the 
overseas contingency operations resulted in the redesignation 
of 1 st Brigade, 1 st Infantry Division, as a heavy brigade combat 
team Sept. 16. The Destroyers began the process of building into 
a Fires battalion supporting 1st HBCT, 1st Infantry Division. 
With fielding initiatives set throughout the fall 2009 and spring 
of 2010, the former transition team training battalion occupied 
their old stomping grounds on Custer Hill, Fort Riley, Kan. 
st Battalion, 6th Field Artillery (M119A2). The 1-6 Field 
Artillery Centaurs provided fires in support of the 3rd Brigade 
1st Infantry Division, Dukes during its recent deployment to 
Operation Iraqi Freedom IX, from July 2008 until June 2009. 
The battalion provided fire support from nine different forward 
operating bases throughout Regional Command East/North. 
Using three different cannon systems, the M119A2, the Ml98 
and the M777 howitzers, the battalion fired more than 43,000 
rounds in support of American and Afghani troops. 

st Battalion, 7th Field Artillery (Paladin). The First 
Lzgtamgbattalion relocated from Schweinfurt, Germany, to 
Fort Riley in 2008, uncasing the unit colors on March 16, 2008 
as part of the 2nd Heavy Brigade Combat Team Daggers of the 


Artillerymen with the 2nd Battalion, 32nd Field Artillery Regiment, train 
on call for fire at Fort Riley, Kan. (Photo by Anna Staatz, Duty First Magazine) 


17 November-December 2009 • Fires 










































































1st Infantry Division. The battalion conducted pre-deployment 
training and preparations throughout the spring and summer of 
2008, including a mission rehearsal exercise at the National Training 
Center, Fort Irwin, Calif., in June. Following a comprehensive 
training period the battalion deployed to Operation Iraqi Freedom 
in October 2008. 

During their deployment, the First Lightning Redlegs 
demonstrated their versatility by executing a wide range of 
challenging missions in support of Multi-National Division- 
Baghdad. The mission included full-spectrum maneuver 
operations, direct support artillery fires and radar coverage, as 
well as responsibility for the security of Iraq’s Green Zone (or 
International Zone), the nexus of Iraqi government, located in the 
heart of Baghdad. 

As part of its demanding mission set, the battalion patrolled 
the streets of Baghdad; provided convoy security to dignitary 
and logistical convoys operating throughout Baghdad; performed 
civil-security operations to improve security and prosperity within 
the region; supported coalition maneuver forces with timely and 
accurate artillery illumination fires and partnered with Iraqi Army 
units to ensure the sustained security of the highly visible Green 
Zone. First Lightning Soldiers excelled in every mission throughout 
a twelve-month deployment in a complex and dynamic combat 
environment, truly embodying the unit’s motto, Never Broken by 
Hardship or Battle. 

Following a successful relief in place in October, the 1st 
Battalion, 7th Field Artillery, returned home to Fort Riley where 
it is conducting reintegration operations and preparing for future 
operations. 

nd Battalion 32nd Field Artillery (M119A2). The 2nd 

Battalion, 32nd Field Artillery, returned to active service 
January 12, 2006 as part of the 1st Infantry Division. The Proud 
Americans deployed to the National Training Center in November 
2006, in final preparation for combat operations supporting the 
War on Terrorism. From February 2007 to April 2008, the 2nd 
Brigade Combat Team, 1st Infantry Division,— later replaced 
by 2nd Brigade, 101st Airborne — served in northwest Baghdad, 
conducting full-spectrum operations to secure the populace and 


defeat extremist, insurgent and criminal threats to security. 

Task Force Patriot officially assumed control of its battlespace 
on March 15, 2007, after executing an aggressive relief in place 
with various elements of the 2nd Brigade Combat Team. 2-32 
Field Artillery operated primarily in the Hateen, Yarmouk and 
Qadisiyah in western Baghdad between the international zone and 
Baghdad International Airport. The Proud Americans focused on 
securing the people of these neighborhoods and building a sense 
of community. 

In April of2007,2nd Battalion, 32nd Field Artillery, completed 
its joint security station, providing a coordination center for the 
local community services to discuss current operations and develop 
integrated plans to tackle future obstacles. 

In May of 2007, Task Force Patriot overcame tremendous 
adversity when an improvised explosive device strike severely 
injured its commander to continue the mission after an assumption 
of command ceremony. 

Some of the most influential nonlethal projects the Proud 
Americans initiated include a census designed to gather vital 
demographic data, a comprehensive safe neighborhood obstacle 
plan to increase intra-muhalla security, the $300,000 micro-grant 
business initiative, formation of a small business association that 
employed more than 300 men, trash collection points and Sons of 
Iraq recruitment. The task force completed infrastructure projects 
totaling $2.2 million, completing 191 projects, detaining 59 
criminals, confiscating 306 weapons and conducting 2,984 patrols 
during a 15-month deployment. 

In April of 2008, the battalion returned to Fort Riley to rebuild 
combatpower. 2ndBattalion, 32nd Field Artillery, conducted several 
tactical training exercises and continued to focus the battalion 
on aggressive training for the battalion’s return to the War on 
Terrorism. 

In August 2009,2-32 Field Artillery deployed to Iraq in support 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom, occupied Forward Operating Base 
Spiecher and conducted relief in place/transfer of authority with 3 -7 
Field Artillery. On October 3,2009,2-32 Field Artillery conducted 
the transition of partnership ceremony officially taking control of 
the area of operations. ■ 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 18 


















































































































T he 17th Fires Brigade relocated from 
F ort Sill, Okla., to F ort Lewis, Wash., 
during 2007. Preparations began at 
Fort Sill early in the year and culminated in 
the unfurling of the 17th Brigade colors on 
August 10,2007.Additionally, IstBattalion, 
377th Field Artillery (Air Assault), moved 
from Fort Bragg, N.C. to Fort Lewis, Wash., 
on July 16, 2007. They were followed by 
the 308th Support Battalion, which was 
activated on July 17. On that same day, the 
5th Battalion, 3rd Field Artillery, moved 
from Fort Sill to Fort Lewis. 

The main bodies of these organizations 
began arriving at Fort Lewis in early July 
2007. They began occupation of the planned 
brigade area, as well as regular operations 
on July 9, 2007. The first task the brigade 
completed was the unfurling of its colors 
on Aug. 10, 2007. 

During fiscal year 2008, 17th Fires 
Brigade generated the 256th Signal 
Company and received the 1st Battalion, 
94th Field Artillery, from Germany. From 


fiscal year 2008 to July 2009, the brigade 
executed a series of tactical operations 
center exercises and field problems 
culminating in a mission readiness exercise 
with 34th Infantry Division in March in 
preparation for deploying to Iraq. The 
brigade forward deployed to Basra, Iraq, 
in July for a 12-month deployment. The 
brigade is operating as a ground maneuver 
force replacing an infantry brigade. 

raining management. The 1st 
Battalion, 377th Field Artillery (Air 
Assault), Gunslingers, veterans of two in- 
lieu-of missions in support of Operation 
Iraqi Freedom, relocated from Fort Bragg to 
Fort Lewis in May 2007, and immediately 
began building combat power (manning and 
equipping), establishing systems (training 
and sustainment), and developing adaptive 
leaders and Soldiers in support of the Army 
Campaign Plan. Initially focused on leader 
certification and gunners’ testing, the 
battalion rapidly integrated new Soldiers 
and equipment and, by the fall of 2007, 


began training to provide cannon fires and 
conduct air assault operations. 

By spring of 2008, the battalion 
completed calibration, certification and 
live fire of all sections and demonstrated its 
capabilities as the Army’s only air assault 
designated M198 battalion. Demonstrating 
its agility, the battalion planned, coordinated 
and led Fort Lewis’ execution of the 2008 
Reserve Officer Training Corps Warrior 
Forge summer camp — an event involving 
more than 5,000 cadets. 

Following a brief return to its artillery and 
air assault mission-set section certifications 
at Yakima Training Center in September 
2008, the battalion reorganized into a 
motorized infantry battalion, prepared to 
conduct full-spectrum operations in Iraq. 
In July, it deployed to Basra, Iraq, where, 
as the 17th Fires Brigade’s only maneuver 
battalion, it conducts combat operations and 
mobility/security support to the provincial 
reconstruction team and 10 transition teams 
through July 2010. 


19 November-December 2009 • Fires 



































5th Battalion, 3rd Field Artillery, conducted a live-fire exercise, firing the first High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System rockets from a Fort Lewis, Wash., 
unit at Yakima Training Center, Wash., in Oct. 2007. (Photo by Jason Kaye, The Northwest Guardian) 


th Battalion, 3rd Field Artillery. First 
Round moved from Fort Sill to Fort 
Lewis at 10-percent strength, following two 
back-to-back in-lieu-of missions in support 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom. Upon arriving 
at Fort Lewis, the focus on training was at 
the individual and section levels. As a part 
of the 17th Fires Brigade transition, the 5th 
Battalion, 3rd Field Artillery, was converted 
from the M270A1 Multiple-Launch Rocket 
System to the M142 High-Mobility Artillery 
Rocket System unit, receiving its first 
platoon set of new systems in September 
2007. That October, 5-3 Field Artillery 
conducted a live-fire exercise, firing the 
first High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System 
rockets from a Fort Lewis unit at Yakima 
Training Center. 

In May 2008, the battalion conducted 
initial operational testing for the Guided 
Multiple-Launch Rocket System munitions 
at White Sands Missile Range, N.M. In 
September2008, the battalion completed the 
remaining High-Mobility Artillery Rocket 
System fielding with training focused on 
maintenance, employment and tactics, and 
culminated in section live-fire certification. 
From November 2008 to September 2009, 
5-3 Field Artillery has been training for 
deployment to the Central Command area 
of responsibility in Afghanistan in support 
of counter-improvised explosive device 
route-clearance operations. Training has 
covered a broad spectrum of mission sets 
from detainee operations in Iraq to High- 
Mobility Artillery Rocket System and 
security force operations. 

st Battalion, 94 th Field Artillery. Deep 
Steel was ordered to inactivate and cast 
its colors as the last divisional command 
and attack Multiple-Launch Rocket System 
battalion in Europe and the Army. The 1 -94 
Field Artillery unfurled its colors at Fort 
Lewis on August 15,2008. By mid-summer, 
Deep Steel approached 50 percent strength 
and initiated its training programs to be 
mission capable by its October 16, 2008 
activation date. 

The battalion then prepared for the 
scheduled High-Mobility Artillery Rocket 
System fielding in fiscal year 2009. From 
November 2008 to April 2009, the battalion 
conducted the High-Mobility Artillery 
Rocket System fielding with training 
focused on maintenance, employment and 
tactics, and culminated in section live fire. 

A High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System at Ya¬ 
kima Training Center, Wash. (Photo by Jason Kaye, 

The Northwest Guardian) 


Deep Steel recently executed the 2009 
Reserve Officer Training Corps Warrior 
Forge summer camp. The battalion planned, 
prepared and controlled the logistics support 
and training of more than 5,000 cadets. Upon 
completion, the battalion assumed the reins 
of the brigade rear detachment and began 
retraining for its artillery mission. 

08th Brigade Support Battalion. 
The 308th Brigade Support Battalion 
activated during fiscal year 2008 as part of 
the 17th Fires Brigade’s transformation. 
The focus on training was at the individual 
and section levels to establish military 
occupational specialty proficiency. The 
308th Brigade Support Battalion focused 
its training effort on establishing initial 
operations and preparing for the influx 
of personnel and equipment that would 
arrive throughout the year. It conducted an 
aggressive training program as part of the 
brigade commander’s tactical operations 
center operations during Exercise Yama 
Sakura. 

The battalion also provided logistical 
support for several artillery battalion live- 
fire exercises at both the Yakima Training 
Center and Fort Lewis. It also provided 
maintenance and logistics support to the 
1-94 Field Artillery during its integration 
into the 17th Fires Brigade. 

The 308th BSB earned awards in the 
Department of the Army’s Army Award 
for Maintenance Excellence and Supply 
Excellence Award programs. In the spring 
of 2009, the battalion began training 


on logistics operations culminating in a 
battalion field training exercise at multiple 
locations. The 308th Brigade Support 
Battalion deployed in support of the 17th 
Fires Brigade deployment to Basra, Iraq in 
July. 

Battery, 26th Field Artillery. F Battery, 
26th Field Artillery, added to its lineage 
as it unfurled its guidon on August 10,2007, 
as a target acquisition battery underneath 
the 17th Fires Brigade colors. Consisting of 
two Q-37(v)8 FireFinder Radars sections, 
meteorological section, survey section 
and target processing section, F/26th Field 
Artillery provides the ThunderboltBrigadQ 
with weapons locating, meteorological and 
survey capabilities. 

Despite being a generating unit, the 
Wolfpack Battery quickly integrated itself 
into brigade operations augmenting the 
brigade counterfire cell during Yama Sakura 
53 in December 2007, and Operation 
Key Resolve in March 2008. The battery 
became fully operational and supported 
both 5-3 Field Artillery and 1-377 Field 
Artillery live fires. In January, F/26th FA 
transitioned to its in-lieu-of mission as a 
Sentinel Radar battery. Wolfpack deployed 
to Iraq in February, and provides support 
to the Multi-National Corps-Iraq area of 
responsibility. 

During fiscal year 2008, 17th Fires 
Brigade generated the 256th Network 
Support Company, which later deployed 
to Iraq in July, providing command and 
control support to the brigade. ■ 





sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 20 

























































































H eadquarters and Headquarters Battery. After 
redeployment in 2007, HHB, Fort Bragg, N.C., began its 
transformation into 18th Fires Brigade (Airborne). Following 
reset, HHB conducted mandatory training requirements and standard 
garrison operations and fielding new positions and equipment to 
meet transformation guidelines. As 2008 began, HHB/18th Fires 
Brigade continued to train in accordance with its new mission as 
the Army’s only airborne Fires brigade. On July 16, 2008 the unit 
fell under 82nd Airborne Division for training and readiness. 

The battery supported the War on Terrorism throughout the 
year, training four Q36 Radar sections and one Q37 section for 
deployment to Operation Enduring Freedom. HHB also augmented 
2nd Brigade Combat Team with observer/controller support 
throughout its mission readiness validation/exercise. Finally, the 
battery was tasked with a 15 -month deployment mission of its own, 
and successfully trained and deployed a 40-man fires element on 
15 month mission, starting May 2008. HHB performed missions 
that ranged from manning a fire control element at 4th Infantry 
Division headquarters to compiling an Iraqi security forces cell that 
worked as an assessment team for congress to evaluate progress 
in the war. Lastly, some of the unit was detached to the Baghdad 
Operations Command Advisory Team where it functioned as a 
corps-level military transition team between the commanding Iraqi 
general in the city and corps headquarters. 

HHB/18th Fires Brigade (Airborne) began 2009 continuing to 
build the unit as a Fires brigade. HHB continued to support the 
brigade in its wartime mission. The battery supported 2nd Brigade 
Combat Team, from Fort Carson, Colo., on a number of joint fire 
exercises and conducted Operation Gunsmoke, a brigade-level 
field training exercise. In June, the battery participated in a series 
of change of command ceremonies. In August, the battery’s 35- 
man forward element returned from Operation Iraqi Freedom and 
began reset. As of September, HHB/18th Fires Brigade completed 
its transition of command teams and continued to train to support the 
82nd Airborne Division or combined joint task force headquarters 
in full-spectrum operations. 

rd Battalion, 27th Field Artillery (HIMARS). During the past 
two years, 3rd Battalion, 27th Field Artillery, (High-Mobility 
Artillery Rocket System) has continued to support the battalion’s 
deployments, sustainment and redeployment cycle. 

While transforming into a modular High-Mobility Artillery 
Rocket System battalion with a self-sustaining precision fire 
and target acquisition capability, Steel Rain maintained the joint 
deployment mission it began in 2006. Rotating batteries on six 
month deployments, the battalion has conducted six deployment 
and redeployment cycles in support of Operation Enduring Freedom 
successfully to date. 

Between deployments, batteries participated in various joint 
exercises, multiple mission readiness exercises and field training 
exercises in preparation for the battalion’s ongoing mission. B and 
C Batteries are deployed in support of the ongoing j oint mission and 
are conducting a relief in place/transfer of authority in preparation 
for B Battery’s redeployment. 

Steel Rain maintains the capability to employ and deliver accurate 
fires with the successful delivery of Guided Multiple-Launch Rocket 
System rockets and Army Tactical Missile System missiles. Since 
2007, the battalion has shot more than 50 rockets and 20 missiles. It 
also has participated in several test missions at White Sands Missile 
Range, N.M., maintaining its relationship with forces at Redstone 


Arsenal, Ala. while continuing technological advancement within 
the High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System community. 

In June, the battalion was tapped for a global response force 
mission in coordination with 2nd Brigade Combat Team, 82nd 
Airborne Division. The 3rdPlatoon, ABattery is the global response 
force platoon for the battalion, which can strategically deploy within 
96 hours of notification. 

st Battalion, 321st Field Artillery. Gearing up to head back to 
Iraq, 1st Battalion, 321st Field Artillery, trained on convoy 
live-fire ranges and close quarters combat training. Just weeks before 
boarding a plane at Pope Air Force Base, the battalion received 
word its mission had changed from a maneuver unit in Iraq to that 
of a field artillery unit in Afghanistan. 

With the new mission, the 1st Battalion, 321st Airborne Field 
Artillery Regiment, went back to its roots and trained as an airborne 
field artillery unit after nearly three years of performing and preparing 
for nonstandard missions. With rounds going down range safely 
and accurately there was only one task untrained, a “heavy drop.” 
On April 9,2008, B Battery conducted the battalion’s first airborne 
operation with the M198 howitzer in more than three years. During 
the next 10 months the battalion conducted 28 Ml98 drop zone 
missions, living up to 1-321st Field Artillery’s motto as “The Only 
Airborne 155-mm Battalion in the World.” C Battery, 1st Battalion, 
321 st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, conducted the last heavy 
drop with an M198 howitzer on Sept. 11, 2008. 

The M777A2 howitzer is the U.S. Army’s newest howitzer, 
and 1-321st Field Artillery was set to field it. The battalion traded 
in its Ml98 howitzers for the new M777A2 howitzers. The firing 
batteries were instructed by a team of civilians and artillerymen 
from Fort Sill, Okla., on how to emplace, repair and fire the new 
howitzer system, providing timely, accurate and deadly indirect 
fires. Simultaneously, ABattery finalized training on the Q-36 and 
Q-37 Radars for its mission as a radar battery. 

1 st Battalion, 321st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, deployed 
to Afghanistan between December 2008 and January 2009, in 
August 2009 as the first field artillery general support battalion 
headquarters in Afghanistan. The Warriors shot more than 8,000 
rounds in support of maneuver forces to include 15 Excalibur 
missions. 

It was determined the country still required an airborne 155- 
mm field artillery capability. On May 26, 2009, D Battery, 1st 
Battalion, 321st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, was activated, 
given provisional status and hit the street running. By June 26, the 
battery had conducted its first airborne operation with the M777A2 
assumed the global response force mission. 

The Warriors are deployed as part of Combined Joint Task 
Force-82, providing devastating and lethal indirect fires in support 
of maneuver forces throughout Regional Command (East) in 
Afghanistan. 

rd Battalion, 321st Field Artillery. 3rd Battalion, 321st Field 
Artillery, was the first active duty Army unit to field the new 
M777A2 howitzer in June 2007. The battalion trained and certified 
all cannoneers on the new weapon while developing and validating 
new training concepts such as the first low-velocity airdrop and 
the first sling load with a V-22 Osprey or CH-53E Super Stallion 
with an M777A2 by Army units. The battalion also stood up the 
583rd Forward Support Company to provide ammunition, fuel and 
maintenance support for the new howitzers. 

In December 2007, A and C Batteries deployed to Afghanistan. 




A paratrooper of B Battery, 1st Battalion, 321st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, supporting troops in contact engages anti-coalition forces with 
low-angle artillery fires with a M777A2 howitzer from Forward Operating Base Salerno, Afghanistan. (Photograph courtesy of 1st Battalion, 321 st Field Artillery 
Regiment Airborne, 18th Fires Brigade) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 22 






Headquarters and Headquarters Battery, 18th Fires Brigade (Airborne), forward observers are essential in calling in howitzer fire during an air assault 
mission on Fort Bragg, N.C. (Photo by SSG Natasha Schroedel, U.S. Army) 


During their 15-month deployments, the batteries were broken down 
into platoons and occupied separate forward operating bases within 
remote areas of Afghanistan. The two batteries, combined, fired more 
than 20,000 artillery rounds in combat in support of maneuver forces, 
including Excalibur. B Battery remained at Fort Bragg and assumed 
the global response force mission. 

In February, A and C Batteries, redeployed to Fort Bragg and 
began reset. Both batteries completed their intensive reset and draw 
from left behind equipment stocks of howitzers, night vision goggles, 
radios, vehicles and small arms. All equipment was reset within the 
time standards prescribed by Forces Command. 

The 583rd Forward Support Company was tasked to retrain 
mechanics and other support personnel as radar operators. The 583rd 
recently sent Soldiers to Fort Sill, Okla., to train side by side with 
Military Occupational Specialty 13R Field Artillery Firefinder Radar 
Operators and 131A Targeting Warrant Officers. Upon completion 
of 13R training, they trained alongside the 18th Fires Brigade target 
acquisition battery on the light-weight countermortar radar. The 583rd 
departed in November to Afghanistan. 

In August, the battalion received an attachment of a fourth firing 
battery, D Battery, 26th Field Artillery. D Battery was activated by 1st 
Battalion, 321st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, to augment 3rd 
Battalion, 321st Field Artillery, for the January 2010 deployment to 
Afghanistan. Throughout fall, the battalion fired hundreds of artillery 
rounds to certify 24 howitzer and eight fire direction center sections. 
Thousands of small arms rounds of all calibers were fired to qualify 
all Soldiers on their individual and crew-served weapons. 

Battery, 26th Field Artillery (Target Acquisition). In June of 
2007,234th Field Artillery Detachment, a unit of 3rd Battalion, 


27th Field Artillery Regiment (HIMARS), was reconstituted 
as D Battery, 26th Field Artillery, and received notice it would 
deploy, providing radar support in support of Operation Enduring 
Freedom. The battery analyzed its mission and realized the mission 
required additional Soldiers. The battery acquired an additional 
20 Soldiers of varying military occupational specialties from 
3rd Battalion, 27th Field Artillery. With personnel in place, the 
battery sent non-radar MOS Soldiers to Fort Sill, Okla., and 
trained and certified sections, preparing to deploy. In November 
of 2007, the decision was made to transfer ownership of D 
Battery from 3rd Battalion, 27th Field Artillery, to the 18th Fires 
Brigade (Airborne). 

The battery refined its skills as a target acquisition battery 
until it deployed in January of 2008. Once in theater, the battery 
operated three Firefinder Radar AN-TPQ 36 systems and one 
Firefinder Artillery Focating Radar AN-TPQ 37 system in 
support of a myriad of forces within Regional Command (East) 
in Afghanistan and provided maintenance and training support for 
42 Fightweight Countermortar Radar Systems and six Unmanned 
Transient Masint Systems within theater. D Battery also provided 
six Soldiers to 3rd Battalion, 321st Field Artillery, in support 
of the maneuver mission at the Mando Zayi District Center in 
Khowst, Afghanistan. D Battery tracked 1,143 hostile enemy 
rounds, resulting in lethal counterfires. The battery redeployed 
in January. 

Since redeployment, the battery continues to provide 
meteorological, target acquisition and survey support to the 18th 
Fires Brigade and its three field artillery battalions. The battery 
is set to deploy to Afghanistan once again in the fall of 2010. ■ 



23 November-December 2009 • Fires 









MG David D. Halverson 
receives the Fires 
Center of Excellence 
colors from GEN Martin 
E. Dempsey, Training 
and Doctrine Command 
commanding general, 
replacing MG Peter 
Vangjel as the Fires 
Center of Excellence 
commanding general, 
Aug. 26. (Photo by 
Monica Woods, the 
Cannoneer) 


I [j-!w UlLJjiyALJj u uu^iyALJJU u y 

©up ioym^f 


CPT Rimas A. Radzius, 
3rd Battalion, 320th 
Field Artillery, 3rd 
Brigade Combat Team, 
101st Airborne Division 
(Air Assault), watches 
from an overpass as 
Shia pilgrims observe 
Arba’een in Mahmudiyah, 
Iraq. (Photo by 1LT Michael 
T. Denison, Multi-national 
Division, Central) 


An air defense 
Soldier stands 
vigilant. A Patriot 
system is shown 
in the background. 
(Photograph courtesy 
of Office, Chief of Air 
Defense Artillery) 


GEN Ray Odierno talks with shoppers at 
Baghdad’s Shorja Market. The general spent 
the day touring markets and combat outposts 
around Baghdad. (Photo by SSG Curt Cashour, Joint 
Combat Camera Center) 


Members of the Sons of 
Iraq push their way into 
the check-in window at 
their headquarters in 
Multaka, Iraq, to register 
for their monthly salaries. 
(Photo by P02 Brian Short, 

U.S. Navy) 


Soldiers from A Battery, 2nd 
Battalion, 320th Field Artillery 
Regiment, 1st Brigade Combat 
Team, 101st Airborne Division (Air 
Assault), fire a round from their 
M119A2 howitzer during Operation 
Fulton Harvest in the Al-Jazeera 
Desert, Iraq. (Photo by 1LT Jonathan 

J. Springer, U.S. Army) 


A Bulgarian soldier 
helps SPC Zachary 
Baker of 1st Battalion, 
94th Field Artillery, 
load a Bulgarian 
machine gun at the 
Novo Selo Training 
Area, Bulgaria. (Photo 
by PFC Crystal Abbott, 
U.S. Army) 


November-December 2009 • Red Book 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 24 


















FORT LEWIS, WA 

5-5 ADA (MAMD) 

1- 94 FIRES (MLRS) (EAB) 

2- 12 FIRES (155T) 

(4-2 ID SBCT) 

1-37 FIRES (155T) 

(3-2 ID SBCT) 

3- 17 FI RES (155T) 

(5-2 ID SBCT) 

17 FIRES BDE(HHB) 

5-3 FA 
1-377 FA 
1-94 FA 
F/26 (TAB) 







29 PALMS, CA 

3/11 (155T) USMC 


FORT IRWIN, CA 

1/1/11 ACR (S) 




FORT CARSON, CO 
4 IN DIV 

4-42 FIRES (155SP) 
(1-4 ID HBCT) 

3-16 FIRES (155SP) 
(2-4 ID HBCT) 

3-29 FIRES (155SP) 
(3-4 ID HBCT) 

2-77 FIRES 
(4-4 ID HBCT) 


CAMP PENDLETON, CA 
11 MARINES (HQ) 

1/11 (155T) USMC 
2/11 (155T) USMC 
5/11 (155T/HIMARS) USMC 



Legend HBCT = 

105T = 105-mm Towed Howitzer HHB = 

155T = 155-mm Towed Howitzer 
155SP = 155-mm Self-Propelled Howitzer HIMARS = 

A = Avenger 

AAMDC = Army Air and Missile Defense IBCT = 

Command ID = 

ABN = Airborne MAMD = 

ACR = Armored Cavalry Regiment MD = 

AD = Armored Division MLRS = 

ADA = Air Defense Artillery MTN = 

AETF = Army Evaluation Task Force P = 

AMD = Air and Missile Defense PAC-3 = 

ARNG = Army National Guard S = 

BCD = Battlefield Coordination SAB = 

Detachment SIB = 

BDE = Brigade SBCT = 

BTRY = Battery SCR = 

BN = Battalion SQDN = 

C/A = Corps Artillery TAB = 

CAV = Cavalry THAAD = 

CONUS = Continental/Contiguous US 
C-RAM = Counter -Rockets, -Artillery and TRP = 

-Mortars USAADASCH = 

DET = Detachment 

DIV = Division USAFAS = 

EAB = Echelons Above Brigade USAFATC = 

FA = Field Artillery 

FAB = Field Artillery Brigade USMC = 

GMD = Ground-Based Midcourse Defense USMCR = 


Heavy Brigade Combat Team 
Headquarters and Headquarters 
Battery 

High-Mobility Artillery Rocket 
System 

Infantry Brigade Combat Team 
Infantry Division 

Maneuver Air and Missile Defense 
Missile Defense 

Multiple-Launch Rocket System 

Mountain 

Patriot 

Patriot Advanced Capability 3 
Stinger 

Separate Armored Brigade 
Separate Infantry Brigade 
Stryker Brigade Combat Team 
Stryker Cavalry Regiment 
Squadron 

Target Acquisition Battery 
Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense 
System 
Troop 

U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery 
School 

U.S. Army Field Artillery School 
U.S. Army Field Artillery Training 
Center 

U.S. Marine Corps 

U.S. Marine Corps Reserves 


FORT BLISS, TX 

AETF FIRES BN 
2-29 FIRES (155SP) 

(4-1 CAV HBCT) 

2-3 FIRES (155SP) 

(1-1 AD HBCT) 

4-1 FIRES (105T) 

(3-1 AD IBCT) 

32 AAMDC 
11 ADA BDE 
1 -43 ADA 

2- 43 ADA 

3- 43 ADA 
5-52 ADA 

TASK FORCE 3-3 ADA 
A BTRY, 2 ADA 
A BTRY, 4 ADA 



FORT DRUM, NY 
10 MTN DIV 

3- 6 FIRES (1 05J) 
(1-10 ID IBCT) 

2-15 FI RES (105T) 
(2-10 ID IBCT) 

4- 25 FIRES (105T) 
(3-10 ID IBCT) 




WASHINGTON 

P/5/15 (155T) USMCR 
2-146 FA BN (155SP) 
(81 HBCT) 


ARNG and USMCR FA and ARNG ARA in CONUS 


FORT RILEY, KS 
1 IN DIV 

1-5 FIRES (155SP) 
(1-1 ID HBCT) 

1- 7 FIRES (155SP) 
(2-1 ID HBCT) 

2- 32 FIRES (105T) 
(4-1 ID IBCT) 




FORT SILL, OK 
USAADASCH 
6 ADA BDE 

1 -56 ADA BN 

2- 6 ADA BN 

3- 6 ADA BN 

31 ADA BDE 

4- 3 ADA BN (PAC-3) 

3-2 ADA BN (PAC-3) 

USAFAS 
428 FA BDE 

2- 2 FA (1 05J) 

1 -30 FA 

1 -78 FA 

75 FIRES BDE (HHB) 

3- 13 FIRES (MLRS) (EAB) 

1- 17 FIRES (155SP) (EAB) 

2- 18 FIRES (MLRS) (EAB) 
C/26 (TAB) 

214 FIRES BDE (HHB) 

2-4 FIRES (MLRS) (EAB) 

2-5 FIRES (155SP) (EAB) 
1-14 FIRES (HIMARS) (EAB) 
H/26 (TAB) 

USAFATC (HHB) 

1-19 FA 
1 -22 FA 
1 -40 FA 
1 -79 FA 
95 AG (REC) 

~T~ 


FORT CAMPBELL, KY 

2-44 ADA BN (MAMD) 

101 ABN DIV (AIR ASSAULT) 

1- 320 FIRES (105T) 

(1-101 AIR ASSAULT IBCT) 

2- 320 FIRES (105T) 

(2-101 AIR ASSAULT IBCT) 

3- 320 FIRES (105T) 

(3-101 AIR ASSAULT IBCT) 

4- 320 FIRES (105T) 

(4-101 AIR ASSAULT IBCT) 


— 


FORT KNOX, KY 

1-6 FIRES (105T) 
(3-1 ID IBCT) 


FORT BRAGG, NC 

108 ADA BDE (ABN) (HHB) 

1-7 ADA BN (PAC-3) 

3-4 ADA BN (AMD) 

82 ABN DIV 

1- 319 FIRES (105T) 

(1-82 ABN IBCT) 

2- 319 FIRES (105T) 

(2-82 ABN IBCT) 

3- 319 FIRES (105T) 

(3-82 ABN IBCT) 

2- 321 FIRES (105T) 

(4-82 ABN IBCT) 

18 FIRES BDE (HHB) 

3- 27 FIRES (HIMARS) (EAB) 
1-321 FIRES (155T) (EAB) 
3-321 FIRES (155T) (EAB) 
D/26 (TAB) 


FORT GREELY, AK 

49 MD BN (ARNG) 


FORT WAIN WRIGHT, AK 

2-8 FIRES (155T) 

(1-25 ID SBCT) 


FORT RICHARDSON, AK 

2-377 FIRES (ABN) (105T) 
(4-25 ID IBCT) 


SHAW AFB, SC 

4 BCD 





FORT HOOD, TX 
69 ADA BDE 

1-44 ADA BN (AMD) 

1- 62 ADA BN (PAC-3) 

4- 5 ADA BN (AMD) 

41 FIRES BDE (HHB) 

2- 20 FIRES (MLRS) (EAB) 
1-21 FIRES (MLRS) (EAB) 
A/26 (TAB) 

1 CAV DIV 

1- 82 FIRES (155SP) 

(1-1 CAV HBCT) 

2- 82 FIRES (155SP) 

(3-1 CAV HBCT) 

3- 82 FIRES (155SP) 

(2-1 CAV HBCT) 

5- 82 FIRES (155SP) 

(4-1 CAV HBCT) 

3-1 FIRES (105T) 

(3-1 ID IBCT) 


FORT BENNING, GA 

1-10 FIRES (155SP) 
(3-3 ID HBCT) 


CAMP LEJEUNE, NC 
10 MARINES (HQ) 

1/10 (155T) USMC 
2/10 (155T) USMC 
3/10 (155T) USMC 
5/10 (155T) USMC 


FORT POLK, LA 

5-25 FIRES (105T) 
(4-10 ID IBCT) 








FORT STEWART, GA 

3 IN DIV 

1-9 FIRES (155SP) 

(2-3 ID HBCT) 

1-41 FIRES (155SP) 

(1-3 ID HBCT) 

1-76 FIRES (155SP) 

(4-3 ID HBCT) 







1 

1 

Vi 
j \ 

W ' 

r 


CAMP CASEY, KOREA 

1-15 FIRES (155SP) 

(1-2 ID HBCT) 


OSAN AFB, KOREA 

3 BCD 

35 ADA BDE 

2-1 ADA BN (PAC-3) 
6-52 ADA BN (PAC-3) 


CAMP STANLEY, KOREA 

210 FIRES BDE 

6-37 FIRES (MLRS) 

1-38 FIRES (MLRS) 

F/333 (TAB) 

— 


GIESSEN, GERMANY 

1-77 FIRES (105T) 

(172 IN BDE) 


SCHWEINFURT, GERMANY 

1-84 FIRES (155SP) 

(170 IN BDE) 


BAUMHOLDER, GERMANY 

4-27 FIRES (155SP) 

(2-1 AD HBCT) 


BAMBERG, GERMANY 

4-319 FIRES (105T) 

(173 ABN BDE) 


RAMSTEIN AFB, GERMANY 

19 BCD 


VILSECK, GERMANY 

2 CAV ARTY (155T) 

(2 CAV REGT SBCT) 


F[ 


KAISERSLAUTERN, GERMANY 

357 AMD DET 
5-7 ADA (PAC-3) 


OREGON 

2-218 FA BN (105T) 
(41 IBCT) 


NORTH DAKOTA 

1-188 ADA (MAMD) 



MINNESOTA 

1-125 FA BN (155SP) 
(34 HBCT) 

1-151 FA BN (155T) 

151 FA (TAB) 

(115 FIRES BRIGADE) 
— 


IDAHO 

1-148 FA BN (155SP) 
(116 HBCT) 




WYOMING 

115 HHB FAB 

115 FIRES BDE (HHB) 

2-300 FA BN (HIMARS) 

(115 FIRES BRIGADE) 




SOUTH DAKOTA 

1-147 FA BN (MLRS) 
(115 FIRES BRIGADE) 




WISCONSIN 

1-120 FA BN (1 05J) 

(32 IBCT) 

1-121 FA BN (HIMARS) 
(197 FIRES BRIGADE) 

-'- 


MICHIGAN 

1-119 FA BN (155T) 

1-182 FA BN (HIMARS) 
(197 FIRES BRIGADE) 


VERMONT 

B/1/101 FA BN (105T) 

(86 IBCT, MA, 1-101 FA BN) 



r 


NEW YORK 

1-258 FA BN (105T) 
(27 IBCT) 


OHIO 

1-134 FA BN (105T) 
(37 IBCT) 

174 ADA BDE 

1- 174 ADA (MAMD) 

2- 174 ADA (MAMD) 



NEW HAMPSHIRE 

197 HHB FAB 

197 FIRES BDE (HHB) 

1-172 FA BN (HIMARS) 


MASSACHUSETTS 

1-101 FA (105T) 

(86 IBCT) 

101 FA (TAB) 

(197 FIRES BRIGADE) 


CALIFORNIA 

N/5/14 (155T) USMCR 
0/5/14 (155T) USMCR 
1-143 FA BN (1 05J) 
(40 IBCT) 

1-144 FA BN (155SP) 

(11 ACR) 

F/144 FA (TAB) 

(65 FIRES BRIGADE) 
MD ELEMENT GMD 




UTAH 

1- 145 FA BN (155SP) 

2- 222 FA BN(155SP) 


COLORADO 

Q/5/14 (155T) USMCR 

100 GMD BDE 

117 SPACE BN 

169 HHB FAB 
169 FIRES BDE (HHB) 

2-157 FA BN (HIMARS) 


KANSAS 

2-130 FA BN (HIMARS) 
1-161 FA BN (155SP) 
E/161 FA (TAB) 

(169 FIRES BRIGADE) 


ILLINOIS 

2-122 FA BN (105T) 

(33 IBCT) 

2-123 FA BN (155T) 
(169 FIRES BRIGADE) 


INDIANA 

139 FA (TAB) 

(138 FIRES BRIGADE) 
2-150 FA BN (155T) 
1-163 FA BN (105T) 

(76 IBCT) 


PENNSYLVANIA 

3/14 (-) (155T) USMCR 
1/3/14 (155T) USMCR 
1-107 FA BN (105T) 

(2 IBCT) 

1-108 FA BN (155T) 

(56 SBCT) 

1-109 FA BN (155SP) 
(55 HBCT) 


RHODE ISLAND 

1-103 FA BN (155T) 
(197 FIRES BRIGADE) 


[ 


NEW JERSEY 

G/3/14 (155T) USMCR 
3-112 FA BN (105T) 
(50 IBCT) 


MISSOURI 

1-129 FA BN (155T) 
(45 FIRES BRIGADE) 


OKLAHOMA 

F/2/14 (HIMARS) USMCR 
1-160 FA BN (105T) 

(45 HBCT) 

45 HHB FAB 

45 FIRES BRIGADE (HHB) 

F/171 FA BN (TAB) 

1-158 FA BN (HIMARS) 

(45 FIRES BRIGADE) 


KADENA AFB, JAPAN 

1-1 ADA BN (PAC-3) 


CAMP HANSEN, JAPAN 
12 MARINES (HQ) 

3/12 (155T) USMC 


All maps as of Nov. 23, 2009 


KANEOHE BAY, HI 

1/12 (155T) USMC 


SCHOLFIELD BARRACKS, HI 
25 IN DIV 

3-7 FIRES (1 05J) 

(3-25 ID IBCT) 

2-11 FIRES (155T) 

(2-25 ID SBCT) 


FORT SHAFTER, HI 
94 AAMDC 



ARKANSAS 

142 FIRES BDE (HHB) 

1- 142 FA BN (MLRS) 

2- 142 FA BN (155SP) 
1-206 FA BN (105T) 

(39 IBCT) 


KENTUCKY 

138 FA BDE (HHB) 

2-138 FA BN (155SP) 
(138 FIRES BRIGADE) 
1-623 FA BN (HIMARS) 


WEST VIRGINIA 

1-201 FA BN (155SP) 
(197 FIRES BRIGADE) 


MARYLAND 

2-110 FIRES (105T) 
(58 IBCT) 


NORTH CAROLINA 

1-113 FA BN (155SP) 
(30 HBCT) 

5-113 FA BN (HIMARS) 
(65 FIRES BRIGADE) 


TENNESSEE 

M/3/13 (155T) USMCR 
3-115 FA BN (155SP) 
(278 HBCT) 

1-181 FA BN (HIMARS) 
(142 FIRES BRIGADE) 


:r 


VIRGINIA 

1-111 FA BN (105T) 

(116 IBCT) 

H/3/14 (M777) USMCR 


SOUTH CAROLINA 

263 AAMDC 

2-263 ADA (MAMD) 

1-178 FA BN (155SP) 
(65 FIRES BRIGADE) 



TEXAS 

14 MARINES HQ USMCR 

D/2/14 (HIMARS) USMCR 
1-133 FA BN (105T) 

(72 IBCT) 

3- 133 FA BN (105T) 

(56 IBCT) 

4- 133 FA BN (HIMARS) 

(45 FIRES BRIGADE) 


MISSISSIPPI 

2-114 FA BN (155SP) 
(155 HBCT) 

1 -204 ADA (MAMD) 


ALABAMA 

K/2/14 (HIMARS) USMCR 
1-117 FA BN (155T) 

(142 FIRES BDE) 


GEORGIA 

1-118 FA BN (105T) 
(48 IBCT) 

1-214 FA BN (155SP) 
(65 IBCT) 


LOUISIANA 

1-141 FA BN (105T) 
(256 IBCT) 


FLORIDA 

2- 116 FA BN (105T) 

(53 IBCT) 

3- 116 FA BN (HIMARS) 

(142 BDE) 

2 BCD (USAR)* 

164 ADA BDE 

1 -265 ADA (MAMD) 

3-265 ADA (MAMD) 

211 REGIMENT (REGIONAL 
TRAINING INSTITUTE) 


c Note: 2 BCD is US Army Reserve 


Maps Sources: 

U.S. Army FA: Jack Hensley, Capabilities Development and Integration Directorate 
U.S. Army ADA: Levi Batiste, Branch Marketing, Office, Chief of Air Defense Artillery 
Email updates and corrections to firesbulletin@conus.army.mil 


































































































































































































































































































A s January 2008 began, the 41st Fires 
Brigade was trained and ready, 
serving as a contingency expedition¬ 
ary force — prepare-to-deploy-order mis¬ 
sion, providing lethal andnonlethal fires and 
fire support anywhere in the world. Then 
in late January 2008, the brigade received 
a change in mission, directing the unit to 
deploy to Wasit Province as a battlespace 
owning brigade serving as a brigade combat 
team in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. 
The brigade reorganized, trained at home 
station and began to deploy personnel and 
equipment five months later. 

eployments and operations. Arriving 
in Wasit, the brigade served under the 
10th Mountain Division and Multi-National 
Division-Central. The brigade previously 
deployed in support of Operation Iraqi Free¬ 
dom as 4th Fires Brigade, 4th Infantry Di¬ 
vision, Operation Iraqi Freedom 05-07 and 
as 41st Field Artillery Brigade, V Corps in 
2003. Headquartered at Forward Operating 
Base Delta in Wasit Province, Iraq, the 41 st 
Fires Brigade was responsible for a coali¬ 
tion force that included soldiers from El 


Salvador, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, 
Poland and Romania, as well as Task Force 
Tusken, which oversaw the border transition 
teams at Combat Outpost Shocker on the 
Iranian border. The brigade also partnered 
with the 32nd Iraqi Army Brigade as well 
as the provincial Iraqi police. 

The brigade deployed with its 2nd Bat¬ 
talion, 20th Field Artillery, and 589th Bri¬ 
gade Support Battalion, while 1st Battalion, 
21st Field Artillery, deployed ahead of the 
brigade in support of detainee operations at 
CampBucca. 1-21 Field Artillery was later 
re-tasked by Multi-National Division-Cen¬ 
tral to support operations in Basra. In all, 
the brigade deployed with more than 1,200 
Soldiers. 

The brigade oversaw Operation Iberian 
Fly-Away, where 1,600 Georgian soldiers 
had to redeploy in 72 hours back to Georgia 
because of the conflict with Russia. 589th 
Brigade Support Battalion helped facilitate 
the movement of the Georgian soldiers and 
their equipment. The result of the Georgian 
redeployment was moving 2-20 Field Artil¬ 
lery Soldiers to three joint security stations, 


manned in partnership with the Iraqi army 
and police. 

Working with the Wasit Provincial Re¬ 
construction Team, the 41st Fires Brigade 
accomplished historic events including the 
renewal of cultural events not seen in the 
area since before Saddam Hussein’s regime 
took power. Operation Bring on the Docs 
was a joint medical civil-military opera¬ 
tion between the Wasit Director General 
of Health and the 41st Fires Brigade, de¬ 
signed to restore the medical capacity in 
Wasit and to bring clinics up to the regional 
health care standard. Members of the bri¬ 
gade surgeon cell and Company C, 589th 
Brigade Support Battalion completed 39 
lectures, 28 key leader engagements with 
hospital staff, and 25 hospital assessments, 
and treated more than 5,300 patients during 
the deployment. 

Operation Jack Straw was a joint task 
force comprised of the brigade legal team, 
military police, law enforcement profes¬ 
sionals, a provincial reconstruction team, 
rule-of-law principal and civil affairs per¬ 
sonnel. They assessed all jail facilities in 




Soldiers from 589th Brigade Support Battalion receive their mission brief as they prepare for a combat logistics patrol to Joint Security Station 
Mutanabe, Iraq, Jan. 29. (Photo by SFC Joe Thompson, U.s. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 25 





























































Iraqi army CPT ‘AN Abdual Zaharra Hussain, 4th Company, 3rd Battalion, 32nd Iraqi Army Brigade, 
holds the key to Joint Security Station Mutanabe during the transfer ceremony, May 28. B Battery, 
2-20 Field Artillery Regiment, had been working with the Iraqi army since Aug. 2008. (Photo by sfc 

Joe Thompson, U.S. Army) 


Wasit Province and biometrically screened 
all detainees in the facilities. The team also 
coached, taught and advised provincial 
judges to issue warrants and make rulings 
consistent with the Iraqi Constitution. 

Wasit Province became the 13th prov¬ 
ince in Iraq to transfer security responsibil¬ 
ities successfully from coalition forces to 
Iraqi security forces in October 2008. Wasit 
Governor Abd al-Latif Hamad Tarfah and 
LTG Lloyd Austin, Multi-National Corps- 
Iraq, commanding general, signed the Wasit 
Memorandum of Understanding, transfer¬ 
ring the security of Wasit province to the 
provincial government and Iraqi security 
forces. 

-21 Field Artillery (Multiple-Launch 
Rocket System). First Strike deployed 
ahead of the 41st Fires Brigade in support 
of detainee operations at Camp Bucca in 
April 2008. While A Battery remained at 
Bucca for the duration of the deployment, 
C Battery started at Camp Bucca; but after 
two months of detainee operations, the unit 
received a maneuver mission to conduct 
security patrols, escort international police 
advisors and support the police transition 
teams in Basra, partnering with the British 
forces there. After almost eight months in 
Basra, C Battery received a change in mis¬ 
sion again —join the 41st Fires Brigade 
at Forward Operating Base Delta, where it 
completed escort missions for the provin¬ 
cial reconstruction team until its redeploy¬ 
ment in July 2009. 

-20 Field Artillery (MLRS). Deep 
Strike deployed to Forward Operat¬ 
ing Base Delta with the brigade headquar¬ 
ters and was the main maneuver asset for 
the brigade. Upon the redeployment of 
the Georgian army in August 2008, Deep 
Strike Soldiers assumed joint security sta¬ 
tions previously manned by the Georgians 


and partnered with Iraqi army and police. 
Once established, these joint security sta¬ 
tions became the focal point for launching 
partnered operations with the Iraqi security 
forces as well as conducting humanitarian 
missions out to the people. 

Deep Strike partnered with the A1 Kut 
Orphanage, distributing humanitarian aid 
and establishing long lasting relationships 
with the community. Deep Strike also part¬ 
nered with the local schools near the joint 
security stations, culminating a pen pal pro¬ 
gram with a video-teleconference between 
the Meadows Elementary School at Fort 
Hood, Texas, and the A1 Enteserat Primary 
School in Shaykh Sa’ad, Iraq. Deep Strike 
Soldiers conducted more than 2,320 patrols, 
360 key leader engagements and drove more 


than 275,000 miles, while serving the citi¬ 
zens of Iraq. 

89th Brigade Support Battalion. 

The Iron Caissons supported the bri¬ 
gade and Forward Operating Base Delta 
throughout the duration of the deployment. 
With the addition of the joint security sta¬ 
tions after the Georgian redeployment 
as well as providing for Combat Outpost 
Shocker on the Iranian border, Iron Cais¬ 
son Soldiers completed more than 270 
combat logistic patrols, distributing more 
than 485,000 gallons of fuel, 430,000 gal¬ 
lons of water and 80,000 cases of bottled 
water. 589th maintenance shops did more 
than 5,800 maintenance jobs, while the air 
terminal moved more than 11,000 passen¬ 
gers and 4.5 million pounds of cargo. Iron 
Caisson Soldiers partnered with the Iraqi 
8th Motor Transport Regiment, helping to 
train and advise the Iraqi army on logistics. 
Iron Caisson s Company C, “Charlie Med,” 
was stood up for the deployment and ran the 
Level II medical treatment facility on For¬ 
ward Operating Base Delta, which treated 
more than 10,000 patients, gave 1,600 im¬ 
munizations and conducted more than 200 
medical evacuations. 

Upon redeploying in August, the 41st 
Fires Brigade began comprehensive reset 
operations along multiple lines of effort to 
include Soldier and family fitness, leader 
development and material accountability. 

SGT Justin Kerr receives range instructions from 
1SG Eduardo Iterregui at Joint Security Station 
Mutanabe, Jan. 29. Kerr and Iterregui were both 
assigned to B Battery, 2-20 Field Artillery Regi¬ 
ment. (Photo by SFC Joe Thompson, U.S. Army) 





26 November-December 2009 • Fires 





























Urn. 



^ EffiECO®'DIiIIIIlM 


T he Soldiers of the 21 Oth Fires Brigade, 2nd Infantry Division, 
are forward deployed in the Republic of Korea and have earned 
the nickname Warrior Thunder based on the brigade’s close 
integration within 2nd Infantry Division. 

Working closely with our Korean allies and fully integrated in 2nd 
Infantry Division’s plans and operations defending South Korea, 
210th Fires has an extremely high operational tempo, focusing on 
the skills required by major combat operations. Comprised of its 
two M270A1 Multiple-Launch Rocket System battalions, 6th Bat¬ 
talion, 37th Field Artillery On the Minute and 1-38 Field Artillery 
Steel Behind the Rock are supported by the maintenance and sus¬ 
tainment capabilities of the 70th Brigade Support Battalion Black¬ 
smith. The 210th Fires Brigade is a self-contained, self-sustaining 
fire support asset that provides 2nd Infantry Division and our Ko¬ 
rean allies maximum flexibility to conduct full-spectrum operations. 
The brigade’s assigned and attached separate batteries and company 
provide target acquisition (F/333 Field Artillery), communications 
(579th Signal) and air defense (E/6-52 Air Defense Artillery), fur¬ 
ther enhancing the capabilities of Warrior Thunder. 

K atchi-Kapshida! (We go together!) While the 210th Fires 
Brigade is unique based on its mission, no organization can 
do it alone. The 21 Oth fosters and maintains a combined operations 
relationship needed to aid in South Korea’s defense. The 21 Oth works 
daily with our Republic of Korea army counterparts and at echelon 
within the local and surrounding community to foster partnerships 
with our comrades in the Republic of Korea army. Working closely 
with our Korean teammates through frequent live fires, multi-echelon 
command post exercises and Korean-U.S. partnership events, 
the 210th Fires Brigade has built a close relationship of trust and 
confidence that truly captures the spirit of Katchi-Kapshida! The 
Korean augmentees to the U.S. Army Soldiers, who are assigned to 
the brigade, fulfill missions in every military occupational specialty 
within the brigade. Korean augmentees offer 210th Soldiers an 
education in Korean culture, helping to integrate seamlessly with 
our Korean allies. 

Finally, 210th Soldiers team with local citizens and leadership 
in the city of Dongducheon, by teaching English at local schools, 
volunteering at local orphanages and enjoying many other 
opportunities to work within our Korean hosts. This community 
involvement fosters a bond of friendship with the Korean people, 
earning the brigade the reputation as a solid and dependable neighbor. 
These relationships are vital to achieve the brigade’s wartime mission 
and enhance the combat effectiveness of Warrior Thunder. 

T rain as we fight. A unique and focused mission with 2nd 
Infantry Division, close ties with our Republic of Korea army 
allies and a high operational tempo allow the brigade to achieve a 
high level of tactical and technical competence in major combat 
operations. Coupled with its unique and challenging mission, the 
21 Oth Fires Brigade maintains an aggressive training schedule—and 
for good reason. Often coined “the main effort of the main effort,” 
the brigade’s initial mission set includes providing fires in support 
of the defense of South Korea as part of combined operations with 
the Republic of Korea army. 

During the first Republic of Korea U.S. combined live-fire 
exercise in April, 1-38 Field Artillery executed a live fire with its 
sister battalion in the Republic of Korea army, firing both U.S. 
and Republic of Korea Multiple-Launch Rocket System launchers 
simultaneously in support of combined arms operations. Training 
with our Republic of Korea partners during exercises, such as 
Operation Thunder Ready in January, enabled its units to share target 


acquisition data and stressed combined operations with Republic 
of Korea artillery. 

Operation Warrior Focus 09-01 and 09-02 included both 6-37 
Field Artillery and 1-38 Field Artillery live firing at Chorwon 
Range. The third Republic of Korea Army Combined Counterfire 
Exercise in September focused coordinating logistics, incorporating 
engineers from E/1-72 Armor into building survivability positions 
and integrating Republic of Korea army infantry into the security 
plans for the Multiple-Launch Rocket System battalions and firing 
batteries. From October through F ebruary 2010,1-38 Field Artillery 
and 6-37 Field Artillery will fire more than 150 training rockets in 
support of Republic of Korea counterfire operations as the Republic 
of Korea army develops interoperable systems to complement the 
precision and responsiveness of Multiple-Launch Rocket System 
fires. 

As part of 2nd Infantry Division, the 21 Oth Fires Brigade played 
a crucial role during the division’s warpath and warfighter training 
exercises held from August to November. These exercises serve as 
opportunities to refine and practice its command and control across 
the division and with the 60th Republic of Korea Mechanized 
Brigade. Operations Key Resolve in March 2008 and 2009, and 
Ulchi Freedom Guardian in August 2008 and 2009, held in support 
of the Combined Forces Command, deployed 210th Soldiers across 
the Korean peninsula to hone its readiness in the defense of South 
Korea. 

During every exercise, its brigade and battalion liaison teams 
reinforce and enhance its capabilities and effectiveness as they 
work and train with Republic of Korea army units, providing a 
valuable link with our Republic of Korea army allies at echelons 
from brigade to field army levels. Every training event strengthens 
and enhances its warfighting readiness and makes an assignment in 
the 210th Fires Brigade personally and professionally fulfilling. 

D iablo - E/6-52 Air Defense Artillery. E Battery, 6-52 Air 
Defense Artillery Diablo , consisting of 24 Avengers, six 
Sentinel Radars and associated command and control is attached 
to the 210th Fires Brigade. 2009 saw the Soldiers of E/6-52 ADA 
executing several live-fire exercises to ensure they are ready to 
defend the brigade against any air threat. 

During Operation Sea Strike in March and November, Diablo 
air defenders successfully fired a total of 55 missiles from their 24 
Avengers over the Korean West Sea. Operation Seventh Circle in 
February honed gunnery and included the integration of E Battery 
into aviation forward arming and refueling point security, adding to 
the flexibility E/6-52 brings to 2nd Infantry Division. An aggressive 
training environment coupled with a focus on major combat 
operations enables E/6-52 to provide unmatched air defense, route 
and point security supporting 210th Fires Brigade operations. 

L eaders, Soldiers and standards. The 210th Fires Brigade is a 
team of highly disciplined warriors who work tirelessly to meet 
the standards of the 2nd Infantry Division and exemplify the Army 
Values. Challenging training under realistic conditions, maintaining 
equipment to standard, counseling and Soldier care are cornerstones 
of the brigade’s mission accomplishment. As the spirit and realities 
of “normalcy” increase in the Republic of Korea for our men and 
women in uniform—so do our opportunities to grow with our allies 
as we move toward our common and individual goals. Longer tour 
opportunities coupled with command sponsorship for families and 
increased quality of life in Korea make the 210th Fires Brigade the 
assignment of choice for field artillerymen. 

Warrior Thunder remains Second to None! ■ 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 27 



































T he 214th Fires Brigade transformed 
from a traditional field artillery 
brigade to a Fires brigade in 2006. 
It is a capabilities-based unit that provides 
precision, close and deep lethal artillery, 
conducts offensive logistics, is network¬ 
centric and provides command and control 
of fires for full-spectrum operations. The 
unit’s transformation provided increased 
lethality, modularity and expeditionary 
support for joint operations. 

Designed to be self-contained, the 
Leader Brigade s organization includes a 
Multiple-Launch Rocket System battalion, 
a High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System 
battalion, a cannon artillery battalion, 
a brigade support battalion, a target 
acquisition battery and a signal company. 

The brigade’s design allows it 
to plug and play into any division 
or higher echelon. The brigade 
headquarters’ 2007 deployment 
to Iraq highlighted the unit’s 
versatility. The brigade deployed 
to augment the 3rd Infantry 
Division, Fort Stewart, Ga. 

Once on the ground, the brigade 
received a change of mission to provide 
command and control of a forward operating 
base less than 40 miles from the Iraq/Iran 
border. At Forward Operating Base Delta, 
the brigade provided command and control 
for full-spectrum operations in support of 
Operation Iraqi Freedom to seven countries 
as a part of Multi-National Corps-Iraq. 

The brigade’s 168th Brigade Support 
Battalion returned from Iraq in December 
2008. The Make it Happen battalion 
provided offensive logistical support to 49 
battalions and companies in 13 brigades 
throughout Multi-National Division- 
Baghdad’s area of operations. The battalion 
conducted more than 11,000 maintenance 
jobs, conducted 3,636 deliberate combat 
logistics patrols and drove more than 2.2 
million miles to support 70,000 Coalition 
Forces Soldiers, Iraqi army soldiers, Iraqi 
policemen and national policemen in one of 
Iraq’s most dangerous areas — Baghdad. 

The battalion’s supply support activity 
earned honorable mention status in the 


2009 U.S. Army Forces Command Supply 
Excellence Award competition. This was 
the supply support activity’s first time 
competing in this contest. 

The Deep Attack 2nd Battalion, 4th 
Field Artillery, continues to demonstrate 
its lethality with precision rocket fires 
in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. 
Since 2006, the battalion has provided a 
Guided Multiple-Launch Rocket System 
task force, formerly known as Task Force 
Terminator , but now dubbed Task Force 
Leader that rotationally provides precision 
firing capability for the Multi-National 
Corps-Iraq. 

The battalion maintains its edge by 
incorporating the most current tactics, 
techniques and procedures from theater into 


its training, a rigorous training cycle, rigid 
field training exercises and rotations to the 
National Training Center at Fort Irwin, Calif. 
This unit has proven that artillery is still a 
viable option in today’s counterinsurgency 
fight. 

The Steel Warriors 1st Battalion, 
14th Field Artillery, has completed the 
transformation from a Multiple-Launch 
Rocket System Battalion to a High- 
Mobility Artillery Rocket System Battalion 
successfully. The Steel Warriors conduct 
precision rocket fires in support of Operation 
Iraqi Freedom. This transformation has 
expanded the Fires brigade’s current mission 
from one battalion supporting Operation 
Iraqi Freedom with rocket fires to two. The 
1-14th Field Artillery also provides Guided 
Multiple-Launch Rocket System fires as 
part of Task Force Leader. Keeping artillery 
in the fight conducting its core mission 
of delivering precision fires on today’s 
battlefield is the battalion’s main focus. 

Activated on Sept. 18, 2006, as part 


of the Leader Brigades transformation, 
Battery H, 26th Target Acquisition Battery 
(Field Artillery) deployed 11 months later in 
support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. While 
in Iraq, the battery deployed 10 Q36/Q37 
radar sections that provided critical force 
protection to Coalition Forces and precise 
enemy locations of rocket, mortar and 
artillery fires. The battery also managed 82 
sensor systems across all of Multi-National 
Division-North safeguarding more than 
60,000 Soldiers and 20,000 contractors; 
coordinated and executed 433 logistic 
support missions to more than 20 different 
locations traveling more than 220,000 
square miles. 

The battery is providing institutional 
radar training to 2nd Battalion, 5th Field 
Artillery, Soldiers, who are 
conducting an out-of-design 
mission in support of Operation 
Iraqi Freedom. In addition to 
providing training to its sister 
unit, the Wolfpack battery is 
preparing to deploy in support 
of Operation Enduring Freedom 
in 2010. H/26 also provides 
meteorological support to the entire 214th 
Fires Brigade. 

The Rock Hard 2nd Battalion, 5th Field 
Artillery, replaced H/26 and is manning 
counterfire radar sections in Iraq as part of 
its out-of-design mission. The battalion is 
prepared to conduct its core competency 
mission and continually trains in the art 
of providing cannon fires to maneuver 
forces. 

The 529th Network Signal Company 
provides network support to the entire 
brigade in addition to providing two 
command post node equipment and teams 
in support of Task Force Leader. 

As one of the most versatile and lethal 
formations in the Army, the 214th Fires 
Brigade is transformed and ready to 
support basic fire support missions or to 
assume any mission. Flexibility, agility 
and mission accomplishment describe the 
capabilities of the combat tested and proven 
Soldiers, NCOs and officers of the Leader 
Brigade. ■ 


“The 214th Fires Brigade is transformed and 
ready to support basic fire support missions or to 
assume any mission. ” 


28 November-December 2009 • Fires 







































A Basic Combat Training Soldier prepares to descend from a rappel tower at Fort Sill, Okla. (Photograph courtesy of 434th Field Artillery Brigade) 


T he 434th Field Artillery Brigade 
receives, in-processes and trains 
more than 17,000 Basic Combat 
Training Soldiers and 3,000 Warrior 
Transition Course Soldiers annually. 
The rigorous and realistic Basic Combat 
Training program of instruction transforms 
civilian volunteers into Soldiers, who are 
competent and confident in their war fighting 
and technical skills; who demonstrate the 
requisite character, values and warrior spirit; 
and who can contribute to their first units 
of assignment successfully. 

The Warrior Transition Course is a 
32-day program of instruction designed to 
access former Navy, Air Force, Marine and 
Coast Guard personnel into the Army as well 
as reintegrate prior service Army personnel 
back into the force. The Warrior Transition 
Course, conducted in lieu of Basic Combat 
Training and in about one-half the time, 
produces disciplined, motivated, physically, 
mentally, spiritually and emotionally fit 
Soldiers, who demonstrate the Army Values 
and the Warrior Ethos and are prepared for 
Advanced Individual Training or their first 
unit of assignment. Formerly conducted at 
Fort Knox, Ky., and White Sands Missile 
Range, N.M., the Warrior Transition Course 
moved to Fort Sill, Okla., in January. 


Initial military training, both Basic 
Combat Training and the Warrior Transition 
Course, is designed to be relevant to the 
current fight and challenging to Soldiers 
in training. While fundamental Soldier 
skills and individual fitness remain the 
foundation of the training programs, 
Soldiers also learn higher skills, such as 
combat lifesaver certification and advanced 
rifle marksmanship. Situational training 
exercises, conducted in a realistic urban 
environment with Arabic foreign language 
speaking civilian-on-the-battlefield role 
players, facilitate training many of the 32 
Warrior Tasks and 12 battle drills. 

To ensure that training meets the needs 
of our Army at war, leaders across the 
brigade focus on the outcome of each 
training event so that Soldiers can apply 
their skills effectively. This requires that 
trainers think about not only the conditions 
and standards for a given task, but also the 
context in which the task is executed. To 
facilitate this approach, drill sergeants and 
cadre are certified in marksmanship training 
at the Combat Application Training Course, 
which both enhances their ability to train 
Soldiers to shoot their assigned weapons 
and teaches the tenants of Outcomes Based 
Training and Education. The outcomes- 


based approach has led to numerous 
initiatives to update training events to 
closely replicate the conditions that Soldiers 
in theater experience. 

During the past two years, 434th 
Field Artillery Brigade has expanded to 
meet increased accession and training 
requirements necessitated by the growth of 
the total Army. In addition to the brigade’s 
organic reception battalion and three 
training battalions, a mobilized U.S. Army 
Reserve training battalion brought expanded 
training capacity to Fort Sill, each of the 
past two years with more than $19 million 
dollars in new construction providing the 
additional barracks and administrative 
facilities to support this additional training 
load. 

In January 2010, 434th Field Artillery 
Brigade will begin executing gender- 
integrated Basic Combat Training to further 
support manning requirements of a larger 
Army. Looking forward, top-to-bottom 
renovations of Soldier billets through the 
Trainee Barracks Upgrade Program and 
construction of new facilities to include 
a reception complex, three new “super 
dining facilities” and a chapel will ensure 
that 434th Field Artillery Brigade remains 
ready to meet the training requirements. ■ 

29 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 
















□ 


a 


a 




T he 11th Marine Regiment provides fire support to the 1st 
Marine Division and is comprised of a regimental headquarters 
battery, three cannon battalions and one High-Mobility 
Artillery Rocket System battalion. 

Since the start of Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring 
Freedom, elements of the regiment have performed a variety of 
nonstandard missions. In accordance with Commandant of the 
Marine Corps guidance, 11th Marines has returned to training 
aggressively in our core artillery and fire support competencies. 
Since July 2008,11th Marines has conducted five regimental-level 
exercises and participated in three division-level exercises. These 
exercises have allowed our division fire support coordination 
center to focus again on providing essential fire support planning 
and execution to the 1st Marine Division. 

eadquarters Battery, 11th Marine Regiment. Headquarters 
Battery, 11th Marines, continues to provide Marines to augment 
the ground-combat elements of the Marine Air-Ground Task Force 
in support of both Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. 
Headquarters Battery Marines augment joint and combined staffs, 
provide fire support coordination and liaison teams, provide 
provisional truck platoons and serve on Operation Iraqi Freedom 
military transition teams. Our target acquisition platoon provides 
survey, meteorological, radar detachments and acoustic sensor 
teams in Iraq and Afghanistan. 

The regiment’s Headquarters Battery is in the process of 
establishing a civil affairs detachment. This detachment will conduct 
civil-military operations in support of the 1 st Marine Division. The 
civil affairs detachment has participated in regimental-level exercises 
where it conducted populace and resource control operations by 
establishing a civil-military operations center and a dislocated 
civilian camp. The civil affairs detachment continues to mature as 
it prepares to support Operation Enduring Freedom. The battery 
demonstrates the flexibility of artillerymen as we serve in every 
clime and place. 

st Battalion, 11th Marines, Ultima Ratio Regnum. 1st 

Battalion, 11th Marines, has participated in multiple regimental 
and division level exercises, as well as supporting more than 26 pre¬ 
deployment exercises for forces deploying in support of Operations 
Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. The battalion continues to 
train and source firing batteries to the 11th, 13th, 15th and 31st 
Marine Expeditionary Units in support of the other contingency 
operations and Operation Enduring Freedom. 

During the past year, 1st Battalion has become the regiment’s 
home to as many as six cannon batteries due to rotations, 
emerging operational commitments and reserve component 
battery augmentation for deployments with active duty forces. 
1st Battalion is focusing on re-establishing core competencies in 
providing responsive, accurate and close artillery fires in support 
of maneuver forces. We anticipate the battalion’s deployment in 
support of Operation Enduring Freedom. 



2 nd Battalion, 11 th Marines, The Regiment's Best. In December 
2008, 2nd Battalion returned from a year-long deployment 
as a civil affairs group in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, 
followed by three months of artillery reset training. In March, 2nd 
Battalion completed its first battalion-level artillery firing exercise 
since March 2007. 

Simultaneously, the battalion supported three battery 
deployments to Okinawa, Japan, in support of the 31st Marine 
Expeditionary Unit. 2nd Battalion continues to provide equipment 
and individual augmentation to both Operation Iraqi Freedom 
and Operation Enduring Freedom, while it prepares for future 
deployment rotations. 

rd Battalion, 11th Marines, DominamusNox. 3rd Battalion, 
11th Marines, deployed from May through November 2009, as 
the first Marine artillery battalion in Afghanistan to provide Fires 
in support of the Marine expeditionary brigade. 

The battalion deployed with its Headquarters Battery; one of its 
organic firing batteries, Battery I; a reserve cannon battery, Battery 
N, 5th Battalion, 14th Marines; and a target acquisition platoon. 
Upon deploying, the 3rd Battalion also assumed command of a 
reserve JJigh-Mobility Artillery Rocket System battery, Battery 
D, 2nd Battalion, 14th Marines, which was subsequently replaced 
by an active duty High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System battery, 
Battery R, 5th Battalion, 11th Marines. 

In the Continental U.S., 3rd Battalion’s three remaining organic 
firing batteries continue to prepare for independent deployments 
with Marine Expeditionary Units and with future deploying Marine 
artillery battalions. 

th Battalion, 11th Marines, The Spirit of Saint Barbara. 

Providing precision rocket and missile fires in support of 
the Marine Air-Ground Task Force, joint and coalition forces, 5th 
Battalion, 11th Marines, serves as the Marine Corps’ only active 
duty High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System Battalion. Having 
completed its transition from the Ml98 howitzer to the Ml42 
High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System in April, the battalion has 
trained aggressively to maximize the range and lethality of the 
system by focusing its efforts on the development of command, 
control and support of distributed operations across geographically 
dispersed terrain. 

Since its transition to the Ml42 High-Mobility Artillery 
Rocket System, 5th Battalion 11th Marines, has supported two 
battery deployments to Iraq, and most recently deployed Battery 
R in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. 5th Battalion, 11th 
Marines, continues to work closely with its reserve counterpart, 
2nd Battalion, 14th Marines, and other rocket battalions in the U.S. 
Army. 

In October, 5th Battalion supported the 5th Marine Regiment 
as it conducted Pacific Horizon, an amphibious offload exercise 
in southern California. ■ 




30 November-December 2009 • Fires 






































By MAJ Tony Dedmond and 
LTC Jon R. Milner 

T his article examines two of the Army’s 
branches, air defense artillery and 
field artillery and focuses on their 
modernization programmed for the next 
several years. This examination is particu¬ 
larly relevant for two reasons. First, after 
41 years at Fort Bliss, Texas, the air defense 
artillery branch headquarters has relocated 
to Fort Sill, Okla. and as of June 23, joined 
the newly created F ires Center of Excellence 
with the field artillery branch. The Fires 
Center of Excellence will strive to integrate 
key aspects of the two branches, aspiring for 
unprecedented offensive and defensive Fires 
capabilities. Second, emerging missions to 
include indirect fire protection capability 
and Counter-Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
offer tremendous potential for synergy 
between the two branches in supporting 
the warfighter. How the branches and Fires 
Center of Excellence approach moderniza¬ 
tion to address these emerging missions will 
shape the Fires Center of Excellence and the 
Army as a whole for years to come. 

W hy should you care? While these 
modernizations are necessitated 
by the current global environment, their 
far-reaching impact will have some very 
direct effects on both the force as a whole 
and the individual warfighter alike. In these 
next months and years, the warfighter be 
introduced to systems he or she most likely 
will fight with for the remainder of their 
career. The introduction of these modernized 
systems will provide several opportunities 
for cross-branch training and deployment, 
as well as opportunities for joint operations 
that have yet to be discovered. Additionally, 
this modernization will present substantial 
challenges to both officer and enlisted 
leadership alike, requiring both to be more 
technically qualified in order to be effec¬ 
tive leaders. 

The Air and Missile Defense Moderniza¬ 
tion Strategy is marked by a complex and 
changing operational environment, with 
increased threats from ballistic and cruise 
missiles, manned and unmanned aerial sys¬ 
tems, rockets, artillery, and mortars, coupled 
with the potential for weapons of mass 
destruction payloads. This environment re¬ 




quires the capability to protect the homeland 
from internal and external threats, while 
simultaneously protecting multiple joint 
force commanders’ area of responsibility, 
requiring 24-hours, seven-days-a-week air 
and missile defense protection from tactical 
through strategic operations. Air and mis¬ 
sile defense has several programs already 
fielded or in development, but generally in 
smaller quantities, sometimes measured in 
individual batteries. 

The Field Artillery Modernization 
Strategy likewise shares a complex and 
changing operational environment, but for 
markedly different reasons. The field artil¬ 
lery must be capable of fighting large scale, 
conventional campaigns against near-peer 
adversaries, but also operate in a protracted 
irregular warfare environment where col¬ 
lateral damage is unacceptable. The enemy 
may remain hidden in urban and congested 
areas, intending to bring lethal effects on our 
forces at a time and place of his choosing. 
This requires a scalable, tailorable family 
of capabilities that can range from near to 
far with precision, and from small scale 
nonlethal to large scale lethal effects. 

Operationalizing and optimizing these 
capabilities are of primary importance for 
the Fires Center of Excellence in the near 
and long term. Chief of Staff of the Army, 
GEN George W. Casey, Jr., noted that the 
Army must possess six essential qualities to 
be effective in our nation’s defense. It must 
be versatile, agile, expeditionary, lethal, 
sustainable and interoperable. 

Air and missile defense and field artillery 
modernization are clearly on the path to de¬ 
liver these qualities. Air and missile defense 
operations are inherently joint operations, 
requiring complex coordination and shar¬ 
ing of information in real-time, while still 
adhering to Army doctrine. Field artillery 
is modernizing some of the best artillery 
systems in the world, to make them even 
more capable across a range of operations. 
Both also routinely execute offensive and 
defensive actions simultaneously, provid¬ 
ing freedom of maneuver and protection of 
forces during all facets of an operation; to 
include destroying threat aerial reconnais¬ 
sance platforms in the air and their delivery 
means on the ground. 

The process of modernizing is and must 
be an on-going evolution requiring frequent 



- 



The Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense 
System (Photograph courtesy of Lockheed Martin) 


ll-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 31 


OaO BonCiaMfe transformation 















technology updates to our capabilities. 
Emerging missions and the rate at which 
hostile entities are able to develop and 
deploy technology require “moderniza¬ 
tion agility.” We must be able to adapt to 
new threats and required capabilities in 
months, not decades. And while remain¬ 
ing flexible and adaptive, we also must 
maintain a logical flow of modernization 
that increases warfighter capability across 
the force, with minimal disruption, and 
avoid creating multiple incompatible vari¬ 
ants of a system. This is illustrated below, 
showing how the modernization paths of 
numerous field artillery then air and missile 
defense programs are being synchronized to 
manifest world-class capabilities. We will 
conclude this article with a brief discussion 
on emerging missions and the potential for 
Fires synergy. 

ield artillery modernization. Today, 
field artillery finds 30 percent of its 
force deployed into hostile arenas. Given 
the heavy demand on the force, it is not 
surprising that the Vice Chief of Staff of the 
Army GEN Peter W. Chiarelli noted that, 
“the Army’s number one modernization 
priority is the [Paladin Integrated 
Management] program.” In the 
coming months the field artil¬ 
lery branch looks forward to the 
release of the prototype of the 
Ml09 PIM, an upgrade of the 
Paladin Ml 09A6 self-propelled 
howitzer and M992A2 Field 
Artillery Ammunition Supply 
vehicle. Valued for its sustainability, the 
program is engineered to improve readi¬ 
ness, avoid components obsolescence and 
increase the useful life of platforms out to 
2050. The program will allow maintain¬ 
ability and sustainability of PIM through 
commonality with heavy brigade combat 
team Bradley fighting vehicle, thus ensuring 
the Paladin fire support platform continues 
to meet the needs of heavy brigade combat 
team maneuver commander by improving 
Fires support response and increasing the 
mobility of the fire support platform. 

Operationally, the PIM will give the 
heavy brigade combat team command¬ 
ers upgraded capabilities including more 
maneuverability, higher rate of speed, 
increased crew survivability and delivery 
of accurate and timely fires when and 
where needed. It will improve operational 
awareness significantly on the battlefield 
and reduce the logistics footprint within 
the heavy brigade combat team. Booking 
forward, 600 PIM sets slated for upgrade 
with the first unit being fully equipped by 
2012. PIM will provide the best value for 
Soldiers in conjunction with a low-risk 


solution that ensures the Paladin and field 
artillery ammunition support vehicle plat¬ 
forms remain ready for the fight today and 
tomorrow. 

Due to urgent operational requirements 
in Operation Iraqi Freedom, the field artil¬ 
lery will find the enhanced AN/TPQ-36 
radar as the replacement for the aging AN/ 
TPQ 36 and AN/TPQ-37 counterfire radar 
systems. The EQ-36 is a system technol¬ 
ogy upgrade that provides a 360-degree 
capability with improved range and ac¬ 
curacy in a clutter environment. The EQ- 
36 will be produced in two increments. 
Increment I, will incorporate 360-degree 
coverage, improved 90-degree range and 
accuracy, single C-130 sortie capability 
and Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data 
System interoperability. Increment II, will 
incorporate improved 90- and 360-degree 
range and accuracy. The EQ-36 will provide 
leaders and units an extremely effective 
transportable system solution. This innova¬ 
tive system supports modular forces and 
ensures operational and tactical dominance 
in a counterinsurgency operation. Further, 
the EQ-36 CTA radar can perform in these 


operations without sacrificing the ability to 
prevail in conventional combat. In addition, 
this solution complements the requirement 
for speed, surprise, simultaneous action 
in-depth, and flexible, independent action 
while supporting capabilities-based force 
development now and in the future. 

Finally, the M777A2 lightweight 155- 
mm howitzer began fielding in 2006, and 
will complete Army wide fielding’s in 2011. 
The M777A2 provides the Army with an ad¬ 
vanced, towed, lightweight 155mm howit¬ 
zer, with self-locating and aiming capability 
that meets increased operational thresholds 
for mobility, survivability, deployability and 
sustainability. Over the next several years, 
the field artillery will modernize and deploy 
a multitude of systems, all of which will 
enhance the warfighter capabilities and ef¬ 
fectiveness in current and future conflicts, 
ir defense artillery modernization. 
Given today’s volatile world, the air 
and missile defense force finds itself in a 
steady state in demand. Currently, we have 
forward deployed or strategic assurance 
missions in seven nations around the world, 
meaning that before the next conflict begins, 


air and missile defense has 47 percent of its 
force committed. Such a significant ongoing 
employment makes the modernization of 
the air defense artillery branch one of the 
Army’s highest priorities. The commitment 
to this modernization is materialized in the 
several new systems that will be fielded over 
the next eight to 10 years. 

As these multiple systems are made 
available to the warfighter, to the need to 
optimize and integrate their capabilities 
becomes critical. To this end, the air defense 
artillery has made the Army Integrated Air 
and Missile Defense System of Systems 
their top priority. This capability is actually 
the capabilities resident in several systems, 
to include Joint Fand Attack Cruise Missile 
Defense Elevated Netted Sensor, Patriot, 
Surface-Faunched Advanced Medium- 
Range Air-to-Air Missile and Terminal 
High-Altitude Area Defense System, inte¬ 
grated by a common command and control 
solution called Integrated Battle Command 
System with “Plug & Fight” kits adapted 
onto individual system components (launch¬ 
ers, radars, etc.). When complete, the system 
of systems capability will allow individual 
platforms, such as a Patriot radar 
or Surface-Faunched Advanced 
Medium-Range Air-to-Air Mis¬ 
sile launcher, to enter the battle 
command network and seam¬ 
lessly join the fight. Fikewise 
loss of multiple components will 
not cause the system of system 
to fail - rather other components 
will step in and assume their role. 

The end-state goals of this transforma¬ 
tion are scalable, modular and tailorable 
air and missile defense task forces with a 
joint and expeditionary mindset. Air and 
missile defense transformation will enable 
the modern warfighter to fully integrate 
in a comprehensive and lethal battlefield 
through the use of cutting-edge, network¬ 
centric command, control, communications, 
computers and intelligence and weapons 
technologies. 

merging missions. As discussed at 
the beginning of this article, emerg¬ 
ing missions may have potential for great 
synergy between the field artillery and 
air defense artillery communities. Right 
now consideration is underway on how to 
structure and resource indirect fire protec¬ 
tion capability as a program of record. It 
is anticipated that this new organization 
will leverage both field artillery and air 
defense artillery Soldiers and be assigned 
to Fires brigades. 

Fikewise, countering threat unmanned 
aircraft systems will require a similar 
holistic approach, involving not only 


“We must be able to adapt to new threats and 
required capabilities in months, not decades. ” 



32 November-December 2009 • Fires 






field artillery and air defense artillery, but 
several other stakeholders as well. In ad¬ 
dition, future radar modernization such as 
the multi-mission radar may well replace 
select field artillery and air defense artillery 
ground-based radars. 

new approach. In recognition of 
these ambitious modernization efforts 
Headquarters, Department of the Army, 
G8 recently completed an significant staff 
reorganization process which merged 
DAPR-FDE (AMD/Space Division) and 
DAPR-FDS (Field Artillery “Strike” Divi¬ 
sion) into the newly formed DAPR-FDG 
(Fires Division) under a common leadership 
scheme and mission.This reorganization 
parallels the reorganization effort recently 
completed at Fort Sill with the creation 
of the Fires Center of Excellence and en¬ 
sures every element of the Fires doctrine, 
organizations, training, leader develop¬ 
ment, materiel, personnel and facilities 
development process at Fort Sill develops 
synergy with the Fires modernization at 
the Fires Division, and achieves total mis¬ 
sion success for the full Fires community. 
The air defense artillery Surface-Launched 
Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Mis¬ 
sile program is an early indication of how 


this organizational synergy could enhance 
tactical operations. The program manager 
for the Surface-Launched Advanced Medi¬ 
um-Range Air-to-Air Missile, along with 
the Fires Center and HQDA G8-FDG, are 
investigating the potential of incorporating 
the Surface-Launched Advanced Medium- 
Range Air-to-Air Missile missile onto the 
High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System 
Launcher. Having the ability to fire both 
Multiple-Launch Rocket System and Sur¬ 
face-Launched Advanced Medium-Range 
Air-to-Air Missile rockets from the same 
launcher type would enhance commonality 
across Fires elements above the brigade 
combat team level. Such commonality 
would reduce the logistic footprints and 
enhance the potential for tailorable units that 
could be task organized to adjust to evolving 
situations. These kinds of synergy efforts 
will be the focus of a follow-on article in 
the Fires Bulletin. ■ 


Major Tony Demond, air defense artillery, 
is the fires operations officer for the Fires 
Division at Headquarters Department of 
the Army, G-8 Force Development in the 
Pentagon. Previously, he served as the field 


support team chief, 1st Battalion, 1st Infor¬ 
mation Operations Command, Fort Belvoir, 
Va.; information operations chief, J35, at 
the Combined Joint Special Operations 
Task Force -Afghanistan. He has Bachelor 
of Science from the U.S. Military Academy, 
West Point, N.Y. and a Master of Busi¬ 
ness Administration from the University of 
Maryland University College, Adelphi, Ma. 

Lieutenant Colonel Jon R. Milner, field 
artillery, is the electronic warfare team 
chief in the Fires Division at Headquar¬ 
ters Department of the Army, G-8 Force 
Development in the Pentagon. Previously, 
he was the “Deep Fires” chief. He’s served 
twice in Operation Iraqi Freedom, once at 
Multi-National Force - Iraq Headquarters 
as a current operations officer and later 
as a battalion military transition team chief 
and battalion S-3 in Tikrit, Iraq. He holds a 
Master of Science in Administration from 
Central Michigan University. 


Editor’s note: The DAPR-FDG points of contact 
are MAJ Tony Dedmond, 703-692-5280for air and 
missile defense issues, andLTC Jon Milner, 703-692- 
6460for field artillery issues. Please do not hesitate 
to contact them for any Fires modernization issues 
you need to discuss. 




The New Hampshire Army National Guard’s new guided artillery rocket takes flight during a live-fire demonstration by C Battery, 3rd Battalion, 197th 
Field Artillery, at the Fort Drum, N.Y., artillery range, Sept. 22. (Photo by ssg Alexander Thurston, u.s. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 33 








A rticle subjects. Fires strives to be 
“forward-looking.” We’re at the dawn 
of a new Army transformation. Many 
exciting things are taking place in the field 
and air defense artillery fields of expertise. 
Article subjects should therefore be cur¬ 
rent and relevant. Writers may share “good 
ideas” and “lessons learned” with their 
fellow Soldiers, as exploring better ways 
of doing things remains a high emphasis 
with Fires. 

If an article subject is significant and 
pertains to FA or ADA and its diverse ac¬ 
tivities, as a rule of thumb we’ll consider it 
appropriate for publication. Article subjects 
include (but aren’t limited to) technical 
developments, tactics, techniques and pro¬ 
cedures; how-to pieces, practical exercises, 
training methods and historical perspectives 
(AR 25-30, Paragraph 2-3, b). 

We are actively seeking lessons-learned 
articles which will enhance understanding 
of current field and air defense artillery 
operations. The magazine’s heart is mate¬ 
rial dealing with doctrinal, technical or 
operational concepts. We especially solicit 
progressive, forward-thinking and chal¬ 
lenging subject matter for publication. In 
addition to conceptual and doctrinal ma¬ 
terials, we encourage manuscripts dealing 
with maintenance, training or operational 
techniques. 

“Good ideas” or “lessons-learned” articles 
should have two closely related themes: one, 
what did you learn from what you did? The 
second theme is: what is most important 
for others to know, or what will you do 
differently in the future? Include only the 
pertinent information on how you did it 
so someone else can repeat what you did. 
Don’t include a “blow-by-blow” of your 
whole deployment. The article’s emphasis 
should be that your unit has a good idea or 
some lessons-learned to share. 

Steps involved in submitting an article to 
Fires are outlined following. 

All articles should have the “bottom line 
up front”; however, to better ensure your 
chances of publication, we recommend that 
you read all the criteria contained in this ar¬ 
ticle as well as apply the guidance contained 
in the Fires style manual at sill-www.army, 
mil/firesbulletin/style.asp for more details. 
We do not pay for articles or illustrations 
other than providing contributors with com¬ 
plimentary copies of the magazine. 


Fires is not copyrighted. All material pub¬ 
lished is considered in the public domain 
unless otherwise indicated. (Occasionally 
we use copyrighted material by permission; 
this material is clearly marked with the ap¬ 
propriate legal notification.) 

If you get permission to use someone else’s 
graphic or photo, especially from the private 
sector, we need proof of that in writing, 
etting started. Select a relevant topic 
of interest to the U.S. Army Field and 
Air Defense Artillery community. The topic 
must professionally develop members of 
these fields. Write an outline to organize 
your work. Put the bottom line up front 
and write clear, concise introduction and 
conclusion paragraphs. Follow the writing 
standard establishedinAR25-50, Preparing 
and Managing Correspondence, Section IV 
(the Army writing style), and DA Pamphlet 
600-67, Effective Writing for Army Leaders, 
especially Paragraphs 3-1 and 3-2. 

The Army standard is writing you can 
understand in a single rapid reading and is 
generally free of errors in grammar, mechan¬ 
ics and usage. Also see Fires' style manual. 
Maintain the active voice as much as pos¬ 
sible. Write “Congress cut the budget” rather 
than “the budget was cut by Congress.” (DA 
PAM 600-67, Paragraph 3-2, b[l]). Write 
as if you were telling someone face-to-face 
about your subject: use conversational tone; 
“I,” “you” and “we” personal pronouns; 
short sentences and short paragraphs. 
Articles should be double-spaced, typed, 
unpublished manuscript, between 3,000 and 
3,500 (or less) but no more than 5,000 words, 
including endnotes as appropriate. 

Authors should check their articles’ con¬ 
tents with unit commanders or organization 
directors or S2s/G2s to ensure the articles 
have no classified or operations security in¬ 
formation in them. Clearance requirements 
are outlined in Army Regulation 360-1, 
Chapter 5, Paragraph 5-3. Headquarters 
Department of the Army/Office of the 
Secretary of Defense clearance is required 
if your article meets any of the criteria listed 
there. Article clearance is further covered in 
Paragraph 6-6, with procedures on how to 
do so outlined in Paragraph 6-9. The bottom 
line on most article clearance is discussed 
in Paragraph 6-6. While you certainly may 
ask your local Public Affairs Office’s advice, 
it is the “author’s responsibility to ensure 
security is not compromised. Information 


that appears in open sources does not con¬ 
stitute declassification. The combination of 
several open-source documents may result 
in a classified document.” 

So while the Fires staff may question the 
sensitivity of an article we receive, it is 
not our responsibility to “officially” clear 
articles, however if we do see something 
within an article that might cause concern, 
we reserve the right to withhold publica¬ 
tion of such an article until it is thoroughly 
vetted with the proper subject matter expert 
or Army authority. But it still remains 
the author’s responsibility, as outlined in 
AR 360-1, not to compromise national 
security or U.S. Army operational security 
matters. 

We reserve the right to edit an article, so 
the Fires staff will edit all manuscripts and 
put them in the magazine’s style and format. 
The author of an article or interviewee will 
receive a “courtesy copy” of the edited ver¬ 
sion for review before publication, however, 
if the author does not get back to the Fires 
staff with any questions or concerns within 
a specified suspense date (typically five to 
seven working days) it will be assumed 
the author “concurs” with all edits and the 
article will run “as is.” 

Except in the case of Army wide “news” 
items, authors should not submit a manu¬ 
script to Fires while it is being considered 
elsewhere. A comprehensive biography, 
highlighting experience, education and 
training relevant to the article’s subject and 
credentialing the author as the writer of the 
article. Include e-mail and mailing addresses 
and telephone, cell and fax numbers. Please 
keep this information current with Fires 
for as long as we’re considering the manu¬ 
script. 

hotographs and graphics. Must be ac¬ 
companied with an adequate description 
of the images and photographer/illustrator 
credits. All graphics files and photos must be 
separate from the text. See the “Fires Bul¬ 
letin Photographer’s Guide” at sill-www. 
army.mil/firesbulletin/photographers. 
asp for additional information. 

ending the article. E-mail the article, 
photographs and graphics to the editor 
at firesbulletin@conus.army.mil; or mail 
them to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, Oklahoma 
73503-0311. 

For more information or general 
questions, call (580)442-5121/6806. ■ 




34 November-December 2009 • Fires 











By COL James Lackey, Gene Kamena and 
CPT Robert B. Lackey 


Soldiers assigned to B Battery, 48th Infantry Brigade, 118th Field Artillery 
Regiment, perform urban combat training at Fort McCoy, Wis., July 23, 
2008. (Photo by MSgt Paul Gorman, U.S. Air Force) 


Colonel Johnson glanced at his calendar; his day began with 
physical training, then two hours of e-training with his second 
battalion, then a web 2.0-based officer professional development 
with all the captains in the brigade combat team, and finally a 
virtualfamily readiness group meeting in the evening. He reflected 
for a brief moment on the degree Millennials have changed the way 
the military communicates and trains — then the video conference 
device on his desk came to life; it was the commanding general 
e are not quite at this situation today, but perhaps this 
example is a glimpse into the future of where we need to 
be in the Army in terms of incorporating the Millennial 
generation. Millennials are the largest population of personnel 
within the U.S. Army today. It is, therefore, essential to ensure they 
are received into the Army in a way that benefits both the Soldier 
and the organization. One important aspect of achieving this goal 
is to ensure training techniques are suitable to bring out the full 
potential of this new generation of warrior. The issue of training 
Millennials is, therefore, a strategic issue that must be examined 
thoroughly by senior Army leadership. 

The current U.S. Army training system is based on the guiding 
principles of establishing specific tasks, conditions, standards and 
an end state for every training event, situation or exercise that is 
conducted across the wide range of disciplines for which the Army 
provides training. The current task, conditions and standards-based 
training system was created by individuals of the Baby Boomer 
generation and geared to train the Baby Boomer and Generation X 
population of Soldiers. This article examines the dynamic that the 
Generation Y or Millennial population is having on current training 
practices and whether or not the current Army training system 
is out-of-date and irrelevant to train the U.S. Army’s Millennial 
generation effectively and efficiently. 


M ultiple generations in the same army. The U.S. Army is 
composed of three separate and characteristically unique 
generational groups of Soldiers: Baby Boomers, Generation X and 
the Millennial Generation. The relationships between these three 
generations are of strategic importance to the U.S. Army because 
each of the individual generations displays dissimilar characteristics 
that must be analyzed for policies and training to be utilized most 
effectively. The importance of these unique individuals must not be 
minimized. U.S. citizens rely upon Soldiers to support and defend 
their safety and freedom. Therefore, the continued ongoing training 
of the three generations within the current U.S. Army training 
system and future generations is of crucial importance to the Army’s 
remaining effective and relevant in a constantly evolving world of 
potential threats. 

Senior leadership of the U. S. Army is made up almost exclusively 
of members of the Baby Boomer generation. Additionally, middle¬ 
ranking commissioned officers and NCOs who serve as the middle 
management fall primarily into Generation X. The most important 
group, though, is the vast maj ority of the Army populace who are the 
junior officers, NCOs and Soldiers who are part of the Millennial 
generation. These junior-ranking members of the U.S. Army 
comprise the overwhelming majority of the Army’s organizational 
structure and are the Soldiers who are on the front lines of the 
War on Terrorism today in Iraq and Afghanistan. In fact, a great 
majority of the total Army 2010 fiscal year personnel end strength 
of 1,111,600 Soldiers, as authorized by the U.S. Congress (U.S. 
Army Posture Statement, 2009), are members of the Millennial 
Generation. 

Generations are a group of people who share a similar culture as 
a result of the throughput of the nature, nurture and life experiences 
they have in common. Generational differences stem in part from 
ethnocentrism, misunderstandings and uninformed ideas. According 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 35 


QaO BonCiaMfe transformation 

























to K. Smith’s 2008 research report, Gaining the Edge: Connecting 
with the Millennial, ethnocentrism is considered to be the judging 
of another person’s or group’s ideas against your own. Due to the 
phenomenon of ethnocentrism, it is difficult for a person of one 
generation to provide an honest and unbiased assessment of another 
generation without thinking his generation is superior in some form 
or another. 

Generational differences also are due to a lack of information 
on the part of one group relative to another. The lack of information 
is caused in part by the different life experiences each generation 
has. These life experiences, opinions and ideas, formed by the 
unique experiences of each generation, play a significant part in 
the generational divide. Ultimately, generational collisions are 
due to the misunderstanding of one group by another, according 
to Smith’s research. 

Baby Boomers are an extremely large population with more 
than 80 million members. Baby Boomers grew up in a post World 
War II America that experienced a never-before-seen level of 
national economic prosperity, according to Smith’s research. 
Key life experiences and events of the Baby Boomers include the 
Montgomery bus boycotts, the passing of the Civil Rights Act, the 
John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. assassinations and 
Woodstock, according to J. Drago’s 2006 U.S. Army War College 
strategy research project, Generational theory: Implications 
for recruiting Millennials. A 
major behavioral characteristic 
of the Baby Boomers is that 
they are relentlessly goal- 
oriented. Throughout their 
upbringings, Baby Boomers 
set goals and metrics by which 
goal accomplishment could 
be measured and determined 
as successful or not. This tacit 
drive for goal accomplishment 
tends to consume the lives of Baby Boomers and sometimes leads 
to sacrifices of personal and family time. According to R. Zemke’s 
book, Generations at work: Managing the clach of Veterans, 
Boomers, and Nexters in your workplace, Boomers love to think 
of themselves as the “star of the show” in whatever situation they 
may find themselves. 

Generation X is the smallest of the three generations with only 
about 70 million members, according to research done in 2006 
by R. Chambers, Managing the Millennials. Children from this 
generation grew up in a household where their Baby Boomer parents 
were overworked and tended to neglect their children due to work 
requirements, according to J. Drago’s 2006 research. As a result, 
Generation Xers constantly are seeking a sense of family. They 
desire balance, prefer informalities and are attracted to the “edge” 
or adventurous activities, according to R. Zemke’s 2000 research. 
Key events in a Generation Xer’s life include the Watergate scandal, 
Three Mile Island, the Challenger disaster and Operation Desert 
Storm, according to J. Drago. 

Millennials are a very unique population segment. Members of 
this generational group share certain characteristics, values, morals, 
beliefs and life experiences that make them who they are. The exact 
definition of the Millennial generation is debatable; however, a few 
succinct conclusions can be drawn based off of broad-spectrum 
consensus throughout the various scholarly resources available on 
the subject. 

illennial Warriors. A Millennial commonly is quantified as 
a person who was bom between the years 1980 and 2000. 
This generation is referred to by many names — Millennials, 


screenagers, the Net Generation, the Echo Boom, the Dot Com 
Generation, Generation Why and Generation Next, just to name a 
few, according to J. Drago. Millennials normally are considered to 
be upbeat and optimistic team players. There are roughly 76 million 
members of the Millennial generation, according to K. Smith’s 
2008 research on Millennials. Key characteristics or attributes of 
the Millennials are they were supervised throughout their childhood 
years and are extremely electronic-technology savvy. Millennials 
are accustomed to supervision and being told what to do with 
every minute of their day. As a result of this over-supervision the 
Millennials are receptive to advice from superiors. 

Parents of Millennials often are referred to as “helicopter 
parents” due to their tendencies to hover around or over their 
Millennial children in everything they do, according to research 
conducted in 2008 by J. Newman, author of Leading generation 
Y. Key life experiences and events for this generation were the OJ 
Simpson trial, the Monica Lewinsky scandal, the dot com bust, the 
Columbine tragedy, the Oklahoma City bombing and the tragedy of 
September 11,2001. Significant to the U.S. Army is the Millennials 
are nine to 29 years of age, making them the targeted slice of the 
U.S. population for Army marketing, advertising and recruiting 
efforts. 

Dr. Jean M. Twenge’s work, “Generation me,” provides some 
recommendations for employers of Millennials. The Army, as one 

of the biggest employers in the 
U.S., needs to consider some of 
her suggestions. For example, 
ensure you tell Millennials why 
their job is important; Millennials 
require praise and reinforcement, 
they learn by doing ... they don’t 
like long-boring lectures; one-on- 
one training should be Socratic 
and task oriented. Millennials 
like independence and flexible 
schedules; they don’t take criticism well; they are very ambitious 
and money is highly important to them. 

he Training Gap. Current U. S. Army training doctrine is derived 
from two publications that are disseminated to the lowest 
levels of the organizational structure — Army Regulation 350-1 
Army Training and Leader Development and Field Manual 7-0 
Training for Full Spectrum Operations. It is important to note that 
both of these publications were updated recently in an attempt by 
senior Army leadership to keep up with the times. Army Regulation 
350-1 was last updated on August 3, 2007; and Field Manual 7-0 
was revised on December 12, 2008. 

U.S. Army Field Manual 7-0 , approved by GEN George Casey 
Jr. and other senior executive level members of the U.S. Army 
who are members of the Baby Boomer generation, designates 
seven principles of Army training that must be followed and serve 
as the basic guiding foundation for all Army training, as follows. 
Commanders and other leaders are responsible for training. NCOs 
train individuals, crews and small teams. Train as you will fight. Train 
to standard. Train to sustain. Conduct multi-echelon and concurrent 
training. Train to develop agile leaders and organizations. 

These seven principles serve as the preeminent mandates for 
all training conducted within three domains of the Army training 
system. The seven basic principles appear, at first glance, to be 
straightforward, but present a dichotomy of sorts to Army junior 
leaders. Within these principles, junior leaders are to train to a 
standard and be agile at the same time. The focus of the seven 
principles is on the training process, rather than the most important 
aspect of training — the desired outcome of the training. 


“Millennials like independence and flexible 
schedules; they don’t take criticism well; they are 
very ambitious and money is highly important to 
them. ” 



36 November-December 2009 • Fires 






The Army training system 



The Army training system is described in detail throughout 
Chapter 3 of Field Manual 7-0. The Army training system is 
broken down into three separate domains meant to complement and 
overlap each other: operational, institutional and self-development. 
The institutional training domain includes schools and training- 
base centers that provide initial entry training and all subsequent 
professional training for members of the U.S. Army, according 
to Field Manual 7-0. The institutional domain is the “brick and 
mortar” schoolhouse aspect of the Army training system. Programs 
of instruction and training support packages delineate word for word 
what training must occur within this domain. Within the content 
of the program of instructions and training support packages lie 
tasks, conditions and standards for all training that is mandated by 
Army Regulation 350-1 and Field Manual 7-0. 

The operational domain of the Army training system involves 
training activities and events that organizations conduct at an 
individual unit level, primarily at combat training centers, home 
station, mobilization centers and while deployed ( Field Manual 
7-0). These training events are geared toward improving the 
individual unit’s ability to accomplish an assigned mission with a 
set of tasks, conditions and standards and a mission essential task 
list that is used as a metric to measure the effectiveness or success 
of the training itself. Moreover, Army leadership emphasizes 
the unit’s performance level achieved at one of the three combat 
training centers. The majority of all units in the Army train at one 
of the combat training centers before they are deemed “trained” or 
certified to deploy in support of the War on Terrorism. 

The Army training system’s self-development domain includes 
goal-oriented learning that expands one’s knowledge base at an 
individual level, according to Field Manual 7-0. This domain 
focuses on complementing the institutional and operational domains. 
Examples of training within the self-development domain are 
professional journal readings and pursuing continued formal and 
informal civilian education. Essentially, this domain is designed 
and used as a “catch all” for all knowledge and training that is not 
covered in the institutional and operational domain. 

The U.S. Army fully realizes the need for adaptive and flexible 
Soldiers. In fact, much of Field Manual 7-0 and Army Regulation 


350-1 discuss the need for adaptive leaders. On the surface, the 
verbiage in the doctrine publications suggests the Army training 
system is on the right track to meet the needs of the Millennial 
generation. However, further examination of the publications 
suggests, although the adaptive verbiage is in the doctrine, the 
practices and actual training for the Millennial are vacant from 
the Army training system. 

There are a few specific programs within the Army training 
system that successfully identify Millennial as a special significant 
group worthy of added attention and effort to accommodate their 
characteristics. At the forefront of this effort is the U.S. Army’s 
recruiting message that is directed and administered by The U.S. 
Army Recruiting Command. The Millennial generation is the 
target market for all U.S. Army recruiting — as well they should 
be. Interestingly, Army recruiters largely are made up of members 
of Generation X and a few young recruiters who are actually 
Millennials themselves. 

ecruiters got it right. During the past few years, the U.S. 
Army’s recruiting focus was on the Millennial teenager and 
sending the message to the Millennial’ Baby Boomer parents that 
it is a family decision to join the Army. The two main themes of 
all current U.S. Army recruiting commercials and advertisements 
present on television and the Internet are family and technology. 
These recruiting tactics hit at the very soul of a Baby Boomer and 
Millennial. Baby Boomers think of themselves as the star of show, 
so including them in the “family decision” of having their sons or 
daughters join the Army simply is playing to their Baby Boomer 
characteristics of love for self and need for control. Additionally, 
since Millennials are the most supervised and managed generation 
in history, it is appropriate that their parents are targeted to influence 
their decisions to join. 

The Army’s recruiting message also focuses on technology. 
Millennials are the most tech-savvy generation in America, and the 
results of these recruiting message themes are phenomenal. The 
Army exceeds the end strength of total personnel as authorized by 
Congress, yet recruits continue to enlist at a record pace even with 
a decrease in available initial enlistment bonus money. According 
to the U.S. Army Recruiting Command, there is no shortage of 
new recruits signing up in a bad national economy where jobs are 
scarce; the Army currently is meeting manning requirements. 

The Army’s recruiting message is not the only program that 
was adapted for the Millennials successfully. Another success in 
targeting and adapting for the Millennial Soldiers is Basic Combat 
Training, also known as “boot camp,” which many have viewed 
for decades as “the most sacred crucible” (S qq Millennial Warriors 
by J. Kamena) of old-style rigid Army training. However, recently 
there has been an emergence of a new training methodology called 
Outcome Based Training and Education. 

raining tailored for Millennials. Outcome Based Training 
and Education is a training methodology that focuses on the 
desired outcomes of training and not the process of the training 
itself (See Soldier training is in for a big overhaul , by J. Tice.) 
Outcome Based Training and Education is the brain-child of MAJ 
(Retired) Don Vandergriff, who has more than 20 years experience 
in the U.S. Army Special Operations community. Outcome Based 
Training and Education began in Basic Combat Training at Fort 
Jackson, S. C., in 2008, and has spread to Fort Benning, Ga., and 
Fort Sill, Okla. Fort Jackson is also the Basic Combat Training 
Center of Excellence for the Army (see Basic training remix , by D. 
Steele). As the Basic Combat Training Center of Excellence, Fort 
Jackson is the proponent for all Basic Combat Training doctrine and 
is responsible for producing all Basic Combat Training regimens. 
Outcome Based Training and Education is a breakaway from 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 37 









Millennials. In this area, the Army Chaplain Corps has a competitive 
advantage because the resistance to change in civilian churches is 
exacerbated by older Baby Boomers and the veteran/traditional 
generation that came before the Boomers. The Army does not have 
to be concerned about this population segment because the veterans/ 
traditional generation members are too old to serve in the Army. 

D isconnected approaches. Army training is provided mostly in 
the operational training domain for the War on Terrorism and has 
been largely ineffective at targeting the Millennials and harnessing 
their strengths. Progress has been made in the institutional domain 
of the Army training system through Outcome Based Training and 
Education, but has not filtered over into the operational domain yet. 
This disconnect between the institutional and operational domain 
is widespread and rampant across the Army. The Army’s challenge 
is to maintain the momentum it began in Basic Combat Training 
through the use of Outcome Based Training and Education (see 
Millennial Warriors, Kamena). 

There are several reasons that can be identified relative to the 
incongruence between the institutional and operational domains. 
First, training received by units preparing to deploy in support of 
Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom is governed by 
a mission-essential task list that must be completed satisfactorily 
based on the tasks, conditions and standards laid out for the 
training. The mission-essential task list metrically spells out in 
detail each task and sub-task that must be accomplished for a unit 
to be considered ready for deployment and its wartime mission. 
The mission-essential task list and tasks, conditions and standards 
are created by senior leader Baby Boomers and disseminated down 


November-December 2009 • Fires 


4 


the goal-oriented training that so many Baby 
Boomers intrinsically and naturally gravitate 
toward because it focuses on the desired outcome 
of an event. 

The major difference between Outcome Based 
Training and Education and most other training 
in the Army training system is the process used 
to achieve the desired training outcome is not 
dictated by strict tasks, conditions and standards 
that must be followed to the letter. Outcome 
Based Training and Education empowers junior 
leaders, who happen to be Millennials, and allows 
them to devise the throughput of the training to 
meet the desired outcome. This training allows 
for innovation at the lowest level of the Army 
—essential to developing future leaders. Out-of- 
the-box thinking is promoted rather than stifled 
by the rigidity of tasks, conditions and standards 
(See Stifled Innovation ? Developing Tomorrow s 
Leaders Today by L. Wong). Since the method of 
training itself largely is determined at the lowest 
organizational levels, technology and innovation 
rule the day. During Outcome Based Training 
and Education, innovation is being thrown into 
training at a torrid pace by the Millennial junior 
leaders and Soldiers. 

Tailoring to the specific needs of the 
Millennials is not limited to Army training; it 


has also seeped into Army chaplain practices as well. The U.S. 
Army Chaplain Corps sees varied successes in dealing with the 
Millennials, but mostly positive training outcomes have been 
achieved. The Millennial generation is vastly spiritually different 
from the Baby Boomers and Generation Xers, and this is a good 
thing for the Army Chaplain Corps. Roughly 96 percent of the 
Millennials believe in a god and 87 percent believe in Christ 
(See Chaplain Ministry to the Millennial generation by R.M. 
Coffey). 

However, only 55 percent of the Millennials attend worship 
services. To address this challenge, the Army Chaplain Corps has 
become creative in its attempt to attract the Millennials to spiritual 
services. One method Army Chaplain Corps uses is offering 
alternative worship service schedules. According to Coffey, these 
unconventional schedules gravitate toward afternoon services to 
attract the younger Millennials who vary their sleep time and 
have problems getting out of bed in the mornings. 

Additionally, according to Coffey, technology is playing 
an increasing role in the actual services 
themselves. The Army chaplain 


services compete with civilian 
churches in attracting 
Millennial attendees. 

The Chaplain Corps has 
wide latitude to adapt 
from a traditional 
service and mold its 
programs around the 


the chain to the Generation Xers and then on to the Millennials at 
the lowest structural levels. These tasks, conditions and standards 
allow no digression for innovation or empowerment on the part of 
junior Millennial leaders who are going through the training. 

As a result of this rigid process, units primarily consisting of 
Millennial junior Soldiers are certified for deployment through the 
use of a “check the block” training system that often leaves units 
unprepared for the actual mission sets that they will encounter in 
theater. The mission-essential task list is used as the gospel, even 
though in reality, for the majority of units that deploy to theatre, 
it is a document that is years out of touch with current operations. 
The mission-essential task list is followed because that is “what has 
always been done” and no further training action is required once 
all tasks are trained to the standards laid out within the mission- 
essential task list. 

T he making of a Millennial marksman. Basic rifle 
marksmanship training is as old as the Army itself and is at 
the core of Army training. Basic rifle marksmanship is considered 
“what makes a Soldier a Soldier.” The Army uses this training 
to qualify Soldiers on individual weapons, such as the Ml6 and 
M4 assault rifles. Basic rifle marksmanship tasks, conditions and 
standards have remained by and large unchanged for the last 20 
years. To qualify as an expert on the Ml6 assault rifle, a Soldier 
must hit the goal of 23 of 40 targets at varying distances between 
50 and 300 meters down range. 

The Army training system has failed to identify that, in the War 
on Terrorism, enemy targets are very rarely, if ever, 300 meters 
away from the shooter. For the most part, targets in the War on 



A Basic Combat Training Soldiertakes cover during individual 
movement technique training at Fort Sill, Okla., Aug. 12. (Photo 


illustration by Jason Kelly, Fires Bulletin) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 


















Terrorism are well within 100 meters and many times at close 
quarters, point-blank ranges. Additionally, this standards-based 
system of individual weapon qualification does nothing to use 
the Millennials’ unique skills. Basic rifle marksmanship training 
is dictated word-for-word, and there is no room for Millennial 
innovation input either by thought or technology. Innovation in 
training more easily would allow quick adaptation to the fight in 
Iraq and Afghanistan where terrorists do not adhere to decades’ 
old training methods for the sake of tradition or deference to their 
elder leaders. 

Deviations to basic rifle marksmanship training are few and far 
between. In fact, deviations from the standard are frowned upon by 
senior leadership. Also, outside-of-the-box weapons training are, 
by and large, deemed unsafe by Baby Boomer senior leaders and, 
therefore, not conducted by the Millennials who are executing the 
training. 

Training the Millennials is an absolutely crucial practice that 
needs more attention from senior Army leaders. According to D. 
Stafford and H. Griffis in their 2008 study, A Review of Millennial 
generation characteristics and military workforce implications , 
Millennials naturally embrace the use of technology more than 
any other generation in the history of the U.S. Army. Millennials 
are extremely bright and are the most highly educated group of 
cohorts relative to other generations within the U.S. Army (see 
Stafford’s 2008 Review). 

With their education and the inclination for technology, 
Millennials are primed to provide innovations into the training 
system—-if allowed. They are the proverbial “innovators in waiting” 
of the Army. The challenge for senior leaders is to “learn and 
embrace their technology; nothing turns Millennials off faster than 
a leader who takes pride in not using or understanding technology” 
(see Millennial Warriors, Kamena). 

ecommendations. The recommendations below are offered as 
a beginning to a long term process of integrating and exploring 
the future potential of Millennials. 

Review and adapt the Army Personnel Management System. 
Allow for collaboration and independent learning. Keep the focus 
on task-oriented outcomes based training, but permit Millennials 
to transition to the “hands-on” phase sooner. 

The U.S. Army must build training systems and procedures 
to allow feedback to Millennials via virtual systems. Millennials 
need to know why tasks are important and how they fit into the 
organization. In other words, the Millennials must receive more 
“why” and fewer lectures during training. Counseling and feedback 
are a must, and negative feedback to Millennials must be couched 
in a positive manner. Senior leaders must foster a command climate 
that allows Millennials to be active members of the team and provide 
them opportunities for education online and off duty. 

Encourage competition. Millennials are extremely ambitious and 
desire praise; competition must be a part of training and rewards 
given to the winners. 

Training and Doctrine Command should facilitate a Millennial 
study and then hold a Millennial conference to announce and discuss 
the results of the study. Representatives from the academic and 
business communities as well as the military should be invited to 
participate in this conference. Arepresentative number of Millennial 
officers and enlisted Soldiers from across the Army should also be 
invited to participate. 

The Army must learn from Recruiting and Cadet Command by 
establishing best practices for training in the operational domain. 
Additionally, the business community may be able to contribute 
some best practices for incorporation into Army training adaptation. 
In turn, the Army must conduct a survey focused on Millennials, 


providing feedback about their leaders, training environment and 
attitudes towards the service. This forum will provide the Army 
invaluable information with which to reshape its training. 

Relook rewards for Soldiers. The time is long overdue for the 
Army to relook how it rewards Soldiers. Medals are traditional and 
should be maintained, but time off, monetary rewards and education 
matter more to Millennials. 

The Army is a large organization that is having trouble quickly 
adapting to change throughout the entire organizational structure. 
Millennials now make up the majority of the Army; unfortunately 
not enough attention is being afforded them because this group 
is comprised of only the junior ranks of officers, NCOs and 
enlisted Soldiers. The power and policy making authority in the 
Army lies with the senior leaders who are members of the Baby 
Boomer generation. Ethnocentrism plays a significant role in the 
Army’s resistance to adapt its training system to accommodate 
the Millennials because the Baby Boomers who make the policies 
see nothing wrong with it. The Baby Boomers created the training 
policies themselves and in most cases found success with them in 
the past. But the demands of the Long War, in which we operate 
today and likely well into the foreseeable future, necessitate 
adaptation. 

Although the operational and self-development domains 
have failed to be adjusted and modified to meet the Millennials’ 
strengths, the institutional domain is well on its way through the 
use of programs like Outcome Based Training and Education to 
hone in on the skills the Millennials present. Much can be learned, 
transferred and applied from the institutional domain of the Army to 
make other domains more effective in training this unique generation 
of Soldiers. Will the successes of the institutional domain cross 
over into the operational and self-development domains or will 
the resistance to change continue to permeate the senior ranks of 
the Army? Only time will tell. ■ 


Colonel James Lackey, field artillery is the chief of the Army advi¬ 
sory group and senior Army advisor to commander, Air University in 
Montgomery, Ala. He also teaches in the leadership and warfighting 
departments of Air War College. During Operation Iraqi Freedom 
he commanded 1st Battalion, 41st Field Artillery in the 3 rd Infantry 
Division. His deployments include; Desert Shield/Desert Storm, 
Kosovo and OIF. He holds a Bachelor of Science in Management 
from the University of South Alabama and two Masters Degrees, 
one from Webster University and the other from Air War College. 

Professor Gene Kamena teaches Joint Strategic Leadership at the 
Air War College in Montgomery, Ala. Professor Kamena is a retired 
infantry officer with thirty years of service. He commanded the 2nd 
Brigade Combat Team of the 1st Armored Division. His deployments 
include; Macedonia, Kosovo, Desert Storm and Operation Iraqi Free¬ 
dom. He completed the Master of Military Art and Science Program 
at Fort Leavenworth, Kan. and is a graduate of the Army War College. 

Captain Robert B. Lackey, field artillery, is the commander of Service 
Battery, 434th Field Artillery Detachment, which is part of the 434th 
Field Artillery Brigade, Fort Sill, Okla. He has served as a platoon leader 
and battery executive officer for 1-12 FA, battery executive officer for 
HHB 17th Field Artillery Brigade, assistant brigade S-3 for the 434th 
Field Artillery Brigade, battery executive officer 1 -79 FA, all at Fort Sill, 
Okla. During Operation Iraqi Freedom 05-07, he served in the 17th Field 
Artillery Brigade as a platoon leader and convoy commander. He holds 
a Bachelors of Science in Commerce and Business Administration 
from The University of Alabama. 



40 November-December 2009 • Fires 




By COL (Ret.) James L. Davis 


T he white paper The King and I: The 
impending crisis in field artillery s 
ability to provide fire support to 
maneuver commanders , which was writ¬ 
ten by three former brigade combat team 
commanders, openly challenges the dete¬ 
rioration of the field artillery branch at an 
alarming rate. The paper centers around 
the authors’ assertion that “no branch of 
the Army has suffered a greater identity 
crisis than (the) field artillery, as a result 
of transformation, (counterinsurgency)- 
centric operations and the non-standard 
manpower demands of (Operations Iraqi 
and Enduring Freedom).” In light of this 
white paper, the Fires Center of Excellence 
and the Command and General Staff Officer 
College developed several initiatives to 
alleviate this perceived concern and help 
combat the atrophy of field artillery skills 
among the branch’s mid-level officers. 

Intermediate level education has 
always been viewed as a course that 
provides an officer the opportunity to 


build a solid educational foundation for 
future assignments. Unfortunately, unless 
an officer is selected for attendance at the 
War College, intermediate level education 
is probably the last educational opportunity 
for most field grade officers. Therefore, it 
is the last opportunity to provide both field 
artillery and maneuver officers the ability to 
gain higher-level proficiency in Fires during 
their field grade years. Intermediate level 
education provides a superb educational 
environment to make an impact on the 
skill set of field artillery mid-grade officers 
before they move into the critical positions 
of battalion executive officer, battalion 
operations officer and brigade fire support 
officer. 

ore skills. The Fires Center of Excel¬ 
lence addressed this perception of 
deteriorating skills by developing the Field 
Artillery Campaign plan. It specifically 
laid out several programs to rebuild the 
field artillery experience base, re-establish 
training capacity and restore senior leader 
oversight. To rebuild the field artillery ex¬ 
perience base, MG Peter Vangjel, former 
commanding general of the Fires Center of 


Artillerymen train at the Field Artillery Captain’s 
Career Course at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. {Fires 

archives) 

Excellence, proposed expanding the Field 
Artillery Captain’s Career Course from 20 
to 24 weeks; Pre-Command Course from 
two to three weeks and Noncommissioned 
Officer Education System up to four weeks. 
Second, he recommended increasing the 
emphasis on Fires within intermediate level 
education. By lengthening the courses and 
increasing the emphasis on fire support 
skills, Vangjel was attempting to broaden 
the professional knowledge foundation 
throughout the force. 

Re-Redding training. The dilemma 
facing field artillery officers when they 
arrive at intermediate level education is 
they normally have come from a non-field 
artillery branch assignment. The normal 
career progression has these officers 
commanding a battery between their sixth 
and ninth years of service followed by a stint 
in an active or reserve training unit, teaching 
at a branch school or serving at recruiting 
command or in a non-field artillery coded 
position. In most instances, they have not 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 41 


QhD QTDOlSaSXDEfe sustain 































Field artillery “re-Redding” curriculum 


Day* Day 2fl Day 3l Day 4! 


• Brigade combat team/ 
Fires cell 

•Lines of effort 

• Decide, detect, deliver 
and assess targeting 
process 

•Assessment 

•“Liberty Thunder” 
operations order brief 


•Concept of Fires 
development 

•Accuracy versus 
precision (Precision- 
Strike Suite-Special 
Operations Force) 

•Collateral damage 
estimate 

•Joint air support 
planning 

•Airspace command and 
control 

• Electronic warfare 
planning and integration 


•Cannon precision Fires/ 
Guided Multiple-Launch 
Rocket System 

•Targeting meetings, 
working groups and 
boards 

•Rehearsal/battle drills 

• Fire support coordinator 
trends 


• Field artillery operations 

• Fires Knowledge 
Network reach back 

•Training and Doctrine 
Command Capabilities 
Manager 

•Cannon, rockets and 
missiles, and sensors 


served in a field artillery unit in two to 
three years. Couple this with numerous 
nonstandard missions, and many of these 
officers end up not performing field artillery 
core tasks in several years. 

To combat this, the Fires Center of 
Excellence developed a “re-Redding” 
training program. This training is conducted 
one to two weeks prior to the start of the 
intermediate level education academic 
year and consists of a four-day training 
program designed to bring the incoming 
students up to speed on current doctrine; 
tactics, techniques and procedures; and 
field artillery operations (See the above 
figure for the program’s curriculum). It 
focuses on both fire support officer and 
field artillery operations skills that will 
prepare these officers better to act as the 
subj ect matter expert within their 16-person 
staff group during the academic year and, 
ultimately, their future assignments. Classes 
use the existing curriculum from the Fire 
Support Coordinator, Joint Fires, Electronic 
Warfare and Information Operation Courses 
currently taught at Fort Sill, Okla. 

Intermediate Level Education Core and 
Advanced Operations Courses. Students 
spend the majority of their time in the 
Core and Advanced Operations Courses 
discussing doctrine, tactics and complex 
problems at the strategic, operational and 
tactical levels. Using both the joint operation 
planning and execution system, and military 
decision making process, officers employ 
current doctrine to analyze and develop 
solutions to complex problems embedded 


in doctrine. Working as a member of a 
simulated joint and Army staff, each student 
analyzes and develops products from 
the Combined Forces Land Component 
Command to the brigade combat team 
perspective. These products include 
identifying the problem, mission analysis 
and development of an operations plan or 
order. 

During the analysis, students discuss the 
various war fighting functions as well as the 
enablers that make a combined, division 
or brigade headquarters successful. Fires 
skills - both lethal and nonlethal fires - are 
discussed in various blocks of instruction 
at the macro level during both the Core and 
Advanced Operations Courses. The majority 
of the learning within each staff group occurs 
through discussions field artillery officers 
have with their fellow classmates as they 
work through complex and diverse problem 
sets. If an inbound field artillery officer 
is not well versed in lethal and nonlethal 
fires, then the staff group does not gain a 
full appreciation of how fires contribute to 
success in full-spectrum operations. It is, 
therefore, essential we bring each incoming 
officer up to speed on fire support matters 
so each staff group gets the full benefit of 
having a field artillery subj ect matter expect 
in its educational process. The “re-Redding” 
program significantly increases the skill set 
of each incoming field artillery officer and 
benefits not only the field artillery officer 
at intermediate level education, but, also, 
the entire staff group. 

Electives. After completing the Core and 


Advanced Operations Courses’ curriculum, 
officers are required to complete 192 hours 
of electives. They run the full gamut of full- 
spectrum operations and are taught by subj ect 
matter experts from within the college. In 
addition to supporting the students’ overall 
long-term professional development, the 
electives provide an opportunity to focus 
on the students’ educational needs for 
their upcoming assignments. The elective 
program supports the awarding of additional 
skill identifiers and is an integral part of the 
master of Military Art and Science Program. 
Electives also support the Command and 
General Staff School’s language program, 
prepare selected students for the Advanced 
Military Studies Program offered by the 
School of Advanced Military Studies and 
give students the opportunity to enroll in 
electives to support their own goals. 

We are constantly updating the course 
material to ensure it remains relevant and 
current and, more importantly, provides 
master’s level expertise. Within the electives 
program, there are eight fires focused and 
related courses that field artillery officers 
entering intermediate level education should 
consider taking as part of their professional 
development. Senior artillerymen in the 
college challenge each incoming class 
to take these electives to build a strong 
foundation. Even with this challenge, the 
responsibility for self-improvement fully 
rests on each officer. All officers must 
look at their respective backgrounds and 
operational experiences, as well as their 
strengths and weaknesses, and select those 


42 November-December 2009 • Fires 










electives that will improve their professional 
knowledge base. 

The courses outlined below all contain 
either a pure Fires curriculum or focus on 
critical aspects of both lethal and nonlethal 
fires that will assist students in developing 
into well-rounded officers. 

“A307 Fires in Contemporary 
Operations” encompasses discussions on 
the planning and synchronizing of both 
lethal and nonlethal fires at the division 
level and below. 

“A335 S3/XO Roles in Full Spectrum 
Operations” focuses on preparing students 
to become successful battalion and brigade 
operations and executive officers. Classes 
focus on the duties and responsibilities 
of an operations and executive officer in 
developing intelligence preparation of the 
battlefield; intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance; and targeting at the brigade 
level and below. 

“A532 Joint Targeting and Effects” 
covers in detail, joint planning using the 
joint targeting model, the six-step targeting 
cycle and the four-step ground targeting 
cycle. 

“A866 Joint Firepower Control” is 
modeled after the Joint Firepower Control 
Course academic curriculum taught by the 
Air-Ground Operations School atNellis Air 
Force Base, Nev. Students who complete 
this course earn the 5U Air Operations 
Officer Additional Skill Identifier. 

“A544 Information Operations” 
examines this nonlethal fires capability 
at primarily the operational and strategic 
levels. 

“A578 Fundamentals of Civil Affairs 
and Psychological Operations” explores 
the characteristics of psychological 
operations and civil affairs at the tactical 
and operational level as well as civil affairs 
units in global operations. 

“A366 Joint Automated Deep Operations 
Coordination System Fundamentals” is 
designed as a hands-on class. It focuses on 
leadership and oversight skills required to 
understand the functions and capabilities 
of the Joint Automated Deep Operations 
Coordination System application in 
supporting the commander’s decision¬ 
making process. 

“A368 Digital Fire Support Operations 
- Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data 
System/Effects Management Tool” is 
another hands-on course that provides 
students with a general understanding of 
the functions, capabilities and battlefield 
architecture issues relating to the Advanced 
Field Artillery Tactical Data System and its 
client, the Effects Management Tool. 

“Targeting in a Hybrid Environment” 


is a new elective designed to study the 
integration and coordination of all nonlethal 
enablers in an era of persistent conflict. The 
hybrid environment encompasses multiple 
threats and is more than just information 
exchange, and command and control 
warfare, but, also, includes civil affairs, civil 
military operations, space operations, and 
psychological operations. This initiative is 
critical because nonlethal specialists always 
will be warfighters in persistent conflict and, 
for the most part, fire support officers as 
integrators always will be at war. The class 
uses the Tactical Information Operations 
Course currently taught at Fort Sill as the 
base for this new course and, also, includes 
more diverse topics. 

The classes cover a wide range of topics: 
interagency operations, partner and host 
nation concerns and issues, information 
operations from a joint perspective, 
commander’s communications strategy, 
space support in the detect and deliver realm 
and working with contractors. The elective 
also discusses public diplomacy, theater 
security cooperation, intelligence support 
to nonlethal targeting, culture, religion and 
fires in support of U.S. Northern Command 
and homeland defense. This elective 
challenges the students to understand these 
complex issues fully and build a foundation 
to combat future adversaries. 

Active participant. These are designed to 
improve lethal and nonlethal skills to make 
mid-level officers more successful across 
the full spectrum of operations. Now that 
these initiatives have been outlined in the 
Field Artillery Campaign Plan and become 
operational, the rest is up to field artillery 
officers across the force and, specifically, 
those officers about to attend intermediate 
level education. 

Each field artillery officer needs to be 
an active participant in the “re-Redding” 
program at the beginning of intermediate 
level education to be the subject matter 
expert in his or her respective staff group. 
Each must be an advocate within his 
staff group for both lethal and nonlethal 
fires during the numerous joint operation 
planning and execution system and military 
decision-making process planning sessions 
throughout the academic year. 

These officers must identify electives 
within the Fires realm that best benefit their 
background and experience. Using these 
initiatives and programs, mid-level field 
artillery officers can ensure they remain 
relevant and current as they go back to the 
field, combat the degradation of Fires skills 
and assume critical roles in fires battalions 
and brigades. ■ 


Colonel (Retired) James L. Davis, field artillery, 
is an assistant professor in the Centerfor Army 
Tactics and the field artillery subject expert for 
the Command and General Staff College. His 
previous assignments include commander of 
the Fire Support Test Directorate; commander 
of the 6th Battalion, 27th Field Artillery; and 
G3, III Corps Artillery, all at Fort Sill, Okla.; bat¬ 
talion S-3 of 4th Battalion, 27th Field Artillery; 
battalion executive officer of 1st Battalion, 
27th Field Artillery; brigade S3 and executive 
officers of the 41st Field Artillery Brigade, 
all in Babenhausen, Germany. Davis holds a 
bachelor’s degree in History from Louisiana 
State University, La., and two master’s degrees 
— Management from Webster University and 
Strategic Studies from the U.S. Army War 
College, Carlisle Barracks, Pa. 



The ground shakes dust loose in the after¬ 
shock as Soldiers of C Battery, 1 -321 Airborne 
Field Artillery Regiment, Ft. Bragg, N.C., fire 
a 155-mm towed howitzer at Camp Wright, 
Afghanistan, Sept. 23. (Photo byTSgt Brian Boisvert, 
U.S. Air Force) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 43 






BH3BonEam& engage 



Winning World War IV 


Part I of II 


By MAJ David Haynes 


T he world is at war again; although, some would say it never 
stopped fighting. The geo- and sociopolitical factors of World 
Wars I and II combined with the effects of the Cold War created 
a climate conducive to proxy wars and limited the amount of states 
willing to wage open conventional conflict against regional and 
global powers. As the weaponry evolved and our adversaries found 
it too costly to wage open war, an age begun where transnational 
groups joined by a common ideology and enemy began using an 
asymmetric tactic to bypass the extant military advantage. 

This tactic is terrorism, but we are not in a global war on terror¬ 
ism. We are in a world war against an ideology bom of a narrow 
interpretation of religion. Winning this war will not be quick and 
will be incredibly difficult. It will rely more on intelligence and 
policing at the local level — a task for which our military in Cold 
War vestiges is marginally suited. 

lashing cultures. The millennia old stmggle of East versus 
West is in its latest iteration. While the hegemonic stmggle 
between the Warsaw Pact and NATO commonly was referred to 
as the Cold War, it, indeed, was a world war as it was marked by a 
time of proxy wars that spanned the globe — so, in effect, “World 
War III.” The current war can, therefore, be seen as a “World War 
IV” and is as much a clash of societies, ideologies and religions 
as we have ever experienced. 

The beginnings. This conflict has deep roots. While it was forced 


into a conventional war in 2001 and 2003, it remains an unconven¬ 
tional fight with an amorphous enemy not bound by geopolitical 
lines. Thus, this enemy is not engaged effectively with military 
power. 

To understand the key to winning this war, one first must un¬ 
derstand why the tactic of terrorism has been adopted by the West’s 
adversaries and the source of radicalism and its direction toward 
the West. This enemy will not be vanquished with the development 
and employment of an increasingly sophisticated suite of weapons 
systems, but in the shadows of populations where terrorist ideology 
is fomented and terrorists recmit, supply, plan and operate. This 
is an environment where the blunt instmment of national power, 
general purpose military forces, is not always the most effective. 

Ideological war. While the U.S. Government coined the term 
“Global War on Terrorism,” we are not at war with terror. Terror 
is an emotion experienced as a result of actual violent acts or the 
perceived threat of violent acts; terror is really the fruits of the ter¬ 
rorist act. The terrorist’s ultimate goal is to use fear to compel his 
adversary to meet a demand. So, we are not at war with terrorism 
either. You cannot wage war on a tactic. 

While not declared, except by the enemy, the war is one of 
ideologies. The West is at war with a foe, al Qaeda. This foe does 
not regard geopolitical boundaries. The bulk of those boundaries 
was imposed by us upon them during the Age of Empire and Co¬ 
lonialism. They are a loosely linked and amorphously structured 
group of transnational actors who see the world as the battlefield. 
Terrorists - by U.S. Government definition - are politically moti- 



44 November-December 2009 • Fires 












vated to compel a government or people to do their will through 
the use of violent acts or the threat of violent acts (ojp.gov/nij7 
topics/crime/terrorism/welcome.htm). To really understand the 
nascent use of terrorism as a means to reach political ends, a short 
discussion about warfare’s evolution is necessary. 

aging war. An examination of the innovations of Western 
warfare and the military revolutions, as posited by military 
historians MacGregor Knox and William Murray in their book 
The Dynamics of Revolution , show a thirst for innovation that set 
in motion a millennial saga that saw the creation of the deadliest 
of arms, nuclear weapons. These weapons, in retrospect, not only 
changed the nature of warfare by their existence, but, also, made 
their capabilities irrelevant and resigned the world to a state of 
proxy warfare, insurgency and terrorist attack. 

The rise of the nation state coincided with the rise of Western 
warfare. As nation states began to coalesce and the nation began 
to fund warfare, professional armies began to appear with a sig¬ 
nificant amount of resources devoted to equipping and training the 
formations. As nation states could field larger and better equipped 
forces, Europeans began to congeal into nation states as a necessity 
for the protection of the people, but more so for the protection of 
those who intended to rule over the people. 

Violence as a tool. The French Revolution brought the will of 
the people into the equation when military matters were at hand. 
Mass politics became irrecoverably important in the political 
dynamic as enlightened people began to protest their status as 
subjects. Violence became a tool to redress grievances against the 
established government and to overthrow it. 

The effect of the revolution in France was to change politics, 
but, more importantly, throughout Europe and, indeed, the world. 
This began a push toward republicanism as a form of government 
where people had rights and were not subjects of the crown. This 
gave them representation and, thus, a say in their government. 

Extending this to terrorists is done by simply exchanging the 
term revolutionary with terrorist. However, the ability of a terror¬ 
ist organization to overthrow an established government today 
is very difficult, due to the innovations in military power that 
give governments the primary monopoly on the ability to inflict 
violence. 

Continued conflict. The birth of armored forces and the ability to 
mass indirect fires and synchronize them on the battlefield became 
the next advantage in warfare. Although memories of World War I 
include trench warfare, combined arms warfare had its birth during 
this conflict. The continuation of the conflict in World War II saw 
the full application of combined arms warfare in three dimensions 
and the enhancement of strategic/operational reach through the 
aircraft carrier and submarine. 

However, as the Western way of war continued to progress, we 
became very adept at killing voluminous amounts of our enemy 
while allowing the enemy ample opportunity to exact a similar 
toll on our own forces. The speed, violence and ferocity of battle 
had reached its highest level and grandest scale by WWII, and 
continued warfare of this type and scale would mean only more 
casualties. Nuclear weapons were not developed necessarily to 
achieve overmatch in this sense, but the first use during conflict 
did just that. 

Nuclear deterrent. The development began out of fears the 
Nazis were building nuclear weapons. The first two nuclear de¬ 
vices detonated in conflict produced the intended effect of forced 
enemy capitulation, but at a horrific civilian and environmental 
cost. Their use precipitated the Arms Race of the Cold War. The 
nuclear weapons went from fission based to fusion based. Increasing 
the destructive power with drastic second- and third-order effects, 


such as the fallout, would create something theorists called nuclear 
winter. 

The Arms Race between NATO and the Warsaw Pact created 
such an inventory of nuclear weapons that the danger existed of a 
cataclysmic event based on our own doctrine of mutually assured 
destruction. The apocalyptic specter of global thermonuclear war 
created a situation where the superpowers as early as the Korean 
War were not willing to fight each other openly. Perhaps, this sig¬ 
naled a potentially unaddressed military revolution, but, for sure, a 
phenomenon of the rise of super power proxy wars. The unintended 
consequence of the effectiveness of nuclear weapons was to render 
their capabilities irrelevant as no government wanted to use them in 
anger. Nuclear weapons’ deterrence still keeps relations somewhat 
civil amongst the nuclear-armed countries. However, the world has 
gone back to combined arms warfare. 

Unconventional and illegitimate means. Adversaries with less 
sophisticated military equipment have embraced guerilla warfare and 
insurgency to conduct open conflict through proxies. Transnational 
clandestine groups have coalesced with political objectives and 
adopted asymmetric tactics against established governments. These 
groups do not have sufficient capability to field an army, dominate 
an opponent and impose their will. The military powers of the West 
and, indeed, most sovereign nations are too massive and powerful 
for politically motivated groups to defeat conventionally. 

It is plain to see why a non-state actor group would not choose 
to wage conventional war against a nation or coalition based on the 
violence that can be brought with the range of weapons available 
to the modem nation state. But from a sociological perspective, 
the terrorist’s adoption of asymmetric tactics can be explained by 
strain theory. The strain theory has roots taken from the theory of 
Anomie created by Emil Durkheim, a twentieth century French 
sociologist, and was later affirmed by Robert K. Merton, a twentieth 
century American sociologist. Anomie is the dismissal of societal 
acceptable norms for behavior when they do not meet one’s needs. 
For example, criminals suffer from individual strain theory when 
they adopt the need to gain the societal norms for success, material 
wealth, but lack the means to gain them legitimately. The desire to 
gain the wealth overshadows the impetus to conform to societal 
norms. The criminal, therefore, abandons the behavioral norm as 
it is an impediment to his or her “success.” 

In the same manner, the terrorist desires to make political change, 
but does not have the patience, resources, legitimacy or ability to 
effect the change through the prescribed societal acceptable man¬ 
ner. The terrorist, therefore, resorts to violence. 

The terrorist also wishes to compel his adversary to do his will. 
The terrorist or terrorist group lacks the ability to confront the ad¬ 
versary in a conventional military fight due to lack of manpower 
and resources. Therefore, the terrorist and/or terrorist group adopts 
asymmetric tactics to inflict casualties on the adversary. In accor¬ 
dance with strain theory, the individuals and the group are unable 
to reconcile their inability to meet the goals of society through 
legitimate means and, therefore, adopt unconventional, illegitimate 
means. 

Criminal behavior can, in some part, be explained the same way 
by the strain theory. So, should terrorist be classified as combatants 
or criminals — perhaps both? We are at war with them and, in this 
case, they are motivated ideologically by a narrow view of religion 
and fueled by hatred. ■ _ 

Editor’s note: The second half of this article in the January-February edition of 
Fires will examine the history behind a transnational Islamist group and present a 
comprehensive strategy to combat al Qaeda and its affiliates. 

Major David Haynes, field artillery, is a division effects officer with 
the 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault), Fort Campbell, Ky. 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 45 



BH3 0iiiCani£fe today’s battlefield 



By CPT Coley D. Tyler, CPT Russell G. Nowels 
and Dr. Phillip L Henson 


T hroughout history, armies have fought more than just each 
other on the battlefield. They have faced geographical and 
meteorological challenges. Examples date back centuries and 
include the Second Punic War (218 B.C to 201 B.C.) when Hannibal 
crossed the Pyrenees and the Alps Mountains to attack the Romans. 
The devastation of Napoleon’s Grande Armee during his invasion 
of Russia in the winter of 1812 is another example. The Punta San 
Matteo — a peak in the Order Alps, Italy, at more than 11,500 feet 
above sea level — tested the Italians and the Austro-Hungarians 
during the Battle of San Matteo in World War I. Later, Soldiers 
experienced harsh conditions during the Battle of the Bulge and 
Operation Barabossa in World War II, and the Battle of the Chosin 
Reservoir during the Korean War. 

Neither British forces in the Falkland Islands (1982) nor Russian 
forces in Afghanistan (1980 to 1988) were exempt from unfavorable 
operating environments. In 1999, India and Pakistan fought the 
Kargil Conflict in terrain with peaks that ranged from 13,000 feet 
to 18,000 feet above sea level and valley floors upwards of 7,000 
feet between India. Operation Anaconda is another example of man 
versus nature. Soldiers fought the Taliban and al Qaeda network on 
the 10,000 foot mountain of Takur Ghar, Afghanistan, in 2002. In 
these conflicts, a large portion of non-battle injuries were a direct 
result of cold weather. 

This trend of conflicts at high altitude in the extreme cold likely 
is to continue due to “hot spots” like Iran, China, Russia (including 
its former republics) and North Korea. The possibility of future 
conflicts in these areas makes it imperative that Soldiers are aware 
of the associated risks and are prepared for them. However, most 
military weather-related planning and preparing currently focus on 
heat adaption for the extremely warm temperatures in the desert 
climate of the Middle East. 

This article explains some of the physiological effects of alti¬ 
tude and cold weather on the body and the mitigating strategies the 
military uses to counter those effects. It is not enough for leaders 
to know what to do; Soldiers must know why they are doing it. 
Having this knowledge will prepare them for future battles in these 
harsh conditions. 


E nvironmental conditions. Before any discussion of how the 
body physiologically adapts to altitude or how it responds to 
cold weather, one must understand exactly what is happening that 
characterizes these conditions. Because there are few negative 
physiological effects below 1,500 meters (4,921 feet), this article 
considers the term “at altitude” to be any elevation above this 
height. This stimulates the production of erythrocyte - red blood 
cells. High-altitude settings are referred to as hypobaric environ¬ 
ments due to decreased barometric pressure — or the atmosphere’s 
weight at a given altitude. 

Air consists of approximately 79.04 percent nitrogen, 20.93 
percent oxygen and 0.03 percent carbon dioxide. As altitude in¬ 
creases, the weight of the atmosphere decreases. This results in a 
proportional decrease in the partial pressure of oxygen (the amount 
of air that is oxygen). 

Air temperature. The air temperature decreases at an approxi¬ 
mate rate of 1 degree Celsius (1.8 degrees Fahrenheit) for every 
150 meters (490 feet). Cold air cannot hold very much water. So, in 
addition to being cold at high altitudes, the partial pressure of water 
(or water vapor pressure) is also low. This creates a situation where 
a very large partial pressure of water gradient exists between the 
outside air and the skin, and the outside air and the air in the body. 
This increases the risk for dehydration at altitude. Therefore, it is 
very important to continue proper hydration strategies to prevent 
dehydration. 

Characterizing cold weather varies for each individual. What 
is cold to one person is not necessarily considered cold to another. 
A good definition of cold weather is any environmental condition 
that causes a loss of body heat, threatening homeostasis mainly 
through air and water. Strong winds are very common at altitude 
and can make the air feel colder. This drastically intensifies the 
effects of cold weather by increasing convective heat loss and the 
rate of bodily cooling. 

The presence of water greatly influences cold-weather effects 
as well. Water transfers heat much faster than air. Cold weather 
is not the only factor to consider. The implications of decreased 
barometric pressure and partial pressure of water at high altitudes 
also are related to solar radiation. 

Less protection. At altitude, sunlight travels through less of the 
atmosphere before reaching Earth. There is less water vapor to 
absorb its radiation, increasing radiant exposure. Snow’s reflective 


46 November-December 2009 • Fires 




























properties also intensify solar radiation exposure. Therefore, skin 
protection, such as clothing, sun block, lip balm and sunglasses, 
is essential. The roofs of some peoples’ mouths even have been 
sunburned because they breathed with their mouths open. 

ffects and adaptations. One of the first and most noticeable 
responses to being at altitude is a respiratory response. Pulmo¬ 
nary ventilation (breathing) increases within seconds of exposure 
at altitude. Chemoreceptors (sensory nerve cells that respond to 
chemical stimuli) in the body detect the low partial pressure of 
oxygen and signal the brain to increase pulmonary ventilation. 
Ventilation remains elevated for several hours or days at a level 
proportional to the altitude. Increased breathing causes the body 
to expire lots of carbon dioxide, lowering the partial pressure of 
carbon dioxide in the blood. This raises the blood’s pH (acidity or 
alkalinity) and is called respiratory alkalosis. If the pH is low, the 
blood is more acidic. 

Respiratory alkalosis. Respiratory alkalosis helps offset hypo- 
baric hypoxia (the state of breathing decreased levels of the partial 
pressure of oxygen, creating an oxygen deficiency to bodily tis¬ 
sues). This offset occurs as a result of oxygen’s increased binding 
to hemoglobin (the oxygen carrying 
component of the red blood cell) from 
around 80 to 89 percent. 

Respiratory alkalosis allows more 
oxygen to be carried to working tissue 
such as muscle to fuel work. However, 
respiratory alkalosis also makes unload¬ 
ing oxygen to working muscle more 
difficult. Eventually, the hypoxic drive 
(the need for oxygen) overrides respiratory alkalosis due to the 
kidneys’ excretion of additional bicarbonate buffering carbonic 
acid, which is formed from carbon dioxide. This allows increased 
ventilation to continue. 

Work. The 75 percent decrease in the diffusion gradient between 
arterial and tissue partial pressure of oxygen is more important 
than the decreased saturation of oxygen in the lungs at altitude. 
This gradient is responsible for driving oxygen from hemoglobin 
in the blood into muscle tissue for use. Greater gradients allow 
gases, such as oxygen, to pass from one area to another. Gases 
continuously move in the body according to these partial pressure 
gradients. Decreased gradients slow the diffusion of oxygen to the 
muscle, inhibiting work capacity. 

Red blood cell production. Another way the body adapts to the 
conditions at altitude is by increasing levels of erythropoietin, a 
hormone produced by the kidney that promotes the formation of 
red blood cells in the bone marrow. This stimulates the production 
of erythrocyte — red blood cells. Erythropoietin levels drop back 
to normal in about a month, but increased red blood cells will 
remain up to three months or more. More red blood cells mean an 


increased capacity for oxygen transport within the body. 

ltitude-based mission planning. These physiological respons¬ 
es are the underlying causes of decreased physical capacity, 
motor ability and possible alterations in mood and personality at 
altitude. These responses must be considered in mission planning 
with as much time allowed for acclimatization as possible. A general 
rule is to allow around three weeks for acclimatization at moderate 
altitudes (2,500 meters) and an additional week for every 1,970 
feet (600 meters) after that. 

To avoid health risks such as acute altitude (mountain) sickness, 
high-altitude pulmonary edema and high-altitude cerebral edema, 
ascent should be slow and gradual, refraining from climbing more 
than 984 feet (300 meters) per day at elevations above 9,840 feet 
(3,000 meters). If proper time for acclimatization is not available 
(which is common with military operations), leadership must pay 
extra attention to the warning signs of high altitude physical and 
mental conditions. See the figure for signs and symptoms. 

Physical responses. Cardiovascular and metabolic responses 
also take place at altitude. Initially, cardiac output increases due 
to an increased heart rate to pump more blood to active muscles to 
compensate for decreased oxygen per 
liter of blood. This peaks after about six 
to 10 days, after which cardiac output 
and heart rate begin to decrease. 

Basal metabolic rate (the minimum 
calorific requirement needed to sustain 
life in a resting individual) also increases 
with altitude with a growing reliance on 
carbohydrates for bodily fuel. Decreased 
appetite caused by being at altitude makes maintaining body weight 
and muscle mass very difficult. 

The eyes, along with internal body parts, also have been shown 
to be affected by altitude — primarily a decrease in color discrimi¬ 
nation of the tritan (blue) color vision axis. This has proven to be 
transient and is related to increased heart rate and decreased oxygen 
saturation. 

Leaders can mitigate the extent of these conditions by stressing 
aerobic fitness. Aerobic adaptations are related to the physiological 
responses at altitude. Thus, emphasize aerobic fitness to prepare 
for altitude. Increased aerobic fitness before entering a high alti¬ 
tude environment improves a Soldier’s maintainable performance 
level. 

Psychological responses. The mind is affected by altitude as 
well. Decrements in individual performance in problem solving also 
have been demonstrated at altitude. IPPS is a psychological testing 
procedure developed by J. Tounge in 2007 that was used to evalu¬ 
ate how a person’s decision-making process was affected in cold 
weather. However, these results seem to be more of a combination 
of altitude effects and anxiety problems faced at altitude. 


“Leadership must pay extra attention 
to the warning signs of high altitude 
physical and mental conditions. ” 



Signs and symptoms of altitude and cold weather conditions 


Acute Mountain Sickness (AMS) 

High Altitude Pulmonary Edema 
(HAPE) 

High Altitude Cerebral Edema 
(HACE) 

Headache, lack of energy, 
insomnia, loss of appetite, 
nausea, dizziness, shortness of 
breath, fluid retention, vomiting 

Breathlessness at rest, dry cough that 
may develop into pink froth, bluish 
lips, nausea or vomiting, headache 

Headache, stumbling, inability 
to perform, memory loss, loss of 
hand coordination, disorientation, 
confusion, hallucinations, 
psychotic behavior, coma, death 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 47 




















These occurrences warrant attention. Ensure Soldiers eat regard¬ 
less of a lack of appetite. They also should be aware of possible 
changes in their vision so they can operate at 100 percent without 
increased anxiety or fear. Also, leaders should consider relying 
more heavily on added input before making decisions. This helps 
to avoid dangerous errors in judgment that have happened in high 
altitude problem solving. 

old weather-based mission planning. When dealing with cold 
weather, the goal is to maintain a core body temperature of 
around 37 degrees Celsius (98.6 degrees Fahrenheit). The body has 
three main responses when the weather is cold. The first response is 
peripheral vasoconstriction. Peripheral vasoconstriction decreases 
blood flow to the exterior of the body, reducing convective heat 
transfer between the body and the outside environment — thereby 
increasing insulation and heat conservation. 

Next, the basal metabolic rate increases internal heat production 
(non-shivering thermogenesis). When both of these responses are 
not enough to maintain core body temperature, the body responds 
with shivering, an involuntary and rapid contraction and relaxation 
of the skeletal muscles that can increase heat production four to 
five times normal values. 

These responses make the extremities (the hands and feet) of 
the body particularly susceptible to cold weather, severely retarding 
muscle function. The cooling of the body’s exterior affects the neural 
recruitment of muscle fibers, force production and the viscosity of 
the fluid and tissues that are crucial to appendage movement and 
sensory perception. Cold temperatures affect the body’s brain and 
central nervous system ability to recruit muscle fibers (signaling 
muscles they are needed for work) and when they are called upon 
to be used, cold temperatures inhibit muscles from generating as 
much force versus when used in warmer temperatures. 

Physical tasks. This translates into decreased manual dexter¬ 
ity and makes fine motor movements much more difficult, such 
as knot tying. If military skills and task performance are to be 
maintained in cold weather, it is imperative those skills and tasks 


be practiced in warm weather beforehand. There is some evidence 
that over time some acclimatization or habituation can take place 
in the hands through repeated exposure and a more effective cold- 
induced vasodilatation response, which is the ability for the body to 
open circulation to the extremities on a periodic basis to keep them 
from staying so cold. However, heavy loads, such as rucksacks, 
can impair blood flow to the hands and inhibit the cold-induced 
vasodilatation response. Cognitive performance also canbe affected 
adversely by cold weather with performance deficits being shown 
with core body temperatures of around 34 to 35 degrees Celsius. 

Studies. It appears race may be a factor in the occurrence of 
cold weather injuries as well. During a study conducted from 1980 
to 1999, African-Americans experienced cold weather injuries at a 
disproportionately higher rate than Caucasians. However, another 
study in 1993 indicated that African-Americans did not show any 
difference in the incidences of non-freezing cold injuries compared 
to Caucasians. But, over time this trend has decreased. It appears 
that it does not play as much of a factor as it possibly did in the 
past. Instead, it found that a smoking history may play a bigger 
role. Regardless, whether or not smoking turns out to be a factor 
for an increased risk of cold-weather injuries (both freezing and 
non-freezing), smoking is not an advantageous habit in this envi¬ 
ronment. 

Believe it or not, alcohol has a place in this discussion also. 
Alcohol restrictions, despite personal opinions, are warranted 
scientifically in a cold weather environment. Alcohol has been 
shown to impair shivering thermogenesis, helping lower core body 
temperatures and blunting cold perception. 

old water immersion. Unlike the gradual cooling of the body 
on dry land, immersion in extremely cold water can cause death 
before the body has even experienced a drop in core temperature. It 
is known some individuals can be allergic to the cold, and sudden 
exposure can send them into anaphylactic shock. Sudden entry into 
cold water also can cause severe cardiovascular responses, leading 
to death by stroke or myocardial infarction (heart attack). 





' r 


E* 


Paratroopers from 2nd Platoon, A Company, 2nd Battalion, 
503rd Infantry Regiment (Airborne), walk in the snow during 
a patrol to Omar in Kunar province in Afghanistan, Jan. 11. 

(Photo by SGT Brandon Aird, U.S. Army) 


48 November-December 2009 • Fires 














An Afghan National Army machine gunner looks back after struggling over an obstacle in the snow during a patrol to Combat Outpost Warheit in 
Nuristan province, Afghanistan, March 2. (Photo by SSG Brandon Aird, U.S. Army) 


Uncontrollable hyperventilation is also a response to the sudden 
contact of cold to the skin, which may lead to impaired conscious¬ 
ness (marked respiratory alkalosis), tetany (cramps) and a decrease 
in the ability to hold one’s breath. This often leads to a person 
drowning before he or she ever experiences other effects such as 
hypothermia. 

If the initial response to cold water is survived, it is very unlikely 
that someone could swim more than 50 to 100 meters to dry land 
due to decreased muscle function. Depending on body composi¬ 
tion, the amount of a person’s fat and muscle can affect the strategy 
chosen for survival in cold weather. Leaner people should stay put 
and move as little as possible to make the most of limited natural 
insulation (fat and muscle). If they attempt to use physical exertion 
to keep warm, they could lose heat quicker because their limited 
natural insulation would be unable to retain heat due to increased 
convective heat loss. 

Larger people have a better chance of employing physical 
exertion in a helpful manner; however, they still are subject to 
diminished muscle function. Both types of people ultimately are 
subject to certain time constraints. They either must be removed 
from the cold water or heat the whole body of water to an accept¬ 
able temperature to prevent hypothermia and death. 

This article just briefly touches some of the fundamental physi¬ 
ological occurrences at altitude and in cold weather. Although miti¬ 
gating strategies and techniques to combat these environments were 
addressed, this article provides a base of knowledge for leaders so 
they can assess their actions in these environments, ensure everything 
is done to preserve combat power and take care of Soldiers. There 
is always room for improvement, and that is fueled by education. 
Dealing with being at altitude and cold weather is no exception. ■ 


Captain Coley D. Tyler, field artillery, is a military movement instructor, 
Department of Physical Education at the U.S. Military Academy. He has 
served in several positions in 3rd Brigade, 1st Cavalry Division, Fort 
Hood, Texas, including commander, Headquarters and Headquarters 
Company, 3rd Brigade Special Troops Battalion; assistant S3, 2nd 
Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery; battalion fire support officer, 2nd Squad¬ 
ron, 7th Cavalry; battalion S2, 2nd Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery and 
company fire support officer, D Troop, 3rd Squadron21, 8th Cavalry; 
deploying in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom in each assignment. 
He holds a master’s degree in Kinesiology from Indiana University. 

Captain Russell G. Nowels, armor, is a military movement instruc¬ 
tor, Department of Physical Education at the U.S. Military Academy, 
West Point, N.Y. He has served as commander, A Troop, 1st Squad¬ 
ron, 10th Cavalry, Fort Carson, Colo.; assistant S3, 3rd Squadron, 
3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment, Fort Carson; adjutant, Regimental 
Headquarters and Headquarters Troop, 3rd Armored Calvary Regi¬ 
ment, Fort Carson; and executive officer, G Troop, 2nd Squadron, 3rd 
Armored Calvary Regiment, Fort Carson; deploying to Iraq in support 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom in each assignment. He holds a mas¬ 
ter’s degree in Kinesiology from Indiana University in Bloomington. 

Dr. Phillip L. Henson is an assistant professor in the Department of 
Kinesiology at Indiana University. His activities and research center on 
understanding and improving human athletic performance, especially 
through the sport of track and field. He served as the competition 
director for the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta, Ga., dealing with the 
potential heat issues involving the track and field events, such as the 
marathons and the 50K walk. He holds a Ph.D. in Human Performance 
from Indiana University. 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • November-December 2009 49 














Periodicals Postage 

PAID 

San Bernardino, CA 


PIN 086024-000 








