Promoting Real-Time Science in the Classroom Using Wireless PDA 

Technology 



March 2002' 



David Matusow 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Code 588 

Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, MD 20771 

David.Matusow@gsfc.nasa.gov 

Joe Sparmo 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Code 585 

Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, MD 20771 

Joe. Sparmo@gsfc. nasa. gov 



Dave Weidow 

The Odyssey School 

4906 Roland Ave. 

Baltimore, MD 21210 

dweidow@theodysseyschool. org 



Abstract 



The year is 20Q4, NASA has landed and deployed a fleet of rovers on the surface of Mars 

to continue the exploration of that planet and prepare the way for human visitors. 

Middle school students at Milton Elementary have been following the mission through the 

media and Internet as part of Mr. Johnson 's Earth and space sciences class. The kids 

have been working in teams to track the rovers as they move 

across the surface of Mars on a scale model of the landing 

site they built from sand and rocks using pictures and video 

downloaded from the Internet. They also built their own 

version of a rover that can be driven around the model The 

time is 3:30pm. Jim and a couple of his fellow students from 

class are sitting in the cafeteria waiting for a student council 

meeting to begin. Mary and several others are on the bus 

riding home. Kathy is in her father's car waiting to leave 

the parking lot. On Mars, Rover-3 has just stopped and 

issued an alert to ground control at NASA 's Jet Propulsion 

Laboratory (JPL). Back at Milton Elementary chimes can 




' Submitted as a "white paper" for the MICCA 2002 education conference in Baltimore, MD. 
http://www.miccaonline.org/ 



be heard going off in the cafeteria, on the school bus, and in Kathy's car. The students 
are familiar with the drill and each brings up the Mars mission status display on their 
handheld PDA device. They've been using their PDAs (those Palm devices that seem to 
be everywhere today) to obtain real-time position information for each of the rovers 
throughout the mission. The mission status display tells them that Rover-3 has stopped 
on the edge of a small gully and isn 't quite sure what to do. The students begin 
considering the options amongst themselves. Should the rover just drive through the 
gully? If it does, what happens if it gets stuck? Maybe it should turnaround and look for 
a way around the gully? Tough questions. Real questions. Real problems. The students 
know they will need to be prepared to discuss the options and conduct their own 
simulations using the models they built in Mr. Johnson 's class tomorrow. Much the same 
way engineers and scientists will be working to solve the problem at NASA. It's a couple 
of days later, NASA has made a decision on what to do and has issued new commands for 
Rover-3 to execute at 9:15am Milton Elementary time. Interestingly, NASA's solution to 
the problem differs from the one favored by the students. 9:16am, chimes can be heard 
going off throughout Milton Elementary... 

Can it happen? You bet. 

The role of technology, doing things in new ways, is critical to the education and 
development of students. Technology offers new avenues for teachers and students alike 
to explore and create opportunities for learning, bring excitement into the classroom, 
extend the classroom beyond its physical limitations, broaden the educational experience 
of students, and help students become their own teachers. The use of Personal Digital 
Assistants (PDA) devices (Palms, etc.) can support these roles by offering students 
mobility (the tool goes with them, they don't go to the tool), and access to real-time 
information (students have access to information as it is created, they don't have to wait 
for it to be made available after the fact). Together, NASA's Goddard Space Flight 
Center (in Greenbelt MD.) and The Odyssey School (in Baltimore MD.) have been 
integrating existing PDA technologies and developing new technologies within the 
classroom, packaging these within lesson plans, classroom activities, and student 
projects, that can help make the scenario described above and others a reality in our 
classrooms. 

Background 

In the fall of 2000, engineers at the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) developed a 
concept for using wireless PDA technology to help educators teach real-time science in 
the classroom. The project is called the HAndheld Mars Exploration (HAMEX) project, 
and its end goal is to use these wireless PDAs for real-time science discovery in concert 
with the rovers exploring Mars in 2004. To this end, working with the Odyssey School, 
the GSFC team developed an application that would lead a student in understanding the 
geo-spatial concepts of latitude and longitude. 

To begin, a sample application was developed for the Palm 7x platform (a specific model 
of the Palm handheld devices that can provide real-time wireless communications). This 



application enables students to access real-time International Space Station (ISS) data and 
leads students through exercises dealing with tracking the orbital position of the ISS. An 
integrated science and social studies lesson plan was developed for middle school 
students to accompany this and other PDA applications. Middle school students and 
teachers at the Odyssey School field-tested the lesson plan and the PDA-enabled 
technologies for effectiveness offering the GSFC experimenters valuable insight and 
feedback for their research. 

This paper will first discuss details of the experiment with the Odyssey School, present 
and discuss the results of the experiment, provide an overview of the technology used m 
the experiment, and finally discuss the HAMEX vision for the near future. 

Experiment 

During the summer of 2001, collaboration was begun between the research engineers at 
NASA/GSFC and teachers at the Odyssey School. The collaboration sought to achieve 
goals for both groups. The NASA engineers wanted to demonstrate the feasibility of 
utilizing real-time science data in a remote environment through unique applications 
resident on hand held devices (PDAs, and in particular. Palm devices). The Odyssey 
teachers wanted to demonstrate the potential benefits to their students in using these hand 
held devices in the learning environment. 

The Palm device itself carries enough capability out-of-the-box to be effectively utilized 
by students under the direction of their teachers. Examples include using the devices to 
assign homework, manage course schedules, activity lists, etc. But working with the 
NASA engineers the idea was to extend these basic functions with some specific 
applications that were tied to more focussed lesson plans. Doing things in new ways is a 
critical component of student education. The technologies, such as PDAs, help to offer 
new avenues for students and teachers alike. Additionally, such technology can bnng 
excitement into the classroom by extending the classroom beyond its physical limitations. 
It broadens the educational experience of students and helps them become their own 
teachers. 

The NASA research engineers at GSFC have been pursuing the development of new 
technology applications for the wireless Palm platform (the Palm 7x model). These 
applications are targeted at engineers and scientists as well as for use in the classroom. 
The mobility of the wireless Palm device, which provides access to real-time (on- 
demand) information, offers a unique combination of capabilities and technologies that 
allow the needs of all these groups to be addressed simultaneously. 

The partnership between the Odyssey faculty and staff with the research engineers at 
GSFC is aimed at combining both their efforts in utilizing PDA technology. The 
experiment integrates the ISS application^ within the middle school science and social 
studies curriculums being taught at Odyssey. To accomplish this, the school purchased 
ten Palm 7x handheld devices and real-time network service for a targeted class. 



' The ISS application is further described in the Technology section. 



Beginning in early September 2001, the Odyssey "Brigantines" (the selected 8'" grade 
class) participated in a 3-month trial program involving the use of these tec hnologies and 
the procured hardware. The devices were 



The Odyssey School in Baltimore Md.^ 

The Odyssey school in Baltimore is a small 
school, grades 1 through 8, for children 
with dyslexia and other language based 
leaming;differences. 

Odyssey has been considering the use of 
PDAs as student aids both in and out of the 
.classroom. Dyslexic children have special , 
needsnot addressed by traditional > = 
teaching techniques and tools.- Using the' 
capabilities inherent to PDAs and 
extending these capabilities to meet the 
specific needs of dyslexic students have 
the potential to greatly impact the ability of 
these students to perforrh in the classroom. 
Beyond the classroom and as students 
graduate and move on to bigger and better 
things these same technologies will go 
where the student goes, offering the 
potential of lifelong aids to support these 
individuals. 



used by the students at school and at 
home to support a number of curriculum- 
based applications and lesson plans co- 
developed by GSFC and Odyssey 
personnel. Additionally, students were 
trained in the use of the Palm's classic 
functions to support such things as the 
date book for class schedules, the to-do 
list for recording and tracking homework 
assignments, the memo pad for taking 
notes, and the address book to store the 
Odyssey directory. A language 
component was also added to the Palm 
and students kept journals of their 
experiences using these devices. These 
journals complemented interviews 
conducted with the students and teachers 
participating in the program and 
supported the overall evaluation of the 
effectiveness of this technology by GSFC 
and Odyssey. 



At Odyssey, the PDA was targeted for use in both the social studies and science 
curriculums'.- In social studies, the PDA was used essentially as a stand-alone tool to 
support geography lessons related to the concepts of latitude and longitude. In science 
class the PDA complimented a study on ecosystems through a so-called "Farming in 
Space" activity developed by the Wheeling Jesuit University . This activity introduced 
students to the concept of the ISS as an ecosystem, and the ability of astronauts ori the 
ISS to grow their own food. The science class used the ISS as a segue from a study ot 
the ecosystem to a study of the physics of motion, in particular, orbital motion. 

The following list provides the specific details of the lesson plan developed for the trial 
program, as well as additional steps that were taken to orient the Odyssey students and 
prepare them for the use of PDAs in their classrooms. 

Preparing for the use of t he PDA technologies 

Step 1 • Memo sent to parents describing the trial program and the roles of students and 
parents in the program. It is important to inform the parents that their children 
will be in possession of school-bought equipment. In the case of this Odyssey 



'http://www.theodysseyschool.org/ 
'http://voyager.cet.edu/iss/main.asp 




experiment, the students and parents were informed that they would not be held 
responsible for reimbursement is the devices were lost, stolen, or damaged but 
that a replacement would not be given. 

Step 2: Distribution of Palm 7x PDAs to students and orientation to the trial program 
being conducted at Odyssey (with parents invited). This allowed for open 
discussion in the general use of the equipment as well as up front feedback on 
the trail experiment prior to its commencement. 

Step 3 : Formal student training and orientation on the general function and use of Palm 
7x devices. This was a more "technology focused" session following the 

general orientation. Basic exercises were 
performed with the goal being to insure that all 
students could be expected to operate the devices 
during the course of the experiment. This 
included the basics of turning the device on and 
off, using the stylus pointer to activate 
applications and enter data, and changing the 
batteries. 

Step 4: Students are trained on the use of Palm 7x classic functions for class schedules, 
school event schedules, Odyssey directory, homework book, and note keeping. 
These rudimentary tools would serve to make the devices a common aspect of 
the student's day. 

Step 5 : Students begin keeping individual journals of their experiences using the Palm 
7x devices. Students maintained these journals throughout the trial program. 

Integrating the PDA technologies within the classroom environment 

Step 6: Students apply the basic concepts of geography (latitude and l ongitude) being 
taught in social studies class by using a Palm 
hurricane application in class and at home to 
track hurricane activity in the Atlantic 
throughout the hurricane season. The basic 
functionality of the hurricane application is to 
give the user the real-time coordinates and 
intensity of an Atlantic hurricane derived from 
weather tracking data. 

Students use personal hurricane tracking sheets to plot the changing position of 
the hurricanes at home; different colors used to track each storm, different 
symbols used to track intensity of each storm. 





Students discuss the origin and development of hurricanes in science class 
during this time using tracking information gathered during social studies, 
videos, and classroom activities. 

Step 7: Students key off their "farming in space" activities in science class to expand 
their understanding of the ISS and further exercise their study of latitude and 
longitude using the ISS application to track the ISS around the world. 

Students used the ISS application to obtain real-time position information for 
the ISS that they recorded in a table. Using the ISS application, they located the 
ISS position on the application's world map display. This position was then 
plotted on a world map. These steps were repeated every 10 minutes or so. 
This activity was conducted in the classroom using a large wall-mounted world 

map and as a homework assignment using 
individual single-page world maps. The activity 
was repeated over a series of classes and days and 
students were lead in discussions and asked to 
consider the meaning of the various ISS 
groundtrack segments collected over the course of 
several days in the context of the physical laws of 
motion. 

Students are introduced to the concepts of Newton's laws of motion, gravity and 
satellite motion through various classroom activities designed to answer the 
question of "why the ISS track looks the way it does". 

The Students concluded the activity by retrieving and plotting ISS positions on 

a homemade celestial sphere to gain a better understanding of how the ISS 

moves around the Earth. Using the time the ISS position was recorded, students 

rotated the Earth to its correct orientation within the celestial sphere and then 

determined and marked the position of the ISS with a piece of clay on the 

celestial sphere using the ISS's sub-satellite point. This view of the ISS's orbit 

around the Earth was compared to and used to 

explain the ISS groundtrack segments recorded 

earlier in the activity. Orbital motion of the ISS 

around the Earth was then compared to the 

motion of other satellites moving around the 

Earth, using the PDA application, and finally 

how the Moon moves around the Earth, the 

Earth moves around the Sun, the Sun moves 

around the center of the Milky Way, etc. 

Step 8: Evaluation and assessment of results from the trial program are collected from 
the students and faculty. 




Results 

The trial experiment at Odyssey, detailed in the previous section, offered many useful 
insights into the use of PDA devices and real-time science data in a classroom setting. 
The GSFC researchers were able to gain "field-tested" feedback from actual end-users 
(the students themselves). From the start, it was hoped that the use of the Palm and the 
Palm-based real-time applications in the classroom and at home by the students would 
add a new dimension to the lessons being taught and provide a more exciting experience 
for the students. 

The principal result was to learn that indeed working with real data in real time makes it 
fun for the student. Real data helps students make the connection between what is 
happening in class to what is happening in the real world. Furthermore, working with the 
same tools in the classroom and at home makes it easier on everyone. Teachers no longer 
have to worry if students have the right kind of computers, Internet access, and the same 
applications at home as in school, etc. With the PDA device, students always have access 
to everything they need when they need it. 

On-demand access to information in the classroom (and at home) eliminates many of the 
traditional limitations associated with the classroom. The teacher doesn't have to worry 
about competing for and scheduling computer resources (which can be difficult to do). 
Lessons can be conducted when it is appropriate to conduct them, not when the computer 
lab becomes available. Lessons can be impromptu. Students don't need to huddle around 
a single computer. 

Furthermore, the 8* grade students at Odyssey had no difficulty learning how to use the 
Palm devices. All of the students were eager to learn the technology and essentially 
taught themselves how to use the devices on their own time and in short order. In 
addition, the students quickly realized the capabilities of the devices and took the 
initiative to use them in a variety of ways both in (e.g., record homework assignments, 
take notes, use it as a dictionary, calculator, etc.) and out (e.g., games, phone book) of the 
classroom. 

But specifically looking at the trail run at Odyssey, it is important to note that the limited 
nature of the "real-time" component of the experiment led to a cost issue. The ISS 
application, along with the hurricane data captured from real-time weather applications 
were the only tools that the students used that required the internet connection service. 
Even the discount rate for the trail class (10 devices for 10 students) ran to $100 a month. 
This on its own is not a major cost burden, but given the fact that it was needed to support 
just these two parts of the lesson plan calls into question that cost benefit. The mitigation 
suggested by the Odyssey faculty is to (1) develop more comprehensive programs which 
involve combinations of Palm-based, hands-on, and more traditional classroom activities; 
and (2) play an active role in extending the use of the devices across multiple classes and 
as a general student aid which replaces traditional aids like homework notebooks, 
calculators, dictionaries, thesaurus, etc. Thus, if a classroom wants to make effective use 



of the connection costs, a more extended use of the real-time component (more wireless 
applications, more real-time data requests) is recommended. 

The Odyssey staff and students gave further recommendations which included (1) 
develop activities using the Palm which build upon each other and last an extended 
period of time; (2) more tightly integrate the Palm applications with the lessons being 
taught in the classroom, complementing the material contained in textbooks and existing 
lesson plans; and (3) develop activities that stress all the capabilities (real-time access to 
data, on-demand access to data, computational abilities, data storage capabilities, internet 
access, etc.) of the Palm. 

To summarize, though, the overall consensus message from Odyssey to NASA is to 
please develop more applications for the classroom! 



Technology 

The HAMEX project team decided to choose a ubiquitous technology that would meet 

the many requirements needed for real-time science data to be delivered to a hardware 

device. Specifically, the Palm 7x Personal Digital Assistants (PDA) was chosen for the 

hardware. This PDA runs the Palm OS, a widely used operating system in the PDA 

community. The Palm 7x PDA specifically offers a wireless technology called "Web 

Clipping." This technology allows for very 

quick transmission of data, in a manner similar 

to the way HTML passes information across 

the Internet.* It is called Web Clipping, 

because the same data that is passed back and 

forth across the World Wide Web (WWW or 

Web) is literally clipped, to remove certain 

data and most graphics. This allows for a 

faster transmission, as well as less data across 

the network. 



Making use of this technology, the ISS locator 
application works in the following manner 
(see Figure 1). A web clipping application on 
the Palm offers several choices to the user (i.e. 
which spacecraft to locate). When the user 
chooses a spacecraft, a web-clipping request is 
then sent to the HAMEX server, where a 
Practical Extraction and Report Language 
(Perl) script interprets the request. The Perl 
script then sends a Hyper Text Transmission 
Protocol (http) request to the ISS real-time 



The HAndheid Mars Exploration 
(HAMEX) project.^ 

HAMEX is a research effort aimed at- 
the effective use of handheld devices 
for the wortd of real-time space 
discovery. It is primarily funded 
through a small educational outreach 
grant from the Goddard Space Flight 
Renter (GSFC) in Greenbelt. MD. 

The initial grant (from the GSFC 
Director's Discretfonary Fund) was 
awarded in the Fall of 2000 and it is 
hoped that through progressive 
advances and collaborations with 
scientists and educators (like those 
from the Odyssey school) that the 
project will evolve towards its primary 
goal of scientific and educational 
outreach with real-time science data 
from Mars rovers using handheld 
devices. 



' HAMEX Website: hllp://hamex.gsfc.nasa.gov 
' Palm Website: http://www.palm.com/wireless/ 



location website/ The longitude and the latitude are then parsed from the returned data, 
and then sent to the Palm in the form of a web-clipping piece of text. 



Liftoff Website 




S/C long&i3t 

(SSFC HAMEX SERVER 




S/C Location 
Request 




Web Clipping Application 



Plot the Coordinates Oame Application 



Figure 1 - Prototype Application Architecture 

It is at this point when the user can then play the "plot the coordinates" game (see Figure 
2). The user clicks on a button which then launches a separate Palm application that 
allows the user to keep guessing where those selected coordinates are until they hit the 
correct spot. The application keeps track of the time taken to select the given spot, and 
who has the current best time. 




Figure 2 - "Find the ISS" game 



' Liftoff Website, http://liftoff.msfc.nasa.gov 



The plotting game application was written using CodeWarrior Version 7 by 
Metro Works. This software allows for easy Palm OS software development by 
providing an environment for software creation, testing and debugging. One key piece of 
literature that helped the authors was "The Palm OS Programming Bible" by Foster. 
This book had numerous examples, and was a good technical reference. 

Vision 

There are several ideas that would make good next steps towards the ftiture of real-time 
science in the classroom. Developing a more comprehensive program would better serve 
the students and the educators. There is a need to develop a full "units" worth of 
activities built around the use of the Palm, and have them tightly integrated with lesson 
plans, materials, and textbooks used by the teachers and students. There is a desire to 
develop ftiture applications that would take advantage of all the Palm has to offer, 
including real-time access to data, on-demand access to data, handheld computational 
power, data storage ability, etc. Some possible examples of how the current ISS 
application might be extended and serve as the basis for a broader, more comprehensive, 
multi-sensory experience for the students are listed below. 

• Use the ISS application (perhaps extended to allow access to more ISS data such as 
x,y,z position information, x,y,z velocity information, Keplerian elements) essentially 
as is with students plotting data on world maps and interpreting these data. 

• Add an ISS viewing time calculator which would allow the students to take what 
they've learned about how the ISS moves around the Earth to make predictions of 
when they can see it and then take their palms outside with them (at home) to actually 
watch it fly overhead. 

• Develop a hands-on activity in which students build their own celestial spheres 
(using a small globe of the Earth, hamster ball, coffee can, and various bits of 
hardware) and use these to track ISS positions. 

• Develop palm-based activities related to Newton's laws of motion to complement 
and reinforce information contained in textbooks. 

• Develop palm-based applications for use in a lab to measure the acceleration due to 
gravity (e.g. the standard of dropping stuff and measuring the time it takes to reach 
various intervals)...these applications would support the collection, storage, and 
analysis of data generated during the lab. 

• Develop a palm-based activity to introduce circular orbital motion. The classic 
example is the shoot a cannon around the world activity, and it is a favorite for 
understanding sub-orbital and orbital motion. 



' MetroWorks, Inc Website: http;//www.metroworks.com 

' The Palm OS Programming Bible, Lonnon R. Foster. IDG Books, 2000 



10 



• Develop a palm-based activity to extend beyond the special case of circular orbits to 
understand the shapes of orbits and how orbits can be changed from one shape to 
another. 

The HAMEX project team hopes that as technology gets further and further along, they 
will be able to accomplish greater and more helpful applications. As described earlier, 
the basis for this entire program had developed from the goal of having real-time 
scientific data accessible from the Rovers which will explore the planet Mars in the 2004 
timeframe. The HAMEX team at GSFC is working towards this goal, which is evolving 
in the years leading up to 2004. As technology advances, the HAMEX team hopes to be 
able to deliver a handheld application and architecture that will be beneficial to both the 
scientific community, and the educational community. 

For the scientific community, the HAMEX team envisions an application that will allow 
the scientist to receive data wherever they are using their handheld device, and then be 
able to make decisions and run other scientific experiments from the handheld 
communicated back to mission operations. This would free the scientist to be virtually 
anywhere, doing anything, and still be in contact with the mission. 

For the students, the HAMEX team envisions developing a palm-based activity to design 
a trip to Mars , including defining the steps (breaking a big problem down into several 
little problems: Earth orbit, transition to Mars orbit, Mars orbit) and setup activities to 
perform each of these steps. There could be competition to see who can get to Mars the 
quickest while using the least amount of fuel. Once they get to Mars, they would monitor 
the rovers just Uke the scientists, performing their own experiments based on previously 
developed lesson plans. 

As technology continues to advance at the rates recently seen, it seems evident and 
likely that this vision will be achievable. 

Conclusion : 

The successfiil collaboration between the GSFC HAMEX team and the Odyssey School 
in Baltimore completes the crucial first step in a vision to bring real-time science data 
into the classroom. By gathering feedback from the "end-user" (the students and their 
teachers), the researchers and developers of these applications have gained valuable 
insight into where the next steps should lead. Such success not only benefits the 
HAMEX team's research, but also the educational community's desire to inspire students 
and educators using new technologies and real-time science information. 

Special Thanks to the Brigantine Class of The Odyssey School 

Allison Davis Alexandra Epstein Brian Gamble 

Zach Hoffman Kaitlin Issenock Rebecca Lavin 

Ian McLaughlin 



