1995 


NASA/SEE SUMMER FACULTY FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM 


MARSHALL SPACE FLIGHT CENTER 
THE UNIVERSITY OF ALABAMA IN HUNTSVILLE 

A CONVERTOR AND USER INTERFACE TO IMPORT CAD FILES INTO 
WORLDTOOLKIT VIRTUAL REALITY SYSTEMS 


Prepared By: Peter Hor-Ching Wang, Ph.D. 

Academic Rank: Assistant Professor 

Institution and Department: Alabama A & M University 

Department of Computer Information Science 


NASA/MSFC: 

Office: 

Division: 

Branch: 

MSFC Colleague: 


Mission Operations Laboratory 
Operations Engineering 
Crew Systems Engineering 

Joe Hale 


LVI 




INTRODUCTION 


Virtual Reality (VR) is a rapidly developing human-to-computer 
interface technology. VR can be considered as a three-dimensional 
computer-generated Virtual World (VW) which can sense particular 
aspects of a user's bahavior, allow the user to manipulate the objects 

interactively, and render the VW at real-time accordingly. The user is 

totally immersed in the virtual world and feel the sense of transforming 

into that VW. 

NASA/MSFC Computer Application Virtual Environments (CAVE) has 
been developing the space-related VR applications since 1990. The VR 
systems in CAVE lab are based on VPL RB2 system which consists of a VPL 
RB2 control tower, an LX eyephone, an Isotrak polhemus sensor, two 

Fastrak polhemus sensors, a folk of Bird sensor, and two VPL DGII 

DataGloves. A dynamics animator called Body Electric from VPL is used as 

the control system to interface with all the input/output devices and to 

provide the network communications as well as VR programming 
environment. The RB2 Swivel 3D is used as the modelling program to 

construct the VWs. A severe limitation of the VPL VR system is the use of 
RB2 Swivel 3D, which restricts the files to a maximum of 1020 objects and 
doesn’t have the advanced graphics texture mapping. The other limitation 
is that the VPL VR system is a turn-key system which does not provide 
the flexibility for user to add new sensors and C language interface. 

Recently, NASA/MSFC CAVE lab provides VR systems built on Sense8 
WorldToolKit (WTK) which is a C library for creating VR development 
environments. WTK provides device drivers for most of the sensors and 
eyephones available on the VR market. WTK accepts several CAD file 
formats, such as Sense8 Neutral File Format, AutoCAD DXF and 3D Studio 
file format, Wave Front OBJ file format, VideoScape GEO file format, 
Intergraph EMS stereolithographies and CATIA Stereolithographies STL file 
formats. WTK functions are object-oriented in their naming convention, 
are grouped into classes, and provide easy C language interface. 

Using a CAD or modelling program to build a VW for WTK VR 
applications, we typically construct the stationary universe with all the 
geometric objects except the dynamic objects, and create each dynamic 
object in an individual file. 


LVI-l 



VWs, define the form, behavior and appearance of objects, are the 
core of a VR system. "From the standpoint of Virtual Environment (VE) 
construction, geometric modelling is a vital enabling technology whose 
limitations may impede progress. As a practical manner, the VE research 
community will benefit from a shared open modelling environment." 
(Nathaniel Durlach, Anne Mavor 1995) 

One of the important aspects of a VR system is the modelling of VWs. 
At NASA/MSFC, there are lots of existing CAD files in different file formats 
for each project. It is very beneficial for the CAVE lab to have the 
capability to import these existing CAD files, such as AXAF CAD files in 
IDEAS or CATIA file formats, into the WTK VR system. 

It is critical to provide a convertor and the user interface allowing 
the WTK VR systems to import VWs from existing files in various CAD file 
formats. A few existing VWs in different CAD file formats are being 
investigated and imported into the WTK VR system. A configured master 
file is used to organize all the dynamic objects in different CAD file formats 
and a user interface is provided for user to access all the existing WTK VR 
applications. 


OBJECTIVES 

The objectives of this effort are to find a path to import existing 
AXAF CAD files in IDEAS and CATIA file formats into WTK VR system, to 
provide a user interface for accessing multiple CAD files in different file 
formats, to integrate the Polhemus Fastrak sensors, Spaceball sensor and 
its associated button commands, and distributed network communications 
into a complete 3D VR environment for space-related VR applications. 


APPROACH 

In order to access existing CAD files in MSFC, several widely used 
CAD file formats are investigated. There are several CAD file formats 
supported by WTK. But, the IDEAS and CATIA CAD files used in AXAF are 
not supported by WTK directly, therefore they must be transformed before 
importing into the WTK environment. Fortunately, an IDEAS UNF to 
Sense8 NFF convertor is obtained from the WTK user's group. A convertor 
to tranform CATIA files into stereolithographies STL files is available. In 
order to generically import various CAD files into WTK VR system, a 


LVI-2 



convertor is generated to transform CAD files in any WTK acceptable file 
formats into either DXF or NFF file formats. The WTK VR system normally 
deals with tremendous amount of data. Therefore, a friendly user 
interface is created to allow the users to access the CAD model files stored 
in different formats. These CAD files can be located in one single diretory 
or specified in a configured master file. In a typical application, the 
universe will be constructed with static objects, while each dynamic object 
will be created in an individual CAD file. Once the AXAF CAD files in 
IDEAS and CATIA file formats can be imported into the WTK 
environments, an integrated 3D VR environment needs to be created for 
the user to study the experiments of AXAF project. 


CONCLUSIONS 

Several CAD file formats are studied and the path to import IDEAS 
UNF files and CATIA stereolithogrphics files into WTK VR Applications is 
identified. The WTK-based VR system is able to import VWs in different 
CAD file formats, such as Sense8 NFF, AutoCAD 3D Studio, AutoCAD DXF, 
Wave Front OBJ file format, VideoScape GEO file format, Intergraph EMS 
stereolithographies STL and CATIA Stereolithographies STL file formats. 
The CAD files can be imported as single file, multiple files located in a 

single directory, or multiple files specified in a configured master file. The 
Spaceball and its buttons are defined for the user to navigate through the 
VW and to issue several frequently used commands. They are also defined 
to allow the user to pitch, yaw and roll the user's viewpoint, to allow the 
user to modify the sensitivity of sensors, and to control the switch between 
ntsc and rgb modes. The network communications are created to achieve 
the synchronization and image rendering between two SGI machines. A 

complete networked immersive VR system with Fastrak sensors and 
Spaceball control is integrated to study the AXAF experiments in VR 

environment. One of the Fastrak sensors is attached to the eyephone to 
track the user's movement, while the other is attached to user's hand to 
interact with those dynamic objects. A predefined 10 locations can be 
specified in a file to allow the user to be repositioned during the 

experiments. A path can be loaded or created during the experiements, 
and replayed at a later time. 

A set of IDEAS UNF files from IOWA State Visulization Lab are 
imported to WTK VR environment. Several CATIA stereolithographies STL 
files from AXAF and TRW are also imported into the WTK VR environment. 
An airlock in Intergraph EMS stereolithographies STL file format is also 
imported into the WTK VR environment. These experiments proves that 


LVI-3 



the WTK 3D VR environment is capable to process and review these CAD 
files and its simulations successfully. 


RECOMMENDATION S 

Due to the high fidelity of the airlock file, the performance drops to 
less than one frame per sencond on the SGI 4D/310 with 24MB RAM 
system. It is recommended that a partition scheme be adopted to allow 
the VR system to import high fedelity VW as well as the real time 
performance. It is recommended that a hierarchical structure and the 
dynamic attributes of objects to be specified in a file to perform the reach 
envelope and human factor engineering studies. It is also recommended 
that higher performace hardware be used to provide the needed 
processing power on high fidelity VWs in the space-related applications. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

I would like to express my great appreciations to my MSFC Colleague 
Joe Hale for his creative ideas and guidance. I also like to thank Gina 
Klinzak of NTI , Mark Blasingame and Rick Moseley of Boeing for their 
time and help to provide the nice working environment. The financial 
support of the NASA/ASEE Summer Faculty Fellowship Program, Teresa 
Shurtz, Gerald Karr, and Fran Six are gratefully acknowledged. 


REFERENCES 

1. Benn, Karen P. The assessment of Virtual Reality for Human 
Anatomy Instruction. NASA Contractor Report. NASA CR- 196533 

2. Helsel, Sandra K. and Judith P. Roth. Virtual Reality Theory . 
Practice and Promise. Meckler Publishing, 1991. 

3. Roy S. Kalawsky. The Science of Virtual Reality and Virtual 
Environments. Addison-Wesley. 1993 

4. Lindsey, Patricia F. Development of Microgravitv. Full Body 
Functional Reach Envelope Using 3-D Computer Graphic Models 
and Virtual Reality Technology. NASA Contractor Report. 


LVI-4 



NASA CR-196533 


5. Nathaniel Durlach, Anne Mavor. Virtual Reality: Scientific and 
Technological Challenges . National Research Council. 1995 
1995 

6. Pimentel, Ken and Kevin Teixdeira. Virtual Reality: Thr ough 
the New T. poking Glass. McGraw-Hill, Inc. 1993. 

7. Rheingold, Howard. Virtual Reality . Simon & Schuster, 1991. 


LVI-5 




