Electronics/Computers 


Software Defined Radio With Parallelized Software Architecture 

Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


This software implements software- 
defined radio procession over multi- 
core, multi-CPU systems in a way that 
maximizes the use of CPU resources in 
the system. The software treats each 
processing step in either a communica- 
tions or navigation modulator or de- 
modulator system as an independent, 
threaded block. Each threaded block is 
defined with a programmable number 
of input or output buffers; these 
buffers are implemented using POSIX 
pipes. In addition, each threaded block 


is assigned a unique thread upon block 
installation. A modulator or demodula- 
tor system is built by assembly of the 
threaded blocks into a flow graph, 
which assembles the processing blocks 
to accomplish the desired signal pro- 
cessing. This software architecture al- 
lows the software to scale effortlessly 
between single CPU/single-core comp- 
uters or multi-CPU/multi-core com- 
puters without recompilation. 

NASA spaceflight and ground com- 
munications systems currently rely ex- 


clusively on ASICs or FPGAs. This soft- 
ware allows low- and medium-bandwidth 
(100 bps to ~50 Mbps) software defined 
radios to be designed and implemented 
solely in C/ C++ software, while lowering 
development costs and facilitating reuse 
and extensibility. 

This work was done by Greg Heckler of 
Goddard Space Flight Center. Further infor- 
mation is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 
GSC-1 6442-1 


Compact Radar Transceiver With Included Calibration 

Volume and weight are reduced without performance penalties. 

Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


The Digital Beamforming Synthetic 
Aperture Radar (DBSAR) is an eight-chan- 
nel phased array radar system that employs 
solid-state radar transceivers, a microstrip 
patch antenna, and a reconfigurable wave- 
form generator and processor unit. The 
original DBSAR transceiver design utilizes 
connectorized electronic components that 
tend to be physically large and heavy. To 
achieve increased functionality in a smaller 
volume, PCB (printed circuit board) trans- 
ceivers were designed to replace the large 
connectorized transceivers. 

One of the most challenging problems 
designing the transceivers in a PCB for- 
mat was achieving proper performance 
in the calibration path. For a radar loop- 
back calibration path, a portion of the 
transmit signal is coupled out of the an- 
tenna feed and fed back into the receiver. 
This is achieved using passive compo- 
nents for stability and repeatability. Some 
signal also leaks through the receive path. 
As these two signal paths are correlated 
via an unpredictable phase, the leakage 
through the receive path during transmit 
must be 30 dB below the calibration path. 
For DBSAR’s design, this requirement 
called for a 100-dB isolation in the re- 
ceiver path during transmit. 

A total of 16 solid-state L-band trans- 
ceivers on a PCB format were designed. 


The transceivers include frequency con- 
version stages, T/R switching, and a cal- 
ibration path capable of measuring the 
transmit power-receiver gain product 
during transmit for pulse-by-pulse cali- 
bration or matched filtering. In particu- 
lar, this calibration path achieves 100-dB 


isolation between the transmitted signal 
and the low-noise amplifier through the 
use of a switching network and a section 
of physical walls achieving attenuation of 
radiated leakage. 

The transceivers were designed in mi- 
crostrip PCBs with lumped elements and 



DBSAR's New Transceiver Architecture will enable the implementation and demonstration of the 
next-generation digital beamfoming synthetic aperture radar, and help advance the technology for 
infusion in future Earth science and planetary missions. 


NASA Tech Briefs, June 2013 


9 



