NASA Contractor Report 201635 


///- 3 3 

0/3 3(3 3 



A Description of the Software Element 
of the NASA EME Flight Tests 


Sandra V. Koppen 

Lockheed Martin Engineering & Sciences Company, Hampton, Virginia 


Contract NAS 1-19000 
December 1996 


National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 
Langley Research Center 
Hampton, Virginia 23681-0001 



ABSTRACT 


In support of NASA's Fly-By-Light/Power-By-Wire (FBL/PBW) program, a series of flight tests were 
conducted by NASA Langley Research Center in February, 1995. The NASA Boeing 757 was flown 
past known RF transmitters to measure both external and internal radiated fields. The aircraft was 
instrumented with strategically located sensors for acquiring data on shielding effectiveness and internal 
coupling. The data are intended to support computational and statistical modeling codes used to predict 
internal field levels of an electromagnetic environment (EME) on aircraft. 

The software was an integral part of the flight tests, as well as the data reduction process. The software, 
which provided flight test instrument control, data acquisition, and a user interface, executes on a Hewlett 
Packard (HP) 300 series workstation and uses HP VEEtest development software and the C programming 
language. Software tools were developed for data processing and analysis, and to provide a database 
organized by frequency bands, test runs, and sensors. 

This paper describes the data acquisition system on board the aircraft and concentrates on the software 
portion. Hardware and software interfaces are illustrated and discussed. Particular attention is given to 
data acquisition and data format. The data reduction process is discussed in detail to provide insight into 
the characteristics, quality, and limitations of the data. An analysis of obstacles encountered during the 
data reduction process is presented. 


INTRODUCTION 

The goal of the FBL/PBW program is to provide advanced technology for future subsonic civil aircraft. 
This technology will include FBL/PBW systems and subsystems, modeling tools, and assessment 
techniques to aid in the prediction of the EME effects on flight critical electronics. The trend in 
commercial avionics is to integrate increasing numbers of digital computers into flight critical systems. 
In addition, the trend in aircraft construction is to use more composite materials, which may provide less 
radio frequency (RF) shielding than conventional metals. An increasing number of high power emitters 
will be operating in the future, putting more high powered radiation in the environment. Therefore, it is 
important for aircraft designers and developers to be equipped with EME modeling tools and assessment 
techiques that will enable them to understand the potential effects of radiation on aircraft electronics, 
design accordingly, and validate their designs. 

In support of the FBL/PBW program, a series of flight tests were conducted to collect data while an 
aircraft is flying through an electromagnetic environment. The primary objective was to provide actual 
flight test data to be used in the validation of field levels predicted by EME computational and statistical 
modeling codes. In addition, the flight test data were to be available to the EM community for 
application to the development of other computational electromagnetic techniques and analyses. This 



paper describes the software for the data acquisition system used in the series of fly-by tests, and the 
methodology and software employed for the data reduction process. The flight test raw data were 
reduced to files containing columnar text that are organized by frequency, flight path, sensor, and time. 
The files contain the time of acquisition, the maximum levels detected by each sensor, and the aircraft 
position information at the time the field data were recorded. The data reside in a database that will be 
made available via a World Wide Web page. Of the original 70 Mbytes of raw data, 36 Mbytes of 
reduced data were produced. The original plan called for acquiring measurements in five different 
frequency bands, HF, VHF, UHF, S-Band, and C-Band; however, due to weather and time constraints, no 
S-Band data were taken. Frequencies were chosen based on available transmitter sources at the NASA 
Wallops Flight Facility and the Voice of America, Greenville, North Carolina. Data were collected at the 
sites at frequencies of 25 MHz, 173 MHz, 430 MHz, and 5400 MHz. The HF and VHF data were 
collected from a source emitting a continuous wave (CW), and the UHF and C-Band source emitted a 
pulsed signal. A flight test plan gives further details on the series of flight test experiments and 
locations. 

The author would like to acknowledge the guidance and contributions of both present and past team 
members. These members are Messrs. Kenneth Dudley, Charles Meissner, and Hal Carney, of NASA 
Langley Research Center, and Mr. Larry Corsa of Hewlett Packard. Also, credit is given to the NASA 
757 crew members, the Aircraft Support Branch, and the Operations Engineering Branch for their support 
of the aircraft. 


FLIGHT TEST EXPERIMENT 
Configuration: 

The flight test data acquisition system was fully automated to allow for the acquisition of the greatest 
amount of information. Measurements of internal fields, external fields, and induced currents were 
acquired by multiplexing the sensors to the instruments by means of a switching matrix. Switching 
matrix details can be found in the working document entitled “NASA FBL/PBW Program NASA Boeing 
757 HIRF Test Plan Flight Tests”. The data acquisition (DAQ) and control system structure are 
presented in Figure 1. The chart illustrates the interfaces between the software and hardware of the 
system, as well as the control and data flow. This discussion will concentrate only on the devices utilized 
by the data acquisition and control software. 

The flight test instrumentation included a pair of HP8560E spectrum analyzers, later referenced as SA1 
and SA2, and two channels of an HP54710 digital oscilloscope, later referenced as DS1 and DS2. An HP 
382 computer controller was used to control and access the measurement instruments via a General 
Purpose Interface Bus (GPIB). The aircraft ARINC 429 receiver and the global positioning system (GPS) 
receiver were accessed by the controller via a VXI bus and an RS232 serial port. Sensors on the aircraft 


2 



included VHF and UHF external antennas, a cabin long wire, a cabin D-Dot, an electronics bay D-Dot, a 
flight deck D-Dot, a cabin 1-320, and an electronics bay 1-320. The sensors were switched to the 
appropriate instruments in a predefined order. Figure 1 illustrates in some detail the various functions 
performed by the control software, including initialization, instrument set up, and continuous data 
acquisition. Details beyond the scope of this paper are provided in the previously mentioned flight test 
plan. The test plan discusses the complete flight test system including instrumentation, sensors, 
switching matrix, attenuators, and amplifiers. 



Figure 1: Control and Data Acquisiton System Structure Chart 


3 




















Initialization and Setup: 


The software initialization functions included initializing processes to read from the ARINC 429 receiver 
and GPS receiver. The processes ran continuously, writing data into shared memory, where the main 
data acquisition software could retrieve the information and write it to disk. In addition, part of a 
configuration parameter table, presented in Figure 2, was initiated, verified, and recorded. The table 
contained instrument parameters and sensor switching order information. Elements of the configuration 
parameter table were used to set up the instruments and control the flow of data acquisition. The 
“Measurement Number” was used to determine data acquisition order, and the “Sensor” and “Instrument” 
fields were used to determine switching parameters. Input for controlling attenuation levels, trigger 
levels, and sensitivity levels were entered here. 


Measurement Number =1-1 
Sensor = VHF 
Instrument = Scope-3 
Attenuation = 0 dB 
Sensitivity = 20 mV/div 
Noise = 10 mV 
Trigger Level = 60 mV 


Figure 2 - A Portion of the Configuration Parameter Table 


The pair of spectrum analyzers and the digital scope were set up by using the parameters given in Figure 
3. For the collection of data within the HF and VHF bands, the spectrum analyzer was considered to be 
more sensitive and therefore the primary measurement instrument. However, since the UHF and C-Band 
data were collected from a pulsed RF source, the digital scope was considered the primary instrument. 
Characteristics of the digital scope allowed measurement of the time signature, which was needed to 
determine pulse rise time. Setting the spectrum analyzers to a zero span established an amplitude versus 
time mode. The result was that only the power levels at the frequency of interest were measured. After 
set up, the state of the digital scope was saved in the instrument’s preamble and then written to a file. 

The preamble included the scaling parameters, x and y origins, and x and y increments. The values were 
of particular importance to the data reduction computation that converted data from binary to scaled 
decimal format. During set up, DS2 was configured to trigger on DS1. If DS1 did not detect the 
assigned trigger level, it automatically triggered after 30 ms. 


4 



Spectrum Analyzer Parameters 


Digital Scope Parameters 

Center Frequency = frequency of interest 


Timebase Reference = .2us (horizontal) 

Frequency Span = 0 Hz 


Vertical Scale = 50 mV/div 

Resolution Bandwidth = 100 KHz 


Sample Rate = 4 Ghz 

Sweep Time = 50 ms 
Trace Data Format = binary 
Mode = single sweep 


Trigger Level = 60 mV 


Figure 3. Spectrum Analyzer and Digital Scope Setup Parameters. 

Data Acquisition: 

As illustrated in Figure 1, data acquisition occurs continuously during each test run, looping until 
stopped. A test run is defined as a flight test that is linked to a specified flight path, date, and time. First, 
the sensors are switched to the appropriate instruments utilizing the switching matrix, and the attenuators 
are set to a level defined in the configuration parameter table. After a settling time, data are acquired 
from the GPS receiver, the ARINC receiver, SA1, SA2, DS1, and DS2. It requires approximately two 
seconds to cycle through all the sensors, both switching and acquiring data. That time increment is 
defined as an “epoch”. Instrument data are written to files that are marked as either containing spectrum 
analyzer data or digital scope data. The results are spectrum analyzer data and digital scope data for each 
sensor. Each data file contains GPS and ARINC data, and two binary blocks of instrument data, 
waveform or spectrum. The acquisition process continues for an entire data run until stopped. The 
flight test plan illustrates several different flight paths of differing lengths. The result is that the data for 
differing data runs varies in the number of epochs and in the number of data files generated. Forty nine 
of the 56 test runs are considered valid and complete. 


DATA REDUCTION 
Design: 

The basic philosophy for the data reduction process was to verify the data at each reduction step by 
displaying it, analyzing it, and correlating it. By using this philosophy, the initial approach involved 
converting the binary data to scaled decimal format for each sensor and plotting waveforms and spectra 
to determine completeness, consistency, and validity of data. To accomplish this, display and analysis 
tools were developed in software. By using the display tools, the raw, transformed, and filtered DS 
waveforms were viewed. That allowed for a quick check of the data to determine missing or clipped 
data, and a relative comparison of sensor levels with respect to aircraft position. 


5 




Figure 4 presents the complete data reduction process, beginning with the raw data and ending with data 
plots and evaluations for each sensor. The process was developed and tested using the VHF data set. At 
each step in the process, it is possible to display the data for evaluation. To corroborate the accuracy of 
the measurements, the DS and SA data plots for a single sensor at a particular time are compared for 
similar patterns and levels. As the Figure shows, the resulting VHF and HF portion of the database is 
generated from the SA data for each sensor. The process requires that the digital scope data be 
incorporated into the UHF and C-Band portion of the database. From that database, plots are generated 
and examined for reasonableness and accuracy. 


Digital Oscilloscope Sensor Data Reduction 



Spectrum Analyzer Sensor Data Reduction 


Cal'd Database 



Correlation 



Figure 4: Data Reduction Process Data Flow Diagram 


6 





The objective of the reduction process is to convert the raw binary data recorded during each test run to a 
format usable for EME modeling and analysis code validation. The raw data are organized into HF, 
VHF, UHF, and C band sets of data runs. The raw data contain SA and DS data files that are organized 
and mapped to particular sensors. During data collection, sensors are switched to specific instruments in 
a predetermined order as defined by the configuration parameter table. The data extracted from each raw 
data file during the data reduction process are mapped to the appropriate sensor. The result is reduced 
data organized by sensors for each test run. 


Data Reduction Tools: 

The data reduction process was initially defined using the VHF data set, since it is the largest, most 
complete set, and contains CW data. Minor changes to the process were applied to data of different 
frequencies. Software prototypes were written to explore methods for extracting, converting, correlating, 
plotting, and analyzing the data for each sensor. The process required constant observation and 
evaluation of the data to determine the best techniques for producing reliable and valid data. The 
prototypes were quickly developed to display and analyze data. 

The Appendix contains an illustration of an actual computer display created by one of the software tools. 
It shows the raw time domain waveform, frequency domain, and filtered spectrum data from the two 
digital scope channels. Also displayed are the aircraft position data and the portion of the configuration 
parameter table that applies to the related instrument data. A similar display can be applied to the 
spectrum analyzer data. The individual software tools provided the basis for development of a data 
reduction tool set for analysis and reduction of the flight test data. All software was developed using HP 
VEEtest and the C language on an HP 382 workstation running the HP-UX operating system. 

Obstacles and Observations: 

During the development of the reduction process for the flight test data, analyses were performed to 
verify the accuracy of the instrument measurements. That involved comparing the DS data of a sensor 
with the SA data of the same sensor. The evaluation was initially performed using the VHF external 
antenna data from the VHF data set as more data were available for the sensor. The process followed 
that in Figure 4, "Digital Oscilloscope Sensor Data Reduction”, where the DS data were transformed, 
filtered, and the amplitude level extracted at a frequency of 173 MHz. The process proceeded through 
the data for an entire test run, and wrote the values to a file. The DS data from the file were then plotted. 
The SA data for the same sensor and test run were reduced to extract and save the maximum values of 
the data to a file. The result was two data files, one containing DS values and the other SA values for one 
sensor across one test run. The SA data were then plotted against the DS data. The method was extended 
to include the other sensors in the data set 


7 



While most of the DS and SA data plots produced favorable comparisons, there were instances where the 
DS measurements did not closely agree in magnitude with the SA measurements. Further investigation 
revealed that during actual flight test data acquisition, a command was sent to set the DS vertical scaling 
levels. Sometimes that resulted in changes to the levels. It is believed that measurements were acquired 
before the instrument completed executing the scale command. If the scaling level were changing, the 
data acquired has shown to be suspect. That event, however, only affects half of the DS VHF antenna 
measurements, the DS flight deck D- Dot 60 measurements, and the DS cabin D-Dot 60 measurements. 
Out of the seven different sensors read during a single VHF test run, only the DS measurements of two 
sensors are questionable. That analysis was also applied to the other test bands. The HF data set proved 
to be similar to the VHF data set. Due to time constraints, a study of the results of the UHF data set and 
C-Band data set is incomplete. 

Since the primary measurement instrument for the HF and VHF bands was the spectrum analyzer, the 
data sets were reduced by using the acquired spectrum analyzer data and are included in the database. 

The reduced UHF and C-Band data sets will require additional study. Since the data sets contain pulsed 
data, and the DS was considered the primary instrument, further study and verification is considered 
fundamental. At this time, the database contains 41 test runs of reduced data acquired by the spectrum 
analyzer for the VHF and HF data sets. It is expected that additional data will be added as further 
evaluations are completed. 


Database Structure: 

Using the data reduction process as previously described, all sensor data collected via a spectrum 
analyzer from the HF and VHF frequency bands were processed and written to data files. The files were 
organized by frequency bands, test runs, and sensors. Included within each file in columnar text format 
and in sequential order were the measured levels, time, and aircraft position data for one test run. The 
data were recorded in seven columns, which are identified as follows: 

Measured Time Latitude Longitude Bearing Distance Altitude 

(V/m) (hhmmss) (deg, min) (deg, min) (deg) (nautical miles) (AGLfeet) 

Data file names reflect the type of sensor data contained in the file: 


vhf.dat 

External VHF antenna 

uhf.dat 

External UHF antenna 

clw.dat 

Cabin long wire 

fd60.dat 

Flight deck D-Dot 60 

cd60.dat 

Cabin D-Dot 60 


8 



ed60.dat Electronics bay D-Dot 60 

ci320.dat Cabin 1-320 

ei320.dat Electronics bay 1-320 

CONCLUSIONS 

The collection of EME data during the NASA B757 flight tests was completed in 1995. The data 
acquisition and control software used during the test provided extensive automation of the process. A 
data reduction process was developed to reduce the flight data to a form that could be used to validate 
EME modeling predictions. The process was intended to be a rigorous application of reduction methods 
and analyses. The VHF data set was initially used to develop the reduction process, which was later 
extended to the other data sets. Observations during the reduction process revealed valid digital scope 
and spectrum analyzer measurements for both the VHF and HF data sets with the exception of the DS 
measurements from two of the sensors. The database was entirely populated with the sound data. No 
questionable data was included. The reduction of the VHF and HF data sets were completed and placed 
into a database that will soon be available. The UHF and C-Band data have undergone part of the 
reduction process, but require further study. 


9 



APPENDIX 


Data Reduction Display Tool 












REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 
OMBNo. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden lor this collection of information ts estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the lime lor reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing me collection of information. Send comments regarding mis burden estimate or any other aspect of thrs 
collection of information, including suggesiions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate tor Information Operations and Reports. 1215 Jefferson Davis 
Highway. Suite 1204. Arlington. VA 22202*4302. and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduclion Project (0704-0188). Washington. DC 20503 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

December 1996 Contractor Report 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

A Description of the Software Element of the NASA EME Flight Tests 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

Contract 
NASI -19000 
WU 505-64-10-01 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Sandra V. Koppen 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Lockheed Martin 
Engineering and Sciences Co. 

144 Research Dr. 

Hampton, VA 23666 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Langley Research Center 
Hampton, VA 23681 -0001 

10. SPONSORING / MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

NASA CR-201635 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Langley Technical Monitor Celeste Belcastro 

12*. DISTRIBUTION /AVAILABILfTY STATEMENT 

Unclassified - Unlimited 
Subject Category 33 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

In support of NASA's Fly-By-Light/Power-By Wire (FBL/PBW) program, a series of flight tests were conducted by 
NASA Langley Research Center in February 1995. The NASA Boeing 757 was flown past known RF 
transmitters to measure both external and internal radiated fields. The aircraft was instrumented with 
strategically located sensors for acquiring data on shielding effectiveness and internal coupling. The data are 
intended to support computational and statistical modeling codes used to predict internal field levels of an 
electromagnetic environment (EME) on aircraft. 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Electromagnetic Environment (EME), Fly-By-Light (FBL), Power-By-Wire (PBW), 
software, data reduction 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 
11 

16. PRICE CODE 

A03 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 


Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 


298*102 










