5"<S 9 s 

!V91-11698 

u p j 

AN EXPERT SYSTEM FOR WIND SHEAR AVOIDANCE 

Robert F. Stengel and D. Alexander Stratton 
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY 

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 
Princeton, New Jersey 08544 


ABSTRACT 


Flight in strong wind shears, especially microbursts, poses 
a unique and severe hazard to aircraft. The disturbance caused 
by the wind field may literally exceed the performance character- 
istics of the aircraft, making safe transit impossible even with 
optimal guidance and control strategies. An unusual degree of 
piloting skill may be required to successfully elude danger. 
Only the best pilots may be able to cope with strong wind shears, 
but even they may be unable to safely penetrate extreme wind 
shears. Nevertheless, planes fly in moderate wind shear all the 
time; pilots learn to handle crosswinds, gustiness, and moderate 
frontal activity. The problem is that microbursts are random, 
rare phenomena; pilots do not develop the needed skills for 
coping with wind shear through normal experience. The typical 
pilot is likely to be confronted with a life-threatening wind 
shear only once or twice in an entire flying career; hence, it is 
unlikely that he or she can learn all the important signs of wind 
shear and maintain a high level of proficiency in the proper con- 
trol procedures. 

On— board computation provides an excellent opportunity to 
assist the pilot in surviving encounters with severe wind shears, 
but the logic that must be executed in real time is complex and 
must have sufficient inputs for framing decisions about appropri- 
ate control actions. The computer program (s) and hardware to 
perform this task must have attributes of expert systems and con- 
trol systems, they must account for the limitations of aircraft 
performance, and they must operate in real time. At least as 
important as its technical specifications, the on— board system 
must provide a satisfactory interface with the flight crew, which 
bears the ultimate responsibility for assuring safety. This 
means not only that the system must deduce near-optimal strateg- 
ies and tactics for emergency situations but that it must dis- 
tinguish between truly hazardous conditions and the more likely 
a lternatives associated with normal aircraft operations. 

A program to investigate ways of protecting against the 
adverse effects of wind shear during aircraft takeoffs and land- 
ings has begun, with current emphasis on developing an expert 
system for wind shear avoidance. Our principal objectives are to 


PR 




ROT FILMED 


515 



develop methods for assessing the likelihood of wind shear 
encounter (based on real-time information in the cockpit) , for 
deciding what flight path to pursue (e.g., takeoff abort, landing 
go-around, or normal climbout or glide slope) , and for using the 
aircraft's full potential for combating wind shear. This study 
requires the definition of both deterministic and statistical 
techniques for fusing internal and external information, for 
making "go/no-go M decisions, and for generating commands to the 
aircraft's autopilot and flight directors for both automatic and 
manually controlled flight. 

The expert system for pilot aiding is based on the results 
of the FAA Windshear Training Aids Program, a two-volume manual 
that presents an overview, pilot guide, training program, and 
substantiating data provides guidelines for this initial develop- 
ment. The WindShear Safety Advisor expert system currently con- 
tains over 140 rules and is coded in the LISP programming lang- 
uage for implementation on a Symbolics 3670 LISP Machine. 


BACKGROUND 


Flight in strong wind shears, especially microbursts, poses a unique and severe hazard to 
aircraft The disturbance caused by the wind field may literally exceed the performance 
characteristics of the aircraft, making safe transit impossible even with optimal guidance and 
control strategies. An unusual degree of piloting skill may be required to successfully elude 
danger. Nevertheless, planes fly in moderate wind shear all the time; pilots learn to handle 
crosswinds, gustiness, and moderate frontal activity. The problem is that microbursts are random, 
rare phenomena; pilots do not develop the needed skills for coping with wind shear through normal 
experience. The typical pilot is likely to be confronted with a life-threatening wind shear only once 
or twice during an entire flying career; hence, it is unlikely that he or she can learn all the important 
signs of wind shear and maintain a high level of proficiency in the proper control procedures. 

On-board computation provides an excellent opportunity to assist the pilot in surviving 
encounters with severe wind shears, but the logic that must be executed in real time is complex and 
must have sufficient inputs for framing decisions about appropriate control actions. The computer 
program(s) and hardware to perform this task must have attributes of expert systems and control 
systems, they must account for the limitations of aircraft performance, and they must operate in 
real time. At least as important as its technical specifications, the on-board system must provide a 
satisfactory interface with the flight crew, which bears the ultimate responsibility for assuring 
safety. This means not only that the system must deduce near-optimal strategies and tactics for 
emergency situations but that it must distinguish between truly hazardous conditions and the more 
likely alternatives associated with normal aircraft operations. 

A program to investigate ways of protecting against wind shear has begun at Princeton 
University, with current emphasis on developing an expert system for wind shear avoidance . This 
program is sponsored by the NASA Langley Research Center under Grant No. NAG- 1-384. Our 
principal objectives are to develop methods for assessing the likelihood of wind shear encounter 
(based on real-time information in the cockpit), for deciding what flight path to pursue (e.g., abort, 
go-around, normal climbout, or glide slope), and for using the aircraft's full potential to combat 
wind shear. This study requires the definition of deterministic and statistical techniques for fusing 
internal and external information, for making "go/no-go" decisions, and for generating commands 
to the aircraft’s autopilot and flight directors in automatic and manually controlled flight. 

The expert system for pilot aiding is based on results of the Integrated FAA Wind Shear 
Program. Its two-volume manual presents an overview, pilot guide, training program, and 
substantiating data and provides guidelines for this initial development. The WindShear Safety 
Advisor currently contains over 140 rules and is coded in the LISP programming language for 
implementation on a Symbolics 3670 LISP Machine. 


517 



I 


BACKGROUND 

Hazards of Low- Altitude Wind Shear 

f 

I 

Difficulty of Maintaining Pilot Proficiency 

l 

Proper Decision-Making and Control Strategy 
Enhances the Possibility of Avoidance and 

Survival 

Meteorological Studies 
| Sensor Development 

Flight Path Optimization 

I 

Reactive and Predictive 
Feedback Control 

I 

FAA Windshear Training Aid 


518 


FAA WINDSHEAR TRAINING AID 

The FAA Windshear Training Aid was prepared with the support of the 
Integrated FAA Wind Shear Program. This two-volume manual was written by a 
team from the airframe industry that interacted with airlines, government, and 
academia. Principal results are expressed in a variety of ways for executive 
review, training classes, and public information. One principal goal is to identify 
the logical connections between pilot observations and pilot actions when wind 
shear is encountered. The functions that a jet transport aircraft crew should 
perform are summarized by a flow chart, as shown. 


519 



WINDSHEAR SAFETY ADVISOR 


The WindShear Safety Advisor (WS A) is a computer program that uses 
concepts drawn from the world of artificial intelligence (AI) to assess the wind 
shear threat and to recommend safe piloting action. The current version is an 
interactive but non-real-time program for studying the input information and 
logic required to emulate and extend the FAA Windshear Training Aid to 
on-board computer systems. In particular, the WSA implements the stated rules 
of the Training Aid, and its development is uncovering the unstated (but critical) 
implications of the manual. The WSA currently does not address important 
human factors issues, such as presentation of information to the pilot and requests 
for pilot input or intervention, which would have little significance in 
non-real-time simulation. However, our goal is to identify a program structure 
that is appropriate for real-time use. 


ISSUES in MONITORING 
and RISK ASSESSMENT 


Situational Awareness 

Reporting of Threat Indicators 
Diversity of Information Sources 
Relevance to Intended Flight Path 
Multiple Reports of Same Phenomenon 

Known Limitations to 
Target Parameter Selection 


Runway length, obstacles 
Aircraft performance 
System malfunctions 

Algorithms for Probability of 
Wind Shear Encounter 

LOW plus MEDIUM = HIGH? 

Bayesian Logic, Fuzzy Sets? 

Admonishment of 

FAA Pilot Windshear Guide, page 36: 

Use of Table 1 (Microburst Winsdshear Probability Guidelines) 
should not replace sound judgement in making avoidance 

decisions. 


521 



ISSUES in MONITORING and RISK ASSESSMENT 


The FAA Windshear Training Aid is a significant achievement in the fight 
against the hazards of low-altitude wind shear; it identifies the major elements of 
observational meteorology that can be linked with dangerous wind shears, and it 
gives jet transport flight crews specific actions to take when wind shear encounter 
is unavoidable. Nevertheless, it takes a high level of piloting awareness and skill 
to evaluate the situation and to execute the implied actions correctly and quickly 
enough to avert catastrophe. To the extent that a computer can be fast and 
precise, it could assist the flight crew in this dangerous situation. 

In seeking to build a computer aid for wind shear avoidance, it is necessary 
to model the implied logical patterns that the flight crew must use and to quantify 
subjective rules for computation. Many factors related to situational awareness, 
limitations to effective action, and efficient decision analysis must be considered, 
for the computer cannot exert "sound judgment " without having been 
programmed to do so. 




522 


FAA WINDSHEAR TRAINING AID 


One Result of the Integrated FAA Wind Shear 

Program Plan 

Volume 1: Overview , Pilot Guide, and Training Program 
Volume 2: Substantiating Data 


Model of Flight Crew Actions 



I 


I Windshear Recovery Technique | 

r •• — ■" •" — ~ "i 

L ^*Port the Enc ou nter j 


523 





FAA WINDSHEAR TRAINING AID, continued 


Flight crews are given information about the likelihood of dangerous wind 
shear when certain observations are made. If the probability of wind shear is 
LOW, standard procedures are recommended. If the probability is MEDIUM, 
the crew is instructed to consider precautions, including delay or alteration of 
terminal operations. If the probability is HIGH, delay or alteration of terminal 
operations is recommended, with specifics actions guided by flight phase. If 
more than observation suggests dangerous wind shear, the subjective probabilities 
should be added, although the guidelines for the risk assessment and the 
probability addition are imprecise. For example, two LOWs equal a MEDIUM, 
and either two MEDIUMS or a LOW and a MEDIUM equal a HIGH. There is no 
guidance regarding spatial or temporal characteristics of the observations; issues 
of proximity and degree of intensity are left to the pilot's judgment. 

Although the strongest suggestion for piloting strategy is "avoid, avoid, 
avoid," recommended procedures for recovery or abort following wind shear 
encounter are given as functions of flight phase. These strategies are 
sub-optimal, but they materially enhance the probability of survival, in 
comparison to standard piloting procedures. 


524 



FAA WINDSHEAR TRAINING AID, 

continued 


OBSERVATION 

PROBABILITY 
OF WINDSHEAR 

PRESENCE OF CONVECTIVE WEATHER NEAR INTENDED FLIGHT PATH: 


- With localized strong winds (Tower reports or 
observed blowing dust, rings of dust, 
tornado-like features, etc.) t ,, t 

HIGH 

HIGH 

MEDIUM 

- With heavy precipitation (Observed or radar 
Indications of contour, red or attenuation shadow).... 

- With ralnshower , f , 

- With lightninq ,, 

TIE. Vi Ul 1 

MEDIUM 

MEDIUM 

- With vlrqa 

- With moderate or greater turbulence (reported or 
radar indications) TTt , 

dlui un 

MEDIUM 

MEDIUM 

- With temperature/dew point spread between 

30 and 50 degrees Fahrenheit T . TT 

ONBOARD WINDSHEAR DETECTION SYSTEM ALERT (Reported 
or observed) TTtf , 

HIGH 

PIREP OF AIRSPEED LOSS OR GAIN: 


- 15 knots or greater ’ 

- Less than 15 knots T , , t 

HIGH 

MEDIUM 

LLWAS ALERT/WIND VELOCITY CHANGE 


- 20 knots or qreater ttt 

- Less than 20 knots 

HIGH 

MEDIUM 

FORECAST OF CONVECTIVE WEATHER 

LOU 


After Liftoff/On Approach Windshear 
Recovery technique 

•THRUST 

• Apply necessary thrust 

• PITCH 

• Adjust toward 15° 

• Increase beyond 15° If required to 
ensure acceptable flight path 

• Always respect stick shaker 

• CONFIGURATION 

• Maintain existing configuration 


525 


WINDSHEAR SAFETY ADVISOR 


FA A Windshear Training Aid 

Expansion to Include Implications 
and Data Input/Output 

Cockpit Simulation 






RULE-BASED SYSTEM for CONTROL 


An on-board implementation of the WSA would be a Rule-Based Control 
(RBC) system having attributes of both expert systems and conventional 
controllers. In the parlance of AI, the Inference Engine executes the intelligence 
of the system, drawing on the Data Base for information (in the form of 
parameter values and properties) and on the Rule Base for logical relationships 
(in the form of IF...THEN or PREMISE.. .ACTION statements). In "firing" the 
rules, the Inference Engine may require that certain side tasks be accomplished, 
such as taking measurements, making estimates, computing control settings, and 
transferring commands to control effecters. Continuing the AI jargon, this 
procedural, quantitative computation is done in a Side Effects Engine that calls on 
both the Data Base and an Algorithm Base for its knowledge. (Measurement and 
control are considered side effects of the request for information and the 
decision-making process.) 

Decision and control functions are readily separated in an RBC system, the 
former calling for symbolic computation, the latter for numeric computation. 

(In eitbe*- case, the digital computer simply moves bits around; however, 
interpretations of the logical operations are different.) Not surprisingly, some 
computer programming languages are better than others at performing die two 
types of tasks, so it is most efficient to use different languages for decision and 
control during the development phase. For example, LISP is a good language for 
developing logical relationships among strings of symbolic data, while Pascal or 
FORTRAN is a good language for numerical computation. Consequently, LISP 
is the language of choice for current WSA development. 

Once decision and control functions have been defined, they must be 
merged (in some sense) in the RBC system. It would be rare indeed for a given 
application to need all the subtle features of either development language; thus a 
single language can be used at the final step. Development of a real-time version 
of an RBC system is thus aided by one or more language translators that 
efficiently transform subsets of the development languages into the final code. 
Experience with current compilers and computers indicates that procedural 
languages like Pascal, FORTRAN, and C produce fast, concise target code for 
both decision and control. 


527 



RULE-BASED SYSTEM for CONTROL 



MEASUREMENTS 


Partitioning for 

Decision and Control Functions 

Integration of Symbolic and Numeric 

Computation 


528 










GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION of KNOWLEDGE 

The elements of decision making needed for the WSA are illustrated by this 
simple example. A parameter is a quantity that can have several values as well as 
an array of complicated properties (not shown). A rule accepts one or more 
parameters as its premise and performs the action of setting another parameter if 
the values of its input parameters make the rule true. For the premise to be true, 
it may be necessary that all multiple parameters take certain values (represented 
by the arc between connecting lines), or it may be sufficient for any parameter to 
take a certain value (represented by no arc between channels into the rule). 

The example shown illustrates such a rule: Rule 1 says that IF the flight 
phase is approach AND the aircraft is below a critical altitude AND a stable 
glideslope has not been established, THEN the pilot should perform a go-around. 
Rule 2 is the logical exclusion of Rule 1 and need not be implemented; it is here 
just for demonstration. Note that the go-around decision proceeds from the rule; 
in an array containing a number of such rules, setting parameters by moving 
from the bottom up is called forward chaining. Sometimes a result is known and 
it is necessary to determine what combination of parameters might have caused 
the result. Answering this question requires backward chaining, that is, moving 
through the rules from the top down. The WSA requires that both types of 
chaining be used at different times. 


529 



GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION 
of KNOWLEDGE 


PARAMETER 



CM 

n 


Ui 

D 

in 

D 

LU 

D 

PARAMETER 

-J 

-i 

mJ 

NAME 

< 

< 

< 

> 

> 

> 



RULE 


RULE 

NAME 



AND OR 


ACTION Sets Values 
of Parameters 


PREMISE Tests Values 
of Parameters 


EXAMPLE 



530 


















STRUCTURE of a RULE 


The current version of WSA defines each rule as a list in the computer 
language called Common LISP. Thus, each rule is expressed as follows: 

{name, premise, action, par-act, par-pre, translate) 

The meaning of each list element is defined on the chart. The Inference Engine 
effectively takes this list apart to And the needed inputs and outputs, performing 
an IF...THEN operation on the appropriate parts. 


531 



STRUCTURE of a RULE 


NAME Name of the Rule 

PREMISE Logical Relation of Parameters to 

be tested by the Rule 

ACTION Logical Result of Rule being TRUE 

PAR -ACT Parameters set by Action 

PAR-PRE Parameters tested in Premise 

TRANSLATE Documentation String for 

Optional Display 

[Implemented as a Common LISP LIST ] 


532 


RULE BASES of the WINDSHEAR SAFETY ADVISOR 

The current WSA version contains over 140 rules that set over 80 
parameters. They arc organized in the left-to-right hierarchy shown, addressing 
the functions defined by the FAA Windshear Training Aid. 


533 



RULE BASES of the 
WINDSHEAR SAFETY ADVISOR 


Executive 


Mission Phase 
Communication 


Wind Shear Alert 

Wind Shear Detection 
Flight Path Deviation 

Risk Assessment 

PIREP-LLWAS 

ATIS-SIGMET 

Generic Weather Risk 

Heavy Precipitation 

Rainshower 

Lightning 

Virga 

Turbulence 


Action 

i 

Standard Procedures 
Recovery Procedures 
Go-Around Procedures 
Delay Procedures 

Planning 

I 

Runway 

Airspeed 

Flaps 


534 

| 


STRUCTURE of a PARAMETER 

Hie parameters of the WSA currently are defined as Common LISP 
variables. There are different classes of parameters, defined by how and when 
their values are determined. A variable has the value current , to which is 
appended a property list containing (use, update, expect, translate ), defined in the 
chart. 


535 



STRUCTURE of a PARAMETER 


Parameter Classifications 


INTERNAL 

PRESET 

STATE 

OUTSIDE 


Parameter is internal to the Expert System; 
Value defined by a Goal-Directed Search 

Parameter is set by Initialization 

Parameter is set by an Estimator 

Parameter is set outside the Expert System 


Parameter Properties 


CURRENT 


USE 


UPDATE 


EXPECT 


Current Value of the Parameter 
Rules that Use the Parameter 
Rules that Set the Parameter 
Allowable Values of the Parameter 


TRANSLATE Description of the Parameter for 

Optional Display 

[Implemented as a Common LISP VARIABLE ] 


536 



EXAMPLE PARAMETERS of the WINDSHEAR SAFETY ADVISOR 


Names of some of the WSA parameters are shown and are, for the most 
part, self-explanatory. Each parameter may represent not only a symbolic or 
numerical value but a list that further defines its properties. Therefore, the 
Inference Engine can readily identify parameters that have certain attributes, in 
turn, aiding the searches associated with monitoring, assessment, planning, and 
action. 


537 



EXAMPLE PARAMETERS of the 
WINDSHEAR SAFETY ADVISOR 


Communication Rule Base 

New-information-received 
Incident-reported 
T o wer-informed-goa 
Tower-informed-delay 
Precautions-taken 

Flight Path Deviation Rule Base 

Target- airspeed 

Airspeed-deviation 

Max-airspeed-deviation 

Agl-at-max-speed-deviation 

Target- vertical-speed 

Vertical-speed-deviation 

Outside Parameters 

PIREP 

LLWAS 

Dispatch-office 

ATIS 

ASWW 

SIGMET 

Onboard-radar 

Tower-report 

TDWR 

Wind-profiler 


538 


LABORATORY for CONTROL and AUTOMATION 

Development of the WindShear Safety Advisor is being conducted within 
the Princeton University Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering's 
Laboratory for Control and Automation. The laboratory has a broad variety of 
computational tools that are appropriate to research in artificial intelligence, 
computer-aided design, flight dynamics, and digital control. A real-time expert 
system for fault-tolerant control of a tandem-rotor helicopter has been 
implemented in the laboratory using three 80286 MULTIBUS computer boards 
for execution. Current WSA development makes use of the LISP Machine, which 
employs Common LISP for the expert system and FORTRAN for flight 
simulation. 


539 



LABORATORY for 
CONTROL and AUTOMATION 

Symbolics 3670 LISP Machine 
Silicon Graphics IRIS 3020 Workstation 

Macintosh II 
IBM PS-2/80 
IBM PC-AT (2) 

IBM PC/XT (2) 

Lab-wide Ethernet Connection (TCP/IP) 

Broadband Connection to IBM 3081s 

andETA 10 s 

Portable and Fixed MULTIBUS 
Computers (5) 

Fixed-Base Cockpit Simulator 


540 



DEVELOPMENT SCREEN for WINDSHEAR SAFETY ADVISOR 

A typical LISP Machine display for WSA development is shown. The 
program developer uses a mouse to invoke features listed on the menu line and 
types information into the User Interaction Pane (or window). Parameters that 
change as a result of WSA activity are highlighted in the Parameter Information 
Pane, while the overall behavior of the expert system can be followed in the 
Result Monitoring Pane. This display is not intended as a prototype cockpit 
display but as an engineering tool for concept and program development. 


541 



DEVELOPMENT SCREEN 

for 

WINDSHEAR SAFETY ADVISOR 


Princeton WindShear Safety Advisor Interface 

Flight Plan Get Value Of Make Message Presets ('Menu Line) 

User Interaction Pane 

Parameter Information Pane 

• messages to prog rem 
developer 

9 Messages to crew, tower, etc 

• Data end commands from 
program developer 

9 Parameters that have changed 
values 

9 Other parameters of interest 

| Result Monitoring Pane | 

• Executive observations 
9 Monitored information 
9 Status assessment 

9 Planning activity 
9 Recommended action 
9 Current airport weather 


LISP Machine Implementation 
for Concept/Program Development 

Interface to FORTRAN 
Flight Simulation 












CONCLUSION 

The WindShear Safety Advisor program implements the stated 
decision-making logic of the FAA Windshear Training Aid, as well as a set of 
unstated implications that are necessary for practical application. The WS A 
expert system contains over 140 rules that set over 80 parameters for terminal 
Gyrations of jet transport aircraft. Future modifications will account for spatial 
and temporal variations of the aircraft and its meteorological environment, as 
well as for interfaces with the air traffic control system. The WindShear Safety 
Advisor sets the stage for cockpit simulation of logic for wind shear avoidance, 
which, in turn, will lead to practical systems for operational aircraft. 


543 



CONCLUSION 


Logic of Wind Shear Avoidance 

Computer Aiding for Crew Decisions 

Spatial and Temporal Factors 

Off-Line and On-Line Simulation 

Interfaces with Sensors, Aircraft, 

and Crew 


