AD-A217 316 



USAISEC 

US Army Information Systems Engineering Command 
Fort Huachuca, AZ 85613-5300 





U.S. ARMY INSTITUTE FOR RESEARCH 
IN MANAGEMENT INFORMATION, 
COMMUNICATIONS, AND COMPUTER SCIENCES 

(A1RM1CS) 


ANNUAL HISTORICAL REPORTS 


(ASQBG-B-8 9-017) 
January, 1989 



DT1C 


ELECTE 
JAN 181990 

B" 



AIRMICS 

115 O’Keefe Building 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, GA 30332-0800 


■'TjBrrWBundto I 


i 


9 0 01 



17 007 


Approved lor public raltaNj 

Dm'-'biiHon 









U.S. ARMY INSTITUTE FOR RESEARCH IN 
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION, 
COMMUNICATIONS, AND COMPUTER SCIENCES 
ANNUAL HISTORICAL REVIEW 

(RCS CHIS-6 [R3]) 


FISCAL YEAR 1988 
1 October 1987 - 30 September 1988 


Prepared by 
LTC James T. Blake 
Deputy Director 
17 January 1989 








EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


This year has been very productive for AIRMICS. Several research projects have been 
completed and a number of new and exciting research initiatives have begun. For 
example, on the topic of projects completed, we developed an Ada Reuse Guidebook 
to help Ada practitioners understand and apply reuse principles in the design of future 
systems, and we published a Guide for Decision Support System Development which 
has already found use in the development of the Defense System Management 
College’s Project Management Support System. New initiatives include the develop¬ 
ment of a pilot project to study the use of low-cost, reliable, video teleconferencing 
technology, and our participation in the DOD Small Business Innovation Research Pro¬ 
gram. 

AIRMICS has a broad research mission. It covers the entire Information Mission Area 
(IMA). To manage this mission, we have partitioned our program into eight research 
areas-Distributed Systems, Software Engineering, Communications and Networks, 
Very Large Data Bases, Decision Support, Information Security, Management of Infor¬ 
mation, and Supercomputers. While our resources do not permit us to embark on 
major projects in all of the research areas, we still maintain some level of effort in 
each of these through cooperative efforts with other government agencies or through 
participation in university-based research centers. 

This is the second year that we have evaluated corporate Independent Research and 
Development (IR&D) for ISC. We have evaluated 1660 projects from 44 companies. 
This effort has lead to the identification of 186 IMA/ISC-related projects and reports 
on 25 of these projects were sent to DCSPLANS for dissemination to interested agen¬ 
cies in ISC. Development and eventual commercialization of these projects will pro¬ 
vide positive benefits to ISC. 

Also during FY 1988, we were assigned the additional mission of providing technol¬ 
ogy transfer support to ISC and its associated Program Executive Officers (PEOs). 
This year we established the resource and management structure needed to accomplish 
this mission, and next fiscal year, we expect ISC to provide us with the personnel 
resources to execute this mission. 

An authorization for six over-hire positions allowed us to staff the previously vacant 
Communication & Networks Systems Division. We also participated in the DA Intern 
Piogram, the ROTC Cooperative Program, and supplemented our professional staff 
with top-notch researchers from leading universities through the Intergovernmental Per¬ 
sonnel Act Program. 

AIRMICS’ portion of the FY 1988 RDTF, appropriations was approximately two mil¬ 
lion dollars. But, including funds from other activities, we actually executed a program 
of nearly five million dollars. Our research program included joint efforts with the 
Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs 
(ASA(MRA)); Defense Communications Agency; National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration; Forces Command; the Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable 
Systems (STARS) Program Office; Rome Air Development Center; and the Army 
Research Office. 



John R. Mitchell 
Director, AIRMICS 





PREFACE 


This Annual Historical Review (AHR), prepared in accordance with the provisions of 
AR 870-5, Military History: Responsibilities, Policies, and Procedures, covers the 
major activities of the U.S. Army Institute for Research in Management Information, 
Communications, and Computer Sciences (AIRMICS) for Fiscal Year 1988. 







TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY. i 

PRFFAPF ... . ii 

TABLE OF CONTENTS . iii 

CHAPTER 

I INTRODUCTION. 1 

A. Mission Statement. 1 

B. Key Personnel. 1 

C. Organization Chart. 1 

D. Strength Figures. 2 

E. Dollar Resources. 3 

II SIGNIFICANT ACTIVITIES. 4 

A. Independent Research and Development (IR&D). 4 

B. Conferences and Coordination. 4 

C. Ada Research. 5 

D. Database Research. 5 

E. Technology Insertion. 5 

F. Information Centers (ICs). 6 

G. Decision Support Systems (DSS). 6 

H. Executive Information Systems (HIS). 6 

I. Pilot Video Teleconferencing (VTC) Network. 7 

J. Information Architecture Reference Model (IARM). 7 

K. Design of Adaptable Distributed System. 8 

L. SBIR. 8 

M. Visiting Scholars Program. 8 

N. Voice/Data Integrator (VDI). 8 

O. Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN). 9 

P. DCA RDTE Working Groups. 9 

Q. Technology Transition Strategies. 9 


STATEMENT "A" per Dan Hocking 
AIRMICS 

TELECON 1/17/90 



III 
































Chapter I 
INTRODUCTION 

A. Mission Statement. Conduct and sponsor applied research in the areas of telecom¬ 
munications, automation, visual information, records management, and printing and 
publications systems which address USAISC mission needs. 

B. Key Personnel. 

TITLE/INCUMBENT INCUMBENCY 

DIRECTOR, AIRM1CS 

Mr. John R. Mitchell, GM-15 12 May 1985 - Present 

DEPUTY DIRECTOR 

LTC Larry L. Henly 21 April 1986 - 15 Jun 1988 

LTC James T. Blake 16 June 1988 - Present 

RESOURCE MANAGER 

Mrs. Randa Sharman, GS-11 5 May 1986 - Present 

CHIEF, ADVANCED CONCEPTS & TECHNOLOGY 
INTEGRATION DIVISION 

Mr. James Gantt, GM-14 1 October 1985 - Present 

CHIEF, COMPUTER & INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 

Mr. Glenn Racine, GM-14 4 August 1987 - Present 

CHIEF, COMMUNICATIONS & NETWORK SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 

Dr. C. Ronald Green, GM-14 4 August 1987 - Present 

C. Organizational Chart. 










D. Strength Figures. 


OFF WO 

BEG FY 1988 

AUTH 6 0 

REQ 6 0 

ASG 4 0 

END FY 1988 

AUTH 6 0 

REQ 6 0 

ASG 5 0 


ENL 

CIV 

INTERN 

OH 

TOTAL 

0 

15 

3 

0 

24 

0 

26 

0 

0 

32 

0 

12 

2 

0 

18 

0 

15 

3 

0 

24 

0 

26 

0 

0 

32 

0 

13 

1 

0 

19 


AIRMICS FY 1988 AHR 


Chapter I 





E. Dollar Resources. In addition to the normal appropriation of RDTE funds, 
AIRMICS received additional funds from various government agencies to conduct joint 
research and development (R&D) projects. DA funding was also provided for two DA 
Interns, one ROTC Cooperative Program student, and one full time person to support 
the Historically and Predominantly Black Colleges and Universities (HPBCU) 
Research Program. Our funding for FY 1988 can be summarized as follows (amounts 
are in thousands of dollars): 


RDTE 

PE62783A (Project DY10) 2140 

Funds from other government agencies: 

Department of the Army for 

HPBCU 376 

Office of the Secretary of the Army 

(Artificial Intelligence Center) 150 

Information Systems Command 500 

Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable 

Systems (STARS) Program Office 250 

Forces Command 433 

Army Materiel Command 536 

Defense Communication Agency 80 

Defense Systems Management College 30 

Laboratory Command 40 

PEO Strategic Information Systems 23 

Program Manager Acquisition Information 

Management 247 

SUBTOTAL 4805 

OMA 

P39 

HPBCU 29 

ROTC Cooperative Program 7 

P87 

INTERN Program 48 

TOTAL 4889 


AIRMICS FY 1988 AHR 


3 


Chapter 








Chapter II 

SIGNIFICANT ACTIVITIES 

A. Independent Research and Development (IR&D) 

AIRMICS has responsibility foi the USAISC IR&D program, and this is our first com¬ 
plete year for carrying out the mission. During FY 1988, AIRMICS completed evalua¬ 
tion of approximately 1606 projects from 44 companies. Of these, 186 (11.6%) were 
ISC/IMA related, and reports on 25 of these projects were forwarded to DCSPLANS 
for dissemination to interested agencies in ISC. Interested ISC agencies have the 
opportunity to participate in on-site reviews of these companies’ IR&D programs. This 
aspect of the program is particularly important since it provides ISC a window into 
non-govemmental research that can potentially benefit the IMA. AIRMICS devotes a 
significant amount of effort in screening corporate IR&D for ISC so as to identify 
those projects that have the potential for exploitation and high payoff. We encourage 
ISC activities to attend on-site reviews so that the command can capitalize on this 
effort. IMA-related research is being performed in software engineering, communica¬ 
tions, and distributed systems. 

B. Conferences and Coordination 

AIRMICS participated in and co-sponsored several conferences and workshops. The 
Empirical Foundations of Information and Software Sciences Symposium on "From 
Data to Models" was co-sponsored with Georgia Tech, and the Sixth Annual Confer¬ 
ence on Ada Technology was co-sponsored with CECOM. In addition, AIRMICS con¬ 
tinued its active relationship with four of academia’s leading research centers. 

As a member of the Software Engineering Research Center (SERC), co-located at Pur¬ 
due and the University of Florida, we participated in several advisory board meetings. 
One product from our relationship with SERC was a value-added report we issued on 
a maintenance survey SERC performed during the year. 

AIRMICS is also an affiliate of the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) at Carnegie 
Mellon. This year we laid the ground work for putting together a plan to implement 
SEI’s assessment program within ISEC. The assessment program is a formalized pro¬ 
cess to evaluate an organization’s software engineering capabilities and needs and 
should be of benefit to ISEC in determining where we stand in terms of capability to 
address current and future software development and maintenance support. 

As a member of the Center for Communications and Signal Processing (CCSP), an 
NSF recognized "Center of Excellence" located at North Carolina State University, 
AIRMICS actively participated in the Center’s semi-annual program reviews and 
assisted in the transfer of the technological enhancements obtained from these research 
results. This center has been conducting basic and applied research in three main 
areas: Algorithms and Architecture, Multi-dimensional Signal Processing, and Com¬ 
munications and Networking. The Center’s objective is to develop models, techniques, 
and prototypes to be used for further development and design in Communications and 
Signal Processing. AIRMICS participates in this research center to leverage its limited 
research funds with other industrial sponsors and to sensitize the center to Army 
research requirements. In order to familiarize intra-government personnel with the 
Center’s activities and to transfer new technologies to other government agencies, 
AIRMICS hosted a special CCSP program review with other government 


AIRMICS FY 1988 AHR 


4 


Chapter II 








representatives from 1SEC, ARO, and CECOM. The developed programs and techno¬ 
logies at the Center will be useful for ISC and the Army in the development and 
design of future network systems. 

As a member of the Center for Innovation Management Studies (CIMS), located at 
Lehigh University, we participated in several advisory board meetings. AIRMICS also 
served as the pilot data collection site for a research project on research communica¬ 
tions. This project is designed to develop guidelines for R&D organizations, such as 
AIRMICS, on how to improve the successful transfer of research information into and 
out of the organization. This effort could improve the transfer of AIRMICS’ research 
results into ISC and the IMA community. 

Conference participation is valuable in apprising the research community of Army 
needs and problems in hopes they will direct future efforts to solving them. Addition¬ 
ally, participation in the research centers enables us to serve as a focal point for 
transferring pertinent SEI, SERC, and CCSP results into the ISC/ISEC community. 

C. Ada Research 

AIRMICS initiated efforts to improve the Ada practitioner’s understanding of Ada reu¬ 
sability and to prepare for implementation and use of a reusable object library in all 
phases of the software development life cycle. This year we developed a Reuse 
Guidebook aimed at helping the command with reuse issues. This is the first draft of 
such a document, and as a result, we received a number of positive comments aimed at 
improving the guide. Next fiscal year we will incorporate the comments from the field 
and issue the guidebook to appropriate activities within the Army. We are very 
optimistic about the progress we are making in this area since the potential for imple¬ 
mentation of reuse concepts could significantly reduce software development costs (as 
much as a 40 per cent). To supplement our professional staff. Dr. Jim Hooper, 
University of Alabama at Huntsville, was hired under the Laboratory Research 
Cooperative Program to assist us in our software engineering research projects in reu¬ 
sability and Ada. He is currently evaluating all reuse efforts being performed in both 
the military and civilian sectors of the economy. We will use the information provided 
by this study to evaluate our progress in the reuse area and to focus our future efforts. 

D. Database Research 

AIRMICS began an effort to perform research and development into the concept and 
design of an encyclopedia built along the lines of the Army Information Model that 
will accommodate changes in the model, represent security requirements of the model, 
and provide a browsing and query capability. The encyclopedia provides the means to 
organize, manage, and access Army metadata (information which describes data), 
which is essential to achieve synchronization of data values as well as interoperability 
and integration among Army information systems. This was the first year of the three 
year effort and we have already begun developing a prototype system that will be 
functional in April 1989. 

E. Technology Insertion 

In the software engineering area, AIRMICS has developed an approach to define a 
software engineering environment complete with a life cycle model and policies, pro¬ 
cedures, training, methodologies, and tools to address each life cycle phase. The intent 
is to establish a software process group with representatives from ISSC and the ISEC 


AIRMICS FY 1988 AHR 


5 


Chapter II 





headquarters elements. This group would act as a change agent and provide a forum 
for sharing information. We arc hopeful that we will get the necessary support from 
the command to make this group a viable tool for enhancing these software life cycle 
activities. 

F. Information Centers (ICs) 

In late 1985, Information Centers were formed within the DOIM activities across the 
Army. The mission of these ICs is to serve as the Army point-of-contact for all Infor¬ 
mation Mission Area (IMA)-related problems. The IC research conducted by 
AIRMICS served to facilitate the formation of these centers through the publication of 
the "IC Planning and Implementation Guide." The purpose of this guide is to provide 
assistance to DOIM shops responsible for implementing ICs in the Army. Working 
closely with ISC-DCSPLANS, we have continued our research with the purpose of 
assisting these centers in the transition from automation support to support for the 
entire IMA. In FY 1988 we began developing a guidebook for use Armywide by 
DOIMs and IC managers. While the "IMA Integration Guide" will not be published 
until February 1989, we have received a number of positive comments on the useful¬ 
ness of this guide from command elements. The next step toward moving the Army 
forward in the area of IMA integration within the Army is the development of tools 
which can automate the handling of routine requests for assistance from the ICs. An 
expert system that performs a "Help Desk" function for the ICs would be invaluable in 
this area. We have proposed the development of a prototype for such a tool, and are 
now searching for funding to continue this research. 

G. Decision Support Systems (DSS) 

We have enjoyed considerable success with our DSS research this fiscal year. 
AIRMICS published the "Guide for DSS Development,” and we have received positive 
feedback DOD wide on the effectiveness of this guide. For example. The Defense Sys¬ 
tems Management College is using the guide in conjunction with their Project Manage¬ 
ment Support System. Using a tutorial style, the guide provides a methodology for 
systematic development of a DSS. The guide uses one large example, which is incre¬ 
mentally developed, and a number of smaller examples to reinforce important con¬ 
cepts. The approach was tested by building a prototype DSS in Ada on a microcom- 
P"ter and then revising the methodology based on this experience. One result from 
this research demonstrated the portability of Ada cot’e. The initial development work 
was done on the UNIX operating system, and the recompilation on MS-DOS was pain¬ 
less. Another significant finding from our research was the paucity of tools. Further 
research in the DSS area should be devoted to the development of such tools. The 
basic idea is to develop a DSS designer’s toolbox. Included in this toolbox would be 
such items as an input/output generator, interactive interface tools, modeling and con¬ 
trol tools, and data handling tools. Unfortunately, no funding is available to tackle this 
research. The development of this DSS guide was sponsored by Product Manager, 
Combat Service Support Control System, however, the concepts are applicable to any 
Army developer of DSS for microcomputers. 

H. Executive Information Systems (EIS) 

During FY 1987 and FY 1988, AIRMICS supported Project Manager, Acquisition 
Information Management (AIM) in the development of an EIS which will link the 
Army Acquisition Executive (AAE) to the Program Executive Officers (PEOs), and the 
PEOs to their Program Managers (PMs). The purpose of this research is to improve 


AIRMICS FY 1988 AHR 


6 


Chapter II 







the effectiveness of oversight and decision making by the AAE. This research has been 
divided into three phases. In the first phase, a proof of principle prototype, called the 
Army Acquisition Management System (AAMS), was developed. This prototype 
implemented capabilities for: (a) data collection, (b) chart definition via either tem¬ 
plates or a graphical programming language, and (c) selective display of charts and 
explanatory texts. The objectives of the second phase, which was started in September 
1988, are: (a) evaluate the improvements brought about by the AAMS through before 
and after measurements, (b) demonstrate a common data architecture, (c) refine the 
requirements of the initial prototype, validate and refine the AAMS, (d) develop a 
training plan, and (e) design and develop import software for data collection. The 
objectives of the third phase, which will end in FY 1990, are: (a) develop a multi-tier 
relational database architecture and prototype, (b) develop a user interface into the 
main DBMS used by the PEOs and PMs, and (c) institutionalize the AAMS with the 
PEO community. The results of this research can be used by all Army PMs and the 
principles demonstrated will have applicability in many other Army management 
environments. 

I. Pilot Video Teleconferencing (VTC) Network 

In November 1987, the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Research, Development, 
and Acquisition, ASA(RDA), and the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower 
and Reserve Affairs, ASA(MRA), approved and funded tlte development of a pilot 
VTC network to link Army locations with Historically Black Colleges and Universities 
(HBCUs). In May 1988, we started the project with Atlanta University. The project 
will explore the uses, costs, and benefits of low-cost, full-motion. 2-way, non-secure 
VTC as applied to Army problems. It will also apply VTC technology to improve 
campus relations and increase the ability of HBCUs to support the Information Mission 
Area by training students and conducting research. The project called for the installa¬ 
tion of three VTC units, and two were installed, at Ft. Huachuca and Atlanta Univer¬ 
sity, this fiscal year. The installation of the VTC unit at Ft. Belvoir was delayed until 
FY 1989. This IMA-related research has generated a great deal of interest in video 
teleconferencing throughout DOD because we have shown that low-cost VTC technol¬ 
ogy is a viable alternative or supplement to the Army’s current, high-cost approach of 
providing VTC. 

J. Information Architecture Reference Model (IARM) 

Over the past several years, AIRMICS has conducted research into the development of 
a global information systems architecture model. This model will satisfy the top layer 
of the Army Information Architecture--the Geographic/Technical Architecture. In May 
1988, the research culminated in the publication of a white paper entitled, "Information 
Architecture Reference Model, IARM". The goal of the research and model is to pro¬ 
vide a framework for future information systems research and a common reference 
model for systems developers. The framework allows for the integration of new and 
evolutionary technology, both hardware and software, while providing a consistent 
interface to the user. The model described in the May 1988 white paper was 
presented to DISC4, ISC and ISEC. The white paper is being reviewed for use within 
DISC4, ISC-DCSPLANS and ISEC-SID. The nuxiel is being used by Purdue Univer¬ 
sity to demonstrate how distributed systems can be mapped to the reference model 
The model has also been reviewed by an ISEC support contractor as a method tor 
determining required information services. In FY 1989, we plan to refine the model. 
This effort will concentrate on the further definition of the services and interconnec¬ 
tions. 


AIRMICS FY 1988 AHR 


7 


Chapter II 










K. Design of Adaptable Distributed System 

In the development of tools and prototypes for the design and development of distri¬ 
buted systems, AIRMICS and NASA, Langley Research Center, with technical support 
from Purdue University, have been conducting a study on an adaptable system called 
the Robust, Adaptability, and Integrity in Distributed Data Base (RAID) System. The 
system will be used to deal with heterogeneous databases, diverse applications, reliabil¬ 
ity, performance, and emerging architectures. Its development and implementation are 
expected to be complete by the summer of 1990. A mini-version of the RAID (Mini- 
RAID) nas been installed in the AIRMICS computer laboratory for on-site evaluation, 
demonstration, and determination of needed enhancements. When the development of 
RAID is completed, it will be used as a tool for designing distributed systems with the 
capabilities of incorporating new systems, without extensive reconfiguration of existing 
systems, at Army posts. 

L. SBIR 

AIRMICS is participating for the first time in the Department of Defense (DOD) Small 
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program. The DOD SBIR program strives to 
stimulate technological innovation in the private sector, strengthening the role of small 
businesses in meeting DOD research and development needs, fostering and encourag¬ 
ing participation by minority and disadvantaged persons in technological innovation, 
and increasing the commercial application of DOD-supported research or research and 
development results in areas selected by the DOD components. In FY 1988, AIRMICS 
had two topics selected for inclusion in the FY 1989 Program. The two selected 
topics are: "Distributed System Simulation Performance Improvements Through New 
Algorithmic Modeling and Hardware Architectures" and "Decision Making in a Geo¬ 
graphically Distributed Environment." We are optimistic that some innovative propo¬ 
sals will be received on these topics and that we will be able to capitalize on this 
effort in FY 1989. 

M. Visiting Scholars Program 

AIRMICS participated in the Visiting Scholars Program. The program provides a 
method for professors in various disciplines to spend their sabbaticals, or part of their 
Sabbaticals, at AIRMICS pursuing research on a topic of common interest. This year, 
from January to May 1988, Dr. Dharma Agrawal of North Carolina State University, 
an internationally recognized researcher in distributed systems, worked with AIRMICS 
addressing some of the issues involved in distributed systems modeling. The results of 
his research are available in a report titled "Generic Distributed System Model." The 
work done by Dr. Agrawal will enable ISC to develop and maintain an Army-oriented 
distributed systems program which will support the introduction of distributed systems 
into the networks supported by ISC. 

N. Voice/Data Integrator (VDJ) 

AIRMICS, in a joint effort with the Rome Air Development Center (RADC), has com¬ 
pleted the design specifications for a smart multiplexer which will enable data from a 
Defense Data Network (DDN) packet switch and a Defense Switched Network (DSN) 
circuit switch to be routed over both AUTOVON and DDN trunks. An emulator to be 
used for demonstration of the concepts involved will be delivered in January 1989. A 
follow-on project to build ten prototype VDIs will be let by RADC in the third quarter 
of 1989. The follow-on contract will be completed in 22 months The incorporation 


AIRMICS FY 1 >88 AHR 


8 


Chapter II 





of VDI prototypes into typical, though perhaps simulated, Army environments will 
enable ISC to explore and compare various methods for increasing the efficiency of its 

networks. 

O. Integrated Services Digital Networks (ISDN) 

AIRMICS conducted the first VTC on ISDN within the Army. The video teleconfer¬ 
ence was held between three sites, each transmitting serially nationwide. Each of six 
presentations reviewed different aspects of the ISDN technology. From the Georgia 
Institute of Technology, an introduction to what ISDN is and what it is not, along with 
a presentation on its availability, was given. From the University of Maryland, ISDN 
migration plans within DGD, and the current Army digital/analog switching status 
were presented. From the University of Arizona, ISDN was discussed from the user’s 
perspective by the Arizona State Transportation Department, and from the provider’s 
perspective by the Mountain Bell Operating Company. The results of this effort, and 
other R&D initiatives, focused many of the management and technical ISDN issues 
that the Information Systems Command (ISC) is currently grappling with. AIRMICS 
will continue to provide insight into the ISDN technology to ISC through its activities 
in applications research, integration, and interoperability of ISDN with current and 
future Department of Defense networks. In FY 1989, AIRMICS plans to develop an 
applications research test bed for ISDN applications. Currently, we need additional 
funding for the project and are looking for a sponsor. 

P. Defense Communications Agency (DCA) Research, Development, Testing, and 
Evaluation (RDTE) Working Groups 

During the past few years the Department of the Army budget line for the Defense 
Communications System (DCS) RDTE was zero. The Defense Communications 
Engineering Center (DCEC), through DCA, established eight RDTE Working Groups. 
AIRMICS aggressively increased interaction with these working groups to help iden¬ 
tify the Army’s areas of interest within the DCA plan. This led to improved Informa¬ 
tion Systems Command (ISC) engineer contact at the DCA Working Group level 
where DCS requirements of mutual interest and concern were formalized. With the 
identification of mutual RDTE interests that directly assist ISC and the Army in 
accomplishing their mission, AIRMICS will develop the plan to seek support from 
DA. Through increased emphasis on R&D, ISC is assured that the future DCS will 
support Army requirements. These requirements will be formalized in a requirements 
document and staffed through ISC to DA for validation and funding in FY 1989. 

Q. Technology Transition Strategies 

AIRMICS is conducting research in technology transition strategies. This research is 
currently targeted at developing ways to insert new technology into the 
office/knowledge-worker environment. With existing resource constraints, both person¬ 
nel and fiscal, we must find ways to integrate new technologies into the office environ¬ 
ment without replacing current systems or creating numerous "patches" to make the 
systems functional. The integration or insertion of new technology will make the office 
or knowledge worker more productive by making available a greater number of usable 
tools. AIRMICS is using its current office automation environment as a testbed to ver¬ 
ify the costs and benefits that can be achieved from this research effort. 


AIRMICS FY 1988 AHR 


9 


Chapter II 






