Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle 

Actuators 



Quarterly Report - No.4 

Contract F61708-98-W00134 
Date 23-03-99 


C. Favede and D.G.Caldwell 
University of Salford 
Manchester, MS 4WT 
UK 


















Report Documentation Page 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 

VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 

1. REPORT DATE 

23 MAR 1999 

2. REPORT TYPE 

N/A 

3. DATES COVERED 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators - Quarterly 
Report - No.4 

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

University of Salford Manchester, M5 4WT, UK 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release, distribution unlimited 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

See also ADM001765 Hand Force Reflection Using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators. 

14. ABSTRACT 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

17. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

uu 

18. NUMBER 
OF PAGES 

50 

19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

a. REPORT 

unclassified 

b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 

c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 


I- hardware configuration - , 

2-SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION. 4 ,, 

2.1- SOFTWARE STRUCTURE 


22 - THE HAPTIC PROGRAM 


2.2.1- Initialisation. 

& _ 7 

2.2.2- Read and convert finger positions. 

.... O - / 

. 7 -« 

2.2.3- Send finger positions to the GRAPHICS co 

imputcrS - 10 

2.2.4- Receive data. 

in 

2.3- THE GRAPHICS PROGRAM 


2.3.1- Load the virtual world. 

.12 14 


2.3.2- The simulation.. _ 17 


2.3.2.1- Move the fingers. 15 

2.3.2. 2 - Check for intersection of the fingers.16 

2.3.2.3- The send packet function.17 


CONCLUSION. 


18 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


1 







































— 


— 




T 


C.Favcdc and D.G.Caldwell Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


REFERENCES.19 

.APPENDIX_ 20-46 

THE VALVE DRIVER.20 - 23 

THE STRAIN GAUGES AMPLIFIER.24 - 28 

THE 24V POWER SUPPLY. 29-31 

THE ±4V POWER SUPPLY.32 - 34 

THE VALVES DATA SHEETS.35 - 36 

THE STRAIN GAUGES DATA SHEETS.37 - 46 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 154 


Quarterly Report 


ii 



















G 


9 


C.Favede and D.G.CaJdwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


INTRODUCTION 

The aim of this project has been the development of a light weight, user friendly hand 
force reflection device using pneumatic Muscle Actuators (pMAs) as the primary 
drive source. 

The project was divided into four parts. During the first period of this project a 
detailed study of the key motions of the human hand and the background technology 
was undertaken in order to determine the requirements of the system. As a second 
milestone a prototype showing the physical structure of the hnnd master was designed 
f 1 ]. This prototype is actuated by two pMAs. and reflects force into the middle finger 
and the thumb. It also exhibits the characteristics mentioned in the original proposal, 
i.c. a low mass (<200g), high force at the finger lips (>15N1 and. full unencumbered 
motion of the user's fingers. In addition, a finger position detecting glove 
instrumented using strain gauges was designed [2]. The third milestone of the project 
was to control the hand master. The system air supply is regulated using 
JOUCOMAT1C proportional solenoid valves, which are digitally controlled using a 
computer and a PID controller implemented in C language. This controller allows fast 
and accurate control of the pMAs that constrain the users finger motions and provide 
realistic sensations when a virtual object is grasped [3]. The final milestone of the 
work programme involves the use of the exoskeleton glove to control and reflect 
sensations in a telepresence and virtual environment. The virtual environment test 
consists of movements within a constrained area studying the ability to manoeuvre, 
detect collisions between fingers and objects, ‘feeP shapes and reflect the forces. 
These features are modelled within a virtual world developed using Sense8’s 
WorldToolKit VR software. 

The completion of this fourth milestone forms the basis of this report. Appendices 
consisting of the hardware description and all the PCB layouts have been added to the 
report together with software for the AutoCAD and 3Dstudio virtual environment 
models. 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 Quarterly Report I 








C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


1- HARDWARE CONFIGURATION 

During the first three phases of this project an exoskeleton hand master was developed 
[l-3j. This hand master monitors linger positions using strain gauges, while the pMAs 
provide force rcficction on the middle finger and the thumb when a virtual object is 
grasped. Detailed hardware description of each of the electronic boards, and sensors 
designed during the first three stages of this project are given in the appendices, 
rhe final aspect of this project will consider the development of a virtual world in 
which the effectiveness of the feedback glove can be tested. A schematic of the 
system hardware used in the implementation is shown in Figure 1-1 



Fig. 1-1. Schematic of the system hardware. 


One computer, termed the HAPTIC computer (Pentium 166 MHz), controls the 
operation of inputs from the exoskeleton glove. This provides data on the position of 
the fingers and is measured by the strain gauge sensors mounted on the glove at the 
finger joint sites [2]. This HAPTIC computer also outputs signals to the pMAs in 
order to constrain the finger motion when contact with an object is to be simulated. To 
achieve this force reflection function a PID controller was implemented [3]. The 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 






























C.Favidc and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


information on the user's finger positions is then transmitted from the input glove via 
the HAPTIC computer to a second computer, the GRAPHICS computer (Pentium 350 
MHz with 64 MB RAM and an Evans and Sutherland Freedom open GL graphics 
board). This GRAPHICS computer is the host site for the models of the virtual world 
and incorporates both objects and physical based motions. 



Contract F61708-^8-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


3 










© 




C.Favcde and D.G.Caldwell Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


2- softw are configuration 

2.1- SOFTWARE STRUCT! IRF 


The distributed nature of the hardware configuration necessitated the use of a 
similarly distributed software system. The Graphics computer software is responsible 
for the construction of the virtual world, graphics updating, and collision detection. 
The HAPTIC software is responsible for monitoring the motion tracking system, 
calculating the reactions and sending this data to the force reflection hardware, as 
shown in Figure 2-1. 


HAPTIC computer 


GRAPHICS computer 

♦ 


T 

Initialise 


T_ 

Construct Virtual 

Exoskeleton 


World 


loop 


Serial link 

Receive finger 

Send finger positions 



positions 


* 


Receive World Status 


Serial link 


I 


Send World Status 


Track user's 
fingers motions 


Fast >800Hz 


Slow >20Hz 
loop 


T 


Compute the force 
stimuli 


I 




Output force stimuli 
to fingers 


Object are updated 
with sensor inputs 

r~ 


Check for intersections 


I 


Render Virtual World 


Figure. 2-1. Software data flow diagram. 


Contract F61708-98-W00134 


Quarterly Report 


4 




































Q 


G 


C.Favcdc and D.U.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


The data exchange between the computers involves the transfer of the World status to 
the Haptics computer from the Graphics computer and the return of the position of the 
user's fingers back to the Graphics computer. Communications between the two 
computer are achieved using a serial link with a baud rate of 9600. Should the virtual 
hand be touching an object, the world status attributes (which fingers are in contact 
with a virtual object) are transmitted by the Graphics computer and the resulting 
sensations are calculated by the Haptics machine and used to control the pMAs. 

This two computer setup results in a similar division of software load. The HAP TIC 
computer program runs under DOS because of the requirements of the PC30 board 
which is used to pertorm A/D and D/A conversions [2]. This program was developed 
using C with a flowchart is represented in Figure 2-2. A listing of this program is 
contained on disc in the Appendix. 

2.2- THE HAPTIC PROGRAM 


Contract F6I708-98-W0013-1 


Quarterly Report 


5 














C.Favede and D.G.CaldwcIl 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


Initialisation 


Read and convert 
Finger positions 


_L_ 

Send converted values to 
the GRAPHICS computer 


I 

Receive intersection information 
from the GRAPHICS computer 


f 

Control the pMAs 



End 


Figure. 2-2. Flowchart of the HAPTIC program. 


2.2.1- Initialisation 


The first requirement of the program is system initialisation, and this occurs in three 
steps as described in Figure 2-3. 

Firstly, the PC30 board needs to be initialised to convert the analogue values given by 
the strain gauge position sensors of the hand exoskeleton structure into digital values 
that can be sent to the Graphics computer. The PC30 board also needs to be initialised 
in order to use its digital outputs. These digital outputs are used to inflate or deflate 
the pMAs providing the force that constrains the user's fingers [3]. 

The second aspect of the initialisation involves setting up the serial communications 
between the two PCs. Subsequently information can be exchanged between HAPTIC 


Contract F61708-98- WOO 134 


Quartcrh Report 


6 






















— 


C.Favedc and D.G.Caldwell Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 

PC to the GRAPHICS systems and vice versa. 

Finally, the calibration positions of the finger angles need to be saved. To initialise 
these values the user needs to put his hand in a known initial position, which is hand 
open, with the palm and the fingers resting fiat on the desk. The computer reads and 
converts these values via the PC30 board, and then stores them as the initial set 
values. 


Initialise PC30 
board 


I 

Initialise serial 
communications 


T 

Read and save 
initial finger position 


L_ 

End 


Figure. 2-3. The initialisation process. 


2.2.2- Read and convert fin 2 er positions 

This function first reads and then converts the voltages returned by the strain gauges 
in order to obtain the angles of rotation of each joint of the user’s fingers. It then 
subtracts the convened value from the set up value stored during the initialisation 
process. Figure 2-4. 


Contract F6 1708-98- WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


7 



























C.Favede and D.G.Caidwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 



Figure. 2-4. Read finger positions. 


2.2.3- Send finger positions to the GRAPHICS computer 

The architecture of die hand is illustrated in Figure 2-5. Strain gauge sensors have 
been placed in the glove in order to monitor the metacarpo-phalangeal joint and 
proximal interphalangeal joint of the four fingers. The input sensors also monitor the 
metacarpo-phalangeal joint and the interphalangeal joint of the thumb. 

Once all the position data from these joints has been collected and convened, the 
HAPTICS communications program can send the joint angle information to the 
GRAPHICS computer which uses this information to carry out the simulation on the 
screen. This data is continuously sent, however, this initially caused a problem 
ensuring that the GRAPHICS computer knew which joint the received angles should 
be attributed too. To remove this confusion a simple communication protocol was 
designed in which the data is sent in packets of 12 numbers. The first and last 
numbers of the packet are always the same and have the hexadecimal value £ff and 
#fe respectively (255 and 254 in decimal base). The second and third numbers of the 
packet correspond to the metacarpo-phalangeal joint and the proximal interphalangeal 
joint of the index finger, while the fourth and fifth v alues belong to the middle linger 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


8 




















C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


Subsequent numbers in the sequence refer to two joints in the nng finger, and the two 
angles of the little finger. The tenth and eleventh numbers are the joint positions for 
the thumb. The GRAPHICS computer reads a data sequence until it finds the number 
»ff (packet stan value), the subsequent data sequence can then be related to the 
relevant joint. The last number of the packet which is #fe. allows the computer to 
check it all the data was sent and if the transmission was correct. As the maximum 
angle for any joint is 180°. #ff and ^fe are outside the acceptable angle values and 
therefore there can be no confusion between the stan data and angle data. A relatively 
low baud rate of 9600 is used for all communication and has been found to be 
acceptable in all circumstances. This will be considered in more detail later in the 
report. 



metacarp c -phalangeal 
join: 


Figure. 2-5. The architecture of the human hand 


.As an example of a typical communication sequence, consider the case where a user is 
executing a precision grasp as illustrated in Figure 2-6. In this instance the metacarpo¬ 
phalangeal joint and the proximal interphalangeal joint of the index finger are 45° and 
90°. the two angles of the middle finger are 20° and 60°. the ring finger angles are 0° 
and 20°, because the little finger is fully extended the two angles of the little finger 
have the same value of 0°. The two thumb angles sensed by the strain gauges position 
device are 20° and 40°. The HAPTIC computer will send the packet 255. 45. 90, 20, 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


9 





























C.Favfede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Fores Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


60. 0. 20. 0. 0. 20. 40. 254 to the GRAPHICS computer. 



Figure. 2-6. Example of precision grasp. 


2.2.4- Receive data. 


The HAPTIC computer receives information on objeci/finger collisions or 
intersections from the GRAPHIC computer. When there is an intersection, the current 
angle of the finger is saved as the maximum value that the finger is allowed to reach. 
The HAPTIC computer running a PID controller program activates the pMAs in order 
to constrain the user's fingers preventing motion (hand closure) beyond this finger 
intersection limit. The GRAPHICS computer sends only a 2 bit binary number, each 
bit corresponding to an active joint. At this stage in the development active force 
feedback is only available on the thumb and the middle finger hence the requirement 
for only a two bit binary signal. The first bit corresponds to the middle finger and the 
second bit to the thumb. If the GRAPHICS computer has detected an intersection of 
one of these fingers with an object in the simulation a 1 is sent and then the previous 
angle value of the finger is saved as the maximum value for the PID controller [3]. It 
the value is 0 there is no intersection, therefore no control of the ptVlAs is needed. 


Contract F6I708-98-WO0I34 


Quarterly Report 


10 











C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Acfuators 


2.3- THE GRAPHICS ROl TTNF 

This program is the heart of the system, running the simulation and controlling all the 
graphics activities. It was written using WorldToolKit (WKT) which is a C library 
(unction based program, while the objects in the virtual environment are designed 
using AutoCAD. The flowchart of the WKT program is illustrated in Figure 2-7, 
while the listing is contained on disc in the Appendix. 


Load virtual world 


! 

Initialise parameters 


I 

Run simulation 



End 


Figure 2-7. The GRAPHICS program. 


Contract F61708-98- WOO 1 34 


Quarterly Report 


II 































o 




C Fa vedc an d D.G.Caldwel! Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 

2.3.1- Load the virtual world 

Initially, the program loads the test environment in which the simulation takes place. 
For these test sequences this consisted of a simple room, designed using the SenseS 
neutral file format (NFF). This is a generic representation for polygonal geometry [4], 

The room is shown in Figure 2-8. The NFF file is listing is on the disc in the 
Appendix. 



Figure. 2-8. The virtual environment. 


In NFF. objects are represented as sets of polygons, and these polygons are ordered 
collections ol vertices. The format specifies polygon, colour and texture applications, 
backtace rejection, vertex normals, object names, polygon IDs (which are all set to 
zero for the room), and portals (4). 

Once the environment is loaded, the program continues by loading the virtual hand 
designed to replicate the motions of the operator's hand. Figure 2-9. The file hand.3ds 
which is the representation ot the hand is again listed in the disc in the Appendix. 


Contract F6l708.d8-W00l34 


Quarterly Report 


12 































c 




• f. 


C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 



Figure. 2-9. The virtual hand. 

The hand was designed using 3D Studio which is modelling, rendering, and animation 
software developed by Autodesk [5]. The three dimensional file designed with 3D 
studio has the extension 3DS which is compatible with WKT. therefore the file can be 
loaded very simply inside the virtual environment simulation. 

Lights are also added to the simulation to create a real life situation. As in the real 
world if there is no light the user is unable to see where he is. and what is in front of 
him. 

1 inally, the program loads into the virtual environment the other objects of the 
simulation. In this instance this includes a desk and a joystick. These objects were 
designed using AutoCAD. AutoCAD is the w'orlds' most popular Computer Aided 
Design (CAD) software [6], and as with jD Studio files, the .DXF files created using 
AutoCAD are directly compatible with WKI and are easily imported into the virtual 
environment. The virtual environment which consists of the room, the hand, the desk 
and the joystick on the top of the desk are illustrated in Fig. 2-10. The table and 
joystick object files are list in the Appendix disc. 


Coniract F6l708-«>8-W00!3J 


Quarterly Report 


13 
























C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 



Figure. 2-10 The virtual world. 

These latter two objects were simply added to the virtual world by using a function of 
WKT called WTobjcct new. This function allows scaling of the object, which can be 
usciul if objects arc designed on different scales. WKT also allows texture mapping, 
which was used on the desk where a wooden texture was applied. Each object added 
to the simulation has a different ID number. 

2.3.2- The simulation 

After loading the virtual world and initialising the computer for serial 
communications, the program is ready to run the simulation. The flowchart of the 
simulation routine is given in Figure 2-11. 



Figure. 2-11. The simulation flowchart 


Contract F6I708-98-W00134 


Quarterly Report 


14 




























C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


As shown, this function consists of four subsets which are described below. 

2.3.2.1- Move the fingers 

This consists of reading the data coming from the HAPTIC computer, and then 
rotating each joint to the desired angle. The detailed flowchart of this function is given 
in Figure 2-12. Dunng the initialisation process the initial value of each angle was 
reset to 0. 



Figure. 2-12. Move the tingers. 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


15 


























C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 

2.3.Z.2- Check for intersection of the fingers 

This function checks if a part of a finger is touching an object. If an intersection is 
detected a command is sent to the HAPTIC computer controlling the action of the 
pMA. This function of the program has the highest computational overhead and may 
slow down the simulation if the world model is overly complex. Therefore, a trade off 
has to be made between the number of polygons used to design the hand and the 
speed of the simulation (time between an action in the real world and the same action 
in the virtual world). 

Since the present hand master gives force feedback for only the middle finger and the 
thumb the program only checks for intersection of these two fingers with object in the 
simulation. 1 hese fingers are composed ol hundreds of polygons, as illustrated in 
Figure 2*13. The program has to test for the intersection of each polygon of the 
middle finger and the thumb with each polygon of the objects in the virtual world. 
This requires intensive computer calculations that would drastically slow down the 
simulation, therefore another solution was implemented To reduce this computational 
overhead a bounding box based solution was adopted. Using this technique a six sided 
box closely overlaps the finger model, as shown for the first phalanx of the ring finger 
in Figure 2-13. Since the bounding box consists of only six polygons, it requires fewer 
computer calculations to test, than for the hundreds of polygons of a finger. 

The function first tests for intersections of the fingers bounding boxes with the other 
graphical entities in the simulation, and returns a list of exactly which polygons are 
intersected by the fingers bounding box. As a bounding box is slightly bigger than a 
finger, when an intersection with a polygon is registered this polygon has to be tested 
to ascertain if it intersects with any of the polygons of the finger. 



Figure. 2-13. Polygonal representation of the hand. 


Contract F6I708-98-W00134 


Quarterly Report 


16 
















C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


-2.2.3- The send packet function 

This function is very simple, and sends only a two bit binary number (needed for the 
thumb and middle finger) to the HAPTIC computer. If the first bit is 0 then the middle 
finger is not intersecting an object, if it is a I it is intersecting an object. Subsequently 
the HAPTIC computer can retrieve the value of the angle and activate the PID 
controller in order to control the pMA and produce a restrained finger motion in line 
with the detected intersection. The second bit of the number works in the same way 
but for the thumb. 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


17 












© 




C.Favede and D.G.Caldweil Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


CONCLUSION 


During this fourth phase of the project virtual reality software was developed to 
model the motions of a hand using inputs from the tactile glove, and to feedback 
contact information to constrain the motions of the thumb and middle finger, thereby 
presenting a grasp sensation to the user. This virtual environment will be used to test 
the system, and measure the performances of the user to use the exoskeleton glove to 
control and reflect sensations. 

This project has advanced as planed in the proposal document, and the different 
deliverables mentioned in the document were achieved. 

i) . A sensorised lightweight input exoskeleton with 11 degrees of freedom operating 
efficiently, safely and comfortably over 90% of the normal human work volume. 

ii) . A feedback exoskcleton using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators for the middle finger 
and the thumb, providing a low mass. safe, fore e/res traint replicating sensation during 
complex anthropomorphic manipulations 

iii) . Demonstration of the control motions and feedback of the hand exoskeleton using 
a VR simulation 

iv) . Adaptation of the present Pneumatic Muscle Actuators and actuator control 
techniques to permit force and position control of operator's limbs (fingers). 

At this stage a first prototype has been designed, but future work has already be 
planed: 

i) . Development of a second prototy pe to improve the aesthetic appeal of the 
exoskeleton structure and reduce the bulkiness of the system. This involves a new r 
development of the pMAs attachment on the user" fingers and on the exoskeleton. 

ii) . Add force sensors on to the exoskeleton structures to monitor the force exerted by 
the system on the user's fingers. 

iii) . Test the exoskeleton in a more complex virtual environment and in real life 
situations i.e. controlling a robot dextrous hand. To ascertain that the force feedback 
will allow the operator to use the minimum necessary grasp force which will reduce 
the danger of damage to the slave or the environment, shorten task completion times, 
and reduce errors. 


Contract F61708-98-W00I34 


Quarterly Report 


18 










C.Favddc and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


REFERENCES 


111* C. Favede and D. G. Caldwell. ‘Hand force reflection using Pneumatic Muscle 
Actuators'’. Quarterly report - No. 1. EOARD contract F61708-98-W00134. Mars 
1998. 


[2]- C. Favede and D. G. Caldwell. "Hand force reflection using Pneumatic Muscle 
Actuators”. Quarterly report - No. 2. EOARD contract F61708-98-WOO 134. July 
1998. 

| ->|- C. Fav6de and D. G. Caldwell. “Hand force reflection using Pneumatic Muscle 
Actuators", Quarterly report - No. 3. EOARD contract F61708-98-W00134, October 
1998. 

[4J- "WorldToolKit ™ version 2.1”, reference manual. Sense'8™ corporation. 1995. 

[5] - M. T. Peterson. “3D STL DIO MAX Fundamentals", New Riders, Indianapolis. 
1996. 

[6] - J. H. Zirbel and S. B. Combs. “Special edition using AutoCAD Release 13 for 
Windows". Que Corporation. Indianapolis, 1995. 


Contract F61708-08-WOO 154 


Quarter!) Report 


Id 












C.Favede and D.G.Caidwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


APPENDIX 

THE VALVE DRIVER 


Contract F61708-98-W00I34 


Quarterly Report 


20 















C Favdde and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


Valve Driver 

The operation of the valve driver forms an essential requirement for actuator control, 
fhe full development of this has been outlined in a previous report [3J. 

Each valve uses a voltage varying between 0 - 24 V with a current requirement of 
I -A, but the output provided by the digital output of the PC30 card is only between 0 
and 5V at only a tew tnA. To solve this problem a drive circuit has been designed, 
figure A. 1. that can drive up to four valves. 

This driver consists of two distinctive parts : 

I he first section which includes the operational amplifier is an adaptation of a 
conventional impedance circuit and functions as a butler to protect the PC30 card. 

1 he second section, the bipolar transistor circuit provides the current needed the 
drive the valve’s coil. 

The electronic circuit for a board which can drive up to 4 valves is given in figure A1 



Contract F6I708-98-WO0I34 


Quarterly Report 


21 







































































































C.Favede and D.G.Caidwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


The overall drive behaviour of circuit is illustrated in figure A.2. 

Ql: ON Ql: OFF 


-•-> t 


••> t 

Figure. A.2. Characteristics of the drive circuit. 

When Vc = 5V, the transistor Ql is not saturated. Current can go through the 
transistor Ql. and the potential voltage in B (transistor collector) is 0. The input 
voltage of the valve is therefore 24V. 

When Ve changes from 5V to 0. transistor Ql switches from the on-state to the 
off-state and becomes saturated- The voltage in B is equal to the power voltage. 24V 
and the input voltage of the valve is therefore 0V. 

A printed circuit board has been designed to control four valves. The layout of the 
circuit is given in figure A.3. figure A.3(a) is for the component side and figure A.3(b) 
for the soldering side. 


Ve 


5 V 

0 V 
24 V 


ov :■ 





Contract F6I708-98-W00134 


Quarterly Report 


















































C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


Figure A.4 shows the component layout. 

Component values: 

Rl, R2, R3. R4: 100Q‘/«W1% 

Dl. D2. D3, D4. D5, D6. D7. D8 Diode 1N4001 

Q1. Q2, Q3, Q4 : NPN power transistor BD241C 

U1 : quad JFET TL084CAN 


1 

o 

OO 

aaaa 

e a 



ruS 

m 

o O 

O O 

9 U ' S 

§!] 

s 

o • 

o ' a 

OO 

o 

o 

OO 

BFi 

?••£ 

o 

OO 

o 

o 

OO 

m 

& 

M 

OO 

Ot_o 

ffBefa 

O 

2 2 

OO 


® nano O 

Figure A.4.Valves drivers board components layout 

The connector JIN receives inputs from the PC30 port A (AO. A1). 

The connector JVALVES is connected to the two valves (at present only two valves 
are used). 

The connector JSUPPLY is connected to the -4V, GROUND. -4V. and 24V. 

The board as been labelled correctly in order to the user to connect everything as 
required. 

The valves used are JOUCOMATIC electro-pneumatic 3 ports servovalves 
(SENTRONIC 602 series). 


23 


Contract F61708-98- WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 










© 


o 


1 


C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


APPENDIX 

THE STRAIN GAUGES AMPLIFIER 


Contract F6I708-98-WOOI54 


Quarterly Report 


24 

















C.Favede and D.G.Caldwdl 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


STRAIN GAUGES AMPLIFIER 

Strain gauges sensors are used to measure the fingers positions. A sensor consists of 
two gauges bound to opposite sides of a thin plastic beam which is attached on the 
glove at each of the linger joints. Strain gauges arc resistive tranducers. wherein 
resistance varies as a consequence of strain changes within the gauge. The strain 
gauge resistance is expressed in the form of R-AR. where R is the resistance of the 
gauge in the absence of the strain (reference value) and AR represents the deviation 
from this reference value as a consequence of a change in the strain. 

To measure resistance deviation, a method to convert AR to the voltage 
variation AV is to make the strain gauge part of a strain gauge bridge, 
fhe strain gauge resistance changes when the device is lengthened or shortened 
according to: 

A R = 2R — 
l 

Where R is the unstrained resistance and y is the fractional elongation experienced 
by the gauge. 

The dev iation AR is extremely small in comparison to R. thus a fairly high gain 
amplification is required to achieve an acceptable sensitivity. Furthermore precautions 
must be taken to prevent temperature variations from overshadowing the variations 
induced by strain. 

A solution is to use pairs of strain gauges so that the temperature variations of 
one gauge compensate for the temperature variations of the other, thus leaving the 
ratios between their reference values constant .Also to avoid cancelling out the 
variation due to strain, one of the tw o gauges must be of the R-AR type and the other 
ol R-AR type. An additional advantage of using strain gauges in pairs is a doubling in 
bridge sensitivity. This is achieved by attaching the two gauges to opposite sides of 
the thin plastic beam mounted over each finger joint. When the finger is bent, the 
beam is then put under strain, causing one of the gauges to lengthen with a resultant 
resistance, while the other gauge will be shortened and its resistance will decrease. 

The circuit illustrated in figure B. 1 has been designed to measure finger positions for 


Contract F61708-98- WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


25 









C.Favcde and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


two sensors. This circuit is duplicated six times to cover all the active joints in the 
hand. 



To achieve the desired amplification, a 1NA114AP (Burr-Brown) operational 
amplifier has been used. This operational amplifier is a general purpose operational 
amplifier offering excellent accuracy. The gain of this operational amplifier can be set 
from 1 to 10000 with only a single resistor. 


Contract F61708-08- WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


26 



































































































C.Fav£de and D.G.Caldwcll 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


Gain for this system is given as : G = 1 + . 

This circuit converts the finger position into a voltage which is then sent to the 
computer via the PC30 board. The latter uses its .A/D function to display the position 
of the finger on the computer screen. Tests on the resolution of this input glove found 
that it was better than 0.3°. 

The PCB designed for this circuit is double sided as illustrated in figure B.2 where the 
layout for the solder side and the component side are given. 



Figure.B.2. Strain gauges amplifier layout 


Figure B.3 shows the components layout. 


O _ 


o 

o 

j ° 

a a ° 6 

M o » 


of^o 

OO O 0 

OO o o 

A 1*1 o o 

nn o o 

aJJ ©_« 

JZo _o 

00 

OO 

t o ana o, o 

_ O; © 

O B: 

o 



Figure.B.3. Components layout 


Components values: 

R1.R2.R3, R4: 120Q >/«W 1% 

Ul. U2 : IN.A114AP Instrumentation amplifiers 

C1. C2 : 0.1 fiF capacitors 

RV1. RV2 : 500Q 500mW ±10% multi turn potentiometer 


Comma F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarter 1> Report 


27 





























C.Favcde and D.G.Caldwcll 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


The connector JIN is connected to the two sensors. JOUTl and JOUT2 are connected 

to the A/D input (channel) of the PC30 board. The connector JSUPPLY is connected 
to 4V. ground and -4V. 

C(instruction and connection of the strain gauge sensor 

I he sensor consists ot two strain gauges bound to opposite sides of a thin plastic 
beam, which is attached to the glove at a finger joint. 

Pin 1 of the first strain gauge is connected to +4V. pin 2 is connected to pin 1 of the 
second strain gauge. This is also connected to the input of the strain gauges amplifier 
board. Pin 2 of the second strain gauge is connected to ground. 

Die strain gauges used arc general purpose foil type, polyester backed strain gauges. 
Ihe gauge length is 8mm. and the gauge resistance is 120Q ±0.5%. The data sheets 
for the strain gauges are given in this appendix. 


Contract F6I708-98-W00134 


Quarterly Report 


28 








C.Favedc and D.G.CaJdwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


APPENDIX 

THE 24V POWER SUPPLY 


Contract F61708.98-WOO 134 


Quarter!) Report 


2‘> 












o 




C.Favede and D-G.Caldv.el! Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 

THE 24V POWER Sl'PPl.Y 

Tlie rwo JOUCOMATIC servo valves used are powered using a 24V supply voltage, 
with each valve having a current requirement of 1.2A. A 24V 5A power supply has 
been designed, its electronic circuit is given in figure C.l. This will drive the valves 
needed to drive the pMAs currently on the thumb and middle finger. 



The PCB layout of this power supply is given in figure C.2. the PCB is single sided. 



rJ «—<rv ~y» ggg‘ 2 


Figure.C.2. Power supply layout 


The component layout is given in figure C.3. 


Contract F61708.98-W00I34 


Quarter!) Report 


30 




















































C Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 



Figure.C3. The 24V power supply component layout 


Components values : 

R1 : 120 £2 '/«W 1% 

■ 5kiJ 500mW ±10% multi turn potentiometer 

Cl - 35V IOOOOjiF radial electrolytic 

C2 : 0.1 pF 

C3 : lpF tantalum radial 

C4 : 10|iF tantalum radial 


FU1 : 5A fuse 5x20mm 

BR1 : 6A rectifier bridge KJ3PC6005 V MKI = 50 V 

D1.D2: 1N4001 diodes 

U1 : L.V1338 voltage regulator 0-32V 5A 


-1 trans is connected to a _ — 0V, 5A transformer (100 VA per secondary 1 binding). 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


31 























C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


APPENDIX 

TH E ±4V POWER SUPPLY 


Contract F61708-^8-W00134 


Quarterly Report 


32 
















C.Favede and D.G.CaldwcIl 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


THE -4V POWER SUPPLY 


The strain gauges sensors are powered using a ±4V voltage supply, which also powers 
all the electronics of the system (except the valves which are powered by a 24 V power 
supply). A 1A power supply will be sufficient to power all the circuits. 

The electronic circuit of the power supply is given in figure D. 1. 



The PCB layout of this power supply is given in figure D.2. The PCB is single sided. 



The component layout is given in figure D.3. 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 1.14 


Quarterly Report 


33 




































































C.Favede and D.G.Caldwcil 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 



Figure.DJ. The ±4V power supply component layout 


Components values : 

R1.R2: 

220 Q '/«W 1% 

R3. R4 : 

120Q '/«W 1% 

RV1. RV2: 

1 OkQ 500mW ±10% multi turn potentiometer 

C1.C2: 

16V lOOOpF radial electrolytic 

C3 : 

220nF tantalum radial 

C4: 

2.2pF tantalum radial 

FU1. FU2 : 

1A fuse 5x20mm 

BR1 : 

1A DIL bridge rectifier DF005 = 50T 

D1 : 

1N4002 diode 

D2. D3 : 

1N4001 diode 

U1 : 

LM7805C voltage regulator 5V 1A 

U2: 

LM7905CT voltage regulator-5V 1A 

TR1 : 

Transformer 2“0-6V 1.33A (8VA per secondary winding, 230Va.c. 

primary). 



Contract F61708-^8-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


34 




























C.Favede and D.G.Caldwell 




-™- 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


APPENDIX 
THE VALVES 

DATA SHEETS 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


35 

















£ 
A 

'* 


PROPC TIONAL 3 PORTS SOLEi.jID VALVE 

Series 602 


GENERALJTES 


rra -•— » 

SENTRONIC V. (we 3fn6 * en ' 'o^cerarure range man me 


SPECIFICATIONS 

FLUIDS 

MAXIMUM PRESSURE {MAP) 

BAND OF REGULATION (PMR) 

FLUID TEMPERATURE 
AMBIENT TEMPERATURE 


50pm. .'ucncateoorary 
a Of io oar iG 1/4 - see tatoie De^owi 

12bar(Qi/2>Gl) 

■ ® ® f '® Par <G 1/4 - see table below) 

12 bar (G 1/2-Gil 
: -10*C. -60*C 
•lire. »«0’C 


CONSTRUCTION 

Dirocl operated poppet valve 
Body anodised aluminium 
Internal parts stainless steel and brass 
Sealing mtnle(NBR) 


installation 

Assembly position any 

Compty with roguirod air Quality 

Comply with (Sectncal suppty specification* 



ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS 


Nominal 
diameter (mm) 

Stabilized 
voltage <*• 
(DC) 

Max. power 

m 

Max current 
(mA) 

Insulation 

class 

Degree of 
protection 

Electrical connection 

6 

12 

20 

!1) Maximum ripple 

24 V « —«* 

10% 

20 

27 

3S 

800 

1100 

1400 

F 

IP 45 

_ 

Connector ISO 4400 
rotatable m 90“ steps 

CM 10(Pg11P) 


CHOICE OF EQUIPMENT 



_codes in me grey snaded areas 

DIMENSIONS AND WEIGHTS 


correspond to commonly used products wft.cn can be supplied rapidly 



JOUCOMATIC ^ 


P300-7 


































































































-■—= 







C.Favede and D.G.Caldweil 


Hand Force Reflection using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators 


APPENDIX 

IHEL STRAIN GAUGES DATA 

SHEETS 


Contract F61708-98-WOO 134 


Quarterly Report 


37 




























Data Pack E 


Issued March 7997 232-5957 


m 


Data Sheet 


Strain gauges and load cells 


Strain gauges 

Two ranges of foil strain gauges to cover general 
engineering requirements for strain analysis All 
gauges have 30mm integral leads to alleviate damage 
to the -gauges due to excessive heat being applied 
during soldering and inst allati on 

Miniature gauges can be used for precise point 
measurement of instrumentation of small components 
The polyimide backing of the gauges can withstand 
temperatures up to 180°C making them ideal for 
higher temperature applications 

The larger size of the standard gauges will not only 
make these gauges suitable for larger components, but 
is useful to assess the average strain over the area 
covered by the gauge thus reduang the possibility of 
incorrect readings due to stress concentrations. 

Gauges temperature compensated for aluminium 
match materials with a coefficient of thermal expansion 
of 23 4 x 10 *hC and are indicated by blue colour 
coding of the backing material. 

Gauges temperature compensated for mild steel match 
materials with a coefficient of thermal expansion of 10.8 
x 19 'V'C and are indicated by red colour coding of the 
backing material 

All gauges are intended for uniaxial strain 
measurements only 


General specification (all types) 

Measurable strain_2 to 4% max 

Thermal output 20 to 160C_±2 micro straui/=C* 

160 c C to 180°C_±5 micro stram^C’ 

Gauge factor change 

with temperature__ ± 0.015° VC max. 

Gauge resistance_120Q 

Gauge resistance tolerance__ -0 5% 

Fangue life_> 10 5 reversals @100 micro strain'*' 

Foil matenai_.copper nickel alloy 

* I micro wans is equivalent to jt. vxanscc of 0 OOOi*-. 


Specification 

(Standard polyester backed types) 


Temperature range_ 

Gauge length_ 

Gauge width_ 

Gauge factor_ 

Base length (single types) 
Base width (single types). 
Base diameter (rosettes) . 


-30 c C to *BO i C 

_3 mm 

_2mm 

_ 21 

_13.0 mm 

_4.0 mm 

_21.0mm 


Specification 

(Miniature polyimide backed type) 


Temperature ranee 

-30'Cto u-iaoTi 

Gauge length 

2 mm 

5mm 

Gauge -width 

1.6 mm 

1 8mm 

Gauge factor 

2.0 

2.1 

Base length (single types) 

6.0 mm 

9.0 mm 

Base -width (single tvoes) 

2,Smm 

3.5 mm 

Base diameter (rosettes) _ 

.7 5x7.5mm 

_12 x 12mm 


Construction and principle of operation 

The strain gauge measuring grid is manufactured from 
a copper nickel alloy which has a low and controllable 
temperature coefficient The actual form of the gnd is 
accurately produced by photo-etching techniques 
Thermoplastic film is used to encapsulate the gnd. 
which helps to protect the gauge from mechanical and 
environmental damage and also acts as a medium to 
transmit the strain from the test object to the gauge 
material 

The principle of operation of the device is based on the 
fact that the resistance of an electrical conductor 
changes with a ratio of aR/R is a stress is applied such 
that its length changes by a factor aL/ 1 Where aR is 
change resistance from 'unstressed value, and aL is 
change m length from onginal unstressed length 

The change in resistance is brought about mainly by 
the physical size of the conductor changing and an 
alteration of the conductivity of the material due to 
changes in the materials structure 

Copper nickel ailoy is commonly used m strain gauge 
construction because the resistance change of the foil 
is virtually proportional to the applied strain i.e. 

aR/e=:ce 

where X is a constant known as a gauge factor, 

= aR fR 
ALL 

And E = strain = aL;'L . X = 

E 

The change in resistance of the strain gauge can 
therefore be utilised to measure strain accurately when 
connected tc an appropriate measuring and indicating 
circuit e g Strain gam amplifier RS stock no 846-171 
detailed later m this data sheet. 























































































































































































































































































































































































































4 

When strain gauges are used in compressive load 
transducer applications, which ncnnaiiv reouire more 
stringent accuracy requirements, a full bridge euros: is 
used with active gauges in all four arms of the bndge. 
(Figure 1) 

The load transducer shown in Figure 1 utilises four 
strain gauges attached to the cylinder The gauges are 
connected into the bridge circuitry m such a manner as 
to make use of Poisons ratio i.e the ratio between the 
relative expansion in the direction offeree applied and 
the relative contraction perpendicular to the’ force, to 
increase the effective gauge factor and thus the 
sensitivity. 


Figure 1 Compressive load transducer 


Load 



To measure tensile loads, a ring ‘with gauges attached 
as shown in Figure 2 may be used. 

Under the action of a tensile load, the curvature of the 
nng in Figure 2 is deformed such that the inner gauges 
undergo tension while the outer gauges experience 
compressive forces 



Instructions tor mounting of strain gauges 

In oraer to obtain the best possible results from a strain 
gauge, it is important to thoroughly prepare the gauge 
and the surface of the specunen to which the gauge is 
to be attached, prior to bonding with the adhesives re¬ 
commended in paragraph 3 below 

1. Specimen surface preparation 

An area larger than the installation should be cleared of 
ail paint rust etc. and finally smoothed with a fine 
grade emery paper or fine sand blasting to provide a 
sound bonding surface 

The area should now be degreased with a solvent such 
a3 RS PC3 solvent cleaner RS stock no 496-883, and 
finally neutralised with a weak detergent solution. 
Tissues or imt free cloth should be used for this 
operation, wetting the surface and wiping off the clean 
tissues or cloth until the final tissue used is stain free 
Care must be taken not to wipe grease from a 
surround ing area onto the prepared area or to touch 
the surface with the fingers 

This finai cleaning should take place immediately prior 
to installation of the gauge 

2. Strain gauge preparanon 

By sticking a short length of adhesive tape along the 
upper face of the gauge it may be picked up from a flat 
clean surface Holding both ends of the tape, orientate 
the gauge in the desired location and stick the end of 
the tape furthermost from the tags to the specimen 
Bend the other end of the tape back on itself thereby 
exposing the back of the gauge 

3. Adhesives and strain gauge installation 

Two basic types of adhesive are recommended: 
a) RS cyanoacrylate 
b.i RS quick-set' epoxy 

When using epoxy adhesive coat the back of the gauge 
■with adhesive and gently push down into position, 
■wiping excess adhesive to the two outside edges of the 
gauge, to leave a thin film of adhesive between gauge 
and sample Stick the 'whole length of tape to hold the 
gauge m position. Care should be taken that there is an 
even layer of adhesive and no air bubbles are left 
under the grid. Cover the gauge with cellophane or 
polyethylene etc. and apply a light weight or clamp as 
required until adhesive has set. Remove tape by slowly 
ana very carefully pulling it back over itself, stanng at 
the end furthermost from the tags Do not pull -upwards 
If cyanoacrylate adhesive is to be used suck one end of 
the tape down to the specimen completely up to the 
gauge. Drop a fiiin of adhesive in the hinge point 
formed by the gauge and the specimen. Starting at the 
fixed end with one finger push the gauge down at the 
same time pushing the adhesive along the gauge in a 
single wiping motion until the whole gauge is stuck 
down Apply pressure with one finger over the whole 
length of the gauge for approximately one minute. 
Leave for a further three minutes before removing 
tape 


4. Wiring 

The RS strain gauges are fined with 30 mm leads to 
enable the gauge to be soldered The lead out wires 
are fragile and should be handled with care 





































232-5957 



Installation protection 

RS strain gauges are encapsulated and therefore are 
protected from dust and draughts etc If however, 
additional protection from humidity, moisture and 
mechanical damage is required RS silicone rubber 
compound, RS stock no. 555-588. may be used This 
should be carefully spread over the installation using a 
spatula. 


Connecting to strain gauges 

The following bridge circuits are shown with 
connection referring to the basic amplifier circuit. 
Figure 7 All resistors, precision 'wire wound 0.1% 5 
ppm (For precision resistors see current RS 
Catalogue). 

Note: The expressions are assuming that ail gauges 
are subjected to the same strain Some 
configurations produce different strain m 
different gauges, and allowance must be made 



Figure 4 Half bndge 


; 

-- .anootSucc* 




a. 




: 






i 


G, 

i 



i 

r 4 


* 




Strain gauge amplifier (RS stock no. 846- 
171) and printed circuit board (RS stock 
no. 435-692) 

Description and operauon 

The strain gauge amplifier is a purpose designed 
hybrid. low noise, low drift, linear dc amplifier in a 24 
pin DIL package specifically configured for resistive 
bridge measurement and in particular the strain 
gauges detailed earner in this data sheet 

Foil strain gauges when attached to a specimen, 
produce very small changes in resistance (typically 
0.2Q in 120Q per micros train), and are thus normally 
connected m a Wheatstone bridge. Overall outputs of 
less than lmV on a common mode voltage of 5 volts 
may be encountered, requiring exceptional common 
mode rejection which cannot be provided by 
conventional means 

The strain gauge amplifier overcomes the problem of 
common mode rejection by removing the common 
mode voltages This is achieved by controlling the 
negative bridge supply voltage in such a manner that 
the voltage at the negative input terminal is always 
zero Thus for a symmetrical bndge, a negative bridge 
supply is generated equal and opposite to the positive 
bndge supply, hence zero common mode voltage 
The advantages of such a system are 

• No floating power supply needed 

• bridge supply easily vaned with remote sense if 
necessary. 

• Wire remote sense system 

• Freedom from common mode effects. 

• Very high stability dc amplifier enables numerous 
configurations to be assembled. 

• Low noise 

• hbgh speed (at low gains j 


Figure 5 Pin connections 


• Bnoge vouage 

1 

24 

-v s 

N/C 

2 

23 

N/e 

Compensation 

3 

22 

-Vs 

NIC 

4 

21 

N/C 

NIC 

5 

20 

Bridge Ref Input 

* Input 

6 

19 

N/C 

N/C 

7 

18 

Feedback 

NiC 

8 

17 

NIC 

NIC 

9 

16 

Output 

• Input 

10 

15 

N/C 

NIC 

11 


NIC 

- Bndge Voltage 

12 

13 

Zero Adjust 


Top view 



1 







































232-5957 


Specification 

(At 25'C ambient and rl2V 
stated.) 


supply unless otherwise 


Supply voltage __±2 to ±20Vdc 

Input o2set voltage_ 200 uV max 

Input ofiset voltage/temperature_0 oyVrC max 

Input offset voltage/suppiy_3yV/Vmax 

Input oflset voltage/time_0 3pV/monih max 

Input impedance_>5MQ min. 

Input noise voltage_9.9jiVp.p max 

Band width (unity gain)_L450kHz 


Cutout current 

5mA 

Cutout vcitaae span 

±(V.-2)V 

Cosed loco aain (adiustable) 

3 to 60.000 

Open loop gain 

>120dB 

Common mode reiection ratio 

>120dB 

Bndge supply voltage/temcerature 

20u V/’C 

Maximum bndge suooly current 

12mA 

Power dissioation 

O.SW 

Warm uo time 

5 mins 

Operating temoerature range 

-25’’C to + 85°C 


Figure 7 Basic circuit for printed circuit board RS stock no. 435-692 (gain approx. 1000) 



Figure 9 Circuit for semiconductor gauges and transducers 



•Vi 


OUTPUT 


QV 


•Vi 


Component values (Figures 7 and 8) 


R, 100k 
R.100R 
R.100k* 

R, 68R* 

R, 10R 

R,l00R(typ.) 


R ; 47R 
R, ICR 
R,lk0 
R ;C 680R 
R U 680R 


C-. C, lQn (typ) 
C-. C. 10*j (tant) 
T ; BD 135 
T3D 136 
T3C 108 


'•'i 


. C„ C T 100n ttyp.)D . D. 1N527 


A glass fibre printed cucuit boar. RS stock no 
435-692 is available for the basic cucuit as given m 
Figure 7 


The board is 46 x 98 mm m size and is complete with 
screen printed component identification and a solder 
mask 


Only typical values are given for certain components 


as adjustment of these values may be necessary in 
specifics applications to obtain optimum noise 
reduction - see Minimisation of Noise later in this data 
sheet) 

’R, and R, values may be adjusted to aiter the zero 
adjustment range when compensating for bridge 
imbalance 

Notes: 1 Gain is defined as 1 

R. 

2 Zero adjustment range ±6.2 x ^ 

Ri R, 

Total bridge supply = 2 x bndge ref input (pin 20) 

C. may be omitted for input lead lengths of less than 10 
metres 


<i 






























































































232-5957 


T, and T- provide bndge currents up to 5CmA and 
should be kept away from amplifier 

Tj and T. provide stability power supplies are being 
used zero and bridge supply reference may be taken 
direct from the power rails 

The high output of some semiconductor strain gauges 
may cause large amounts of asymmetry to the bndge 
In correcting for the common mode change, the 
negative bndge voltage will change, causing a span 
error This may be calibrated out or the arrangement 
above used to eliminate the cause of the error Some 
semiconductor strain gauge transducers are 
temperature compensated by the use of senes arm 
compensation Thus the common mode voltage 
changes the with temperature, and hence the 
arrangement above should be used. Thi 3 oDerates by 
referencing the positive bridge supply to the negative 
supply, thus varying the common mode but not the 
overall bridge supply. 

Minimisation of noise 

1. Inherent white/flicker noise in amplifier 

To keep this to a minimum use high quality (metal film) 
resistors and protect the amplifier from excessively 
high temperatures. The inherent noise level may be 
further reduced from its already low value by fitting C, 
and Cj to reduce the operating bandwidth 

2. Supply frequency (or harmonics) inference 

If at 100Hz then the cause is almost likely to be from 
power supply rails, so use stabilised lines. If at 50Hz 
then it is generally caused by the location of the supply 
transformer, and/or the winng. Relocate the supply 
transformer, screen and input leads to the amplifier 
and if possible reduce the operating bandwidth by 
fitting C, and C : . 

3. Power supply transient interference 

It is good pracnce to decouple the supply lines to the 
amplifier, by fitting C, and C„ as close to u as possible 
If a particular nuisance then fit a mams suppressor 

4. Electromagnetic interference 

This may be picked up by input leads, output leads, 
supply leads or direct into the circuit Minimisation 
involves a combination of screening, decoupling and 
reducing operating bandwidth. Screening The shield 
should be connected to only one earth potential at the 
receiving monitoring equipment end. fry not to earth 
any of the cic power lines (e.g. QV) if the shield at the 
sensor end is earthed then earth the shield at the 
receiving end and if possible connect this earth 
potential to the strain gauge ampufier circuit shield. 
Decouple die power supply leads by fitting C- and C». 
decouple the input leads with R= and C 5 (note a similar 
action on the input is not possible) Remove any pickup 
from the output leads by fitting P_ ; and C, Fa C. if input 
leads are more than 10m long and fit C* if remote 
sense is longer than 10m Reduce the operating 
bandwidth by fitting C, and C- 

Load cells 
Introduction 

Load ceils are basically a beam or other shaped 
member arranged so that an applied load will cause 
a proportional strain at certain fixed points on the 
device 

The strain can be detected m several ways, the most 
common being an arrangement of strain gauges These 


€ 

gauges convert the strain into an electrical stgnai which 
can then be chspiayed, used as a control signal, etc 


Single point load cells 

This RS range of load cells comprise of centre type 
(2kg, 20k & 10kg oil damped) in which a double beam 
a used Also in this range is a 100kg low profile off- 
centred load cell designed for direct mounting of the 
weighing platform They are supplied complete with a 
full bndge of four strain gauges fitted and calibrated 
ready to connect to any suitable amplifier. 

Three sizes of standard units are available for weighing 
up to 2kg, 20kg and 100kg Although physically 
different, the ceils are 100kg similar in method of 
operation and construction 



























































































232-5957 


When used in weighing scales a platform up to the 
maximum size given in the specfi: canon can be used 
without less of performance. 


recommended. An overload in excess of 150% (200% 
for 100kg unit) -will cause permanent damage to the 
cell. 


Electrical connections 

The ceils use a six wire full bridge system for the most 
accurate results. The .ead to the cell is screened and 
the cores are colour coded as shown m Figure 10. 

The RS strain gauge amplifier RS stock no 846-171 can 
be used with these load cells Use the circuit shown in 
Figure 7, connecting bndge supply to excitation and 
compensation to sense (Figure 10) In this circuit a five 
wire system is employed so that the -ve sense wire 
shown in Figure 10 is not used and should be 
connected to Lite -ve supply 

Other amplifiers can be used but to achieve good 
results an accurate low drift amplifier is required 



Mechanical fixings 

The 2 and 2kg cells are fixed by M6 x 1 set screws 
ana the bodies of the cells are drilled and tapoec to a 
depth of 10mm The 100kg cell is fixed by M8 x 1.25 
set screws with the body drilled and taoDed 15mm 
deep 

Care must be exercised when handling these devices 
- do not pull the lead or drop the device and ensure 
that the cell is net subjected to excessive vibration 

A platform, hopper, or any other fixture can be 
attached to the top or front face of these ceils but it must 
be noted that the weight of these attachments must be 
taken into account For example if a 1kg hopper is 
attached to the 2kg load cell for weighing cut 
polystyrene granuals for injection moulding the cell 
will only weigh !kg of the material because of the 
weight of the hopper 

These lead ceils must be mounted on a fiat ngxi base 
which is level and will not defied under loading 

The fixing bolts must be tightened to the correct torque 
of 7Nm Do not use a ratchet of click stop' torque 
spanner on the 2kg ceils as this may damage it 

Overload stops 

it is ’vital that overload protection is provided ana u is 
recommended that under load protection is 
incorporated where possible. 

While these load cells can be subjeded to overloads 
of 150% (200% for 100kg unit) without permanent 
damage the use of this safety factor cannot be 


Aci underload is simply a load which raises rather than 
depresses the load face. The RS cells are caoabie of 
measuring these types of load 

On the 2kg lead cell both over and under load stops 
are built into the device and therefore the cell will be 
preteaed if correctly mounted on a flat and rigid base 

•. ah the 20kg cell the base of the beam is machined 
sc that it ’will defied and touch any fiat base used at 
rated load Using a fiat rigid base will, therefore, 
automatically provide overload protection. 

An extra M6 x 1 tapped hole is provided in the base 
for an underload stop A mechanical stop should be 
provided with a no load clearance of 0 5mm so that the 
load face of the load cell can be only be raised by 
0.5mm which is equivalent to the full rated load of the 
unit. 


Single point - oil damped 


Principles of operation 

An undamped cantilever load cell can behave like a 
very stiff spring. Consequently when pre-loaded with 
a weight and shock excited by another weight, the unit 
nngs for an appreciable time A settling time of 
several seconds may be acceptable in platform scale 
applications but it is not acceptable for high speed 
repetitive weighing (Figure 11). 


A 











o 


232-5957 


Figure 11 Typical response tunes (undamped) 



•w» ’*»r* »nwi '5Cw» 


As can be seen tare weight increases settling time and 
should be kept at a minimum 



With the damped load cell it can be that the settling 
time is drastically reduced from more than 1 second to 
less than 100ms. (Figure 12 and 13) 


Figure 13 Capacity 7Kg 

Signal 

* 



Mounting 

The precision obtainable from the unit can only be 
realised by careful attention to the mechanical 
mounting. It will be appreciated that if the full scale 
deflection of the Cell is 0 4mm and the scale is divided 
into 4000 divisions, one division on the scale is the 
result of a deflection of 0.0001mm So. any. force, from 
whatever source, which brings about such a deflection 
will introduce an error into the system 
It is for this reason that the baseplate is solid and has a 
machined surface for mounting Ensure, therefore that 
the mounting support is corresponcungly flat and ngid 
Holding down bolts must be equally torqued to 35*40 
Nm (or 25-30 lb ft). Also it is important that the Load 


0 

Cell be level and that the level should not change 
significantly when the system is loaded. The initial 
level should be within 1 degree of the horizontal 
(check with semi level) and the deflection under load 
should not exceed 0 l degrees 

Vibration 

It a sometimes assumed that because the Load Cell is 
damped it a impervious to external vibration. This is 
not so. It is damped against its own natural vibration 
when loaded. If however, the Load Cell is oscillated by 
external forces, such as adjacent vibrating machinery, 
:t may provide output signals corresponding to these 
forces because heavy structures tend to oscillate at 
around 0.1 to 10Hz It is impossible to damp the Load 
Ceil adequately to eliminate these effects and maintain 
coherent performance The design aim must therefore 
be to attach the unit to a Arm flat, level base and to 
ensure that thus base is free from vibration The main 
sources of vibration are likely to be rotating 
machinery on the weigh structure, vibration from the 
floor etc Each of these must be nullified, preferably 
by physical separation but if that is not possible, by 
shock absorbers, anti-vibration mounts or similar 
devices. 

Applying the load 

The load must be applied via the bearing surface 
which is uppermost on the load applicator (Figure 14). 
3oth holes must be used, evenly torqued to 7 Nm 
(Sib’S) so that the load is evenly distributed 
It .s usual to use a flat bar or other load spreading 
member between the applicator and the weigh 
platform table or live superstructure The mating 
section and the substructure must be ngid, otherwise 
the ;ar.er will oscillate and superimpose on the Load 
Cell output, depending on the frequency and 
amplitude generated. The supporting member must 
be flat The lead should be transported on to the weigh 
platform in such a way that it creates the minimum 
disturbance. If the load traverses across the platform, 
it should, if possible avoid knocking the platform 
edge ;:.e no step; If the load is lowered on to the 
platform it should be controlled placement, not a 
dropped load, if possible For optimum performance 
the Lne of action of the applied load should act as near 
as pcssfoie to the centre Line of the Load Cell - in both 
horizontal planes-to minimise eccentricity effects. 

Effect of temperature 

Variations in temperature will affect the viscosity of the 
damping fluid and consequently the settling time of the 
Lead Cell The standard unit is damped for ambient 
•working temperatures (around 20°C) 

It is recommended that the Load Cell temperature be 
within i0°C of the specified working temperature if 
the settling time is to be within 50 milliseconds. 


7 




































232-5957 



Unstable reading 

If the repeated application of a load gives a steady but 
inconsistent reading, or the readings steady at around, 
but not quite, zero between weighings, then the Load 
^eil is probably reflecting seme form of mechanical 
interference or "sticton" Check that the platter is not 
fouling and that dirt etc has not accumulated 
somewhere in the scale mechanism. Remove the 
source of interference and normal weighing should 
result Inspect the Load Cell load applicator this 
should not be binding on the cover of the unit. Do not 
unbolt the base unless absolutely necessary. If this has 
to be done be sure to follow the bolting down 
procedure described earlier 

Outline dimensions 


Figure 14 




Figure 15 Mounting 

I - n —n - 





_l 



1 



| Centre of Load 

_L_ 



J 




© 

Tension/compression load cells 

These general purpose load cells are for force 
measurement .vith .oads up to 500kg Mechanical 
connections are by Ml2 x 175 threads in the body of 
the device («/: x 20 UNF on 500kg unit) and electrical 
connections are via a 3m 5-core screened cable 

These cells can be used for 'weighing but are ideally 
suited for the measurement of tensile, or compressive 
forces by using the cell to replace the structural 
member under investigation The 500kg unit is 
constructed using stainless steel & the 250kg utilises 
aluminium. 

Other applications include, e g determining the 
power output of a motor be replacing the mounting 
with the cell and measuring the torque reaction 
produced. 



r igure ; c 500kg load cell dimensions 

62 36 52 26(1.02") 



(2.46*) 

(2.04*) 





1 



Mounting - 
Holes 

A, 



r.T 

1 1 



1/2-20UNF 
(2 places i 



-> 1 





l_l 



1 


WW\\ 




§ 


, I 

\ 


1 11 - 





1 ■ 



Ml 


30 


1 

t=ti 


r 





J_L 


(1 03) 
Flexible 




a 


































































































































Shear beam load cells 

These shear beam load cells are available in stainless 
steel i oCOkg Sc 1000kg) cons traction or in aluminium 
(500Kg only) construction. AH are low profile units 
providing a high level of environmental protection 
whust reaturing 6 wire output for temperature 
compensation. 3oth types of unit are of rugged 
construction but the stainless steel products ar- 
hermetically sealed to enable the cells to function in 
harsh environments whilst maintaining its operation 
specifications. a 

Typical applications for these products would be in 
low profile platforms, pallet track weighers, tanks and 
suos etc 



& 


232-5957 


Tgure 23 Wiring schematic diagram 



(Blue) 


*ve Output - (Green) 


■ OacK i 

• (Brown) 

■ (White) 


Balanced temperature compensation 


Contilever load cells 

These load cells are available in 100kg and 250kq 
options They are of welded, bending beam, stainless 
steel construction and hermetically sealed to enable 
functionally m harsh environments 

The low profile construction and high accuracy of 
these products make them ideal for applications such 
as platform scales, weighing and packing machines 
ana .or mechanical scale conversions 

figure 24 Outline dimensions 


10 


ta 



*5 


205 


figure 25 Wiring schematic diagram 

-ve input 





- .V 

- *ve Sense 


• (Blue) 

• (Green) 


♦ve Output • (White) 


-ve Input 
-ve Sense 


- (Black) 

- (Grey) 


-ve Output - (Red) 


Balanced temperature compensation 


d 































































































































