N89- 16353 


HJsfinig Adi®* 1®) H id pD Gum® id ft ftlh® (D)p®ir®ftfi©iDs 

M®u®2®inD®iDft Sysft®iD ®s ® (C©iDiDiDiDSfty ©IT Ezp®n?fts 


ABSTRACT 

This paper describes an architecture for the Space Station Operations 
Management System (OMS), consisting of a distributed expert system 
framework implemented in Ada. The motivation for such a scheme is based on 
the desire to integrate the very diverse elements of the OMS while taking 
maximum advantage of knowledge-based systems technology. This 
technology is needed not only to solve problems that are specific to various 
elements of the OMS, but also to help solve the problems of integration and 
evolutionary growth. 

Part of the foundation work for an Ada-based distributed expert system 
was accomplished in the form of a proof-of-concept prototype for the KNOMES 
project (Knowledge-based Maintenance Expert System). This prototype 
successfully used concurrently active experts to accomplish monitoring and 
diagnosis for the Remote Manipulator System. We have named the basic 
concept of this software architecture ACTORS, for Ada Cognitive Task 
Organization Scheme. An individual ACTOR is a modular software unit which 
contains both standard data processing and artificial intelligence components. 

The work accomplished in the KNOMES project and in similar efforts 
throughout the industry suggest that the maintenance task for Space Station 
can best be accomplished via a knowledge-based system approach. In 
addition, tasks such as planning and scheduling, as well as logistics 
management and payload activity management, may also benefit greatly from 
the use of knowledge-based reasoning in some form. Since all of the above 
applications form a subset of the complete OMS, it will therefore be necessary 
to include the potential for utilizing knowledge-based systems within the OMS -- 
if not at IOC, then during the growth of the station. In addition, it will be 
necessary for all of these OMS components to talk to each other. 

It is when one considers the overall problem of integrating all of the OMS 
elements into a cooperative system that the Al solution stands out. By utilizing a 
distributed knowledge-based system as the framework for OMS, it will be 
possible to integrate those components which need to share information in an 
intelligent manner. This will be particularly crucial where processes need to be 
controlled in a hierarchical manner. One example is where a maintenance 
system for a particular subsystem needs to inform the scheduler about new 
constraints on the activities which that subsystem can perform. 


* Ada is a trademark of the U.S. Government, (Ada Joint Program Office) 


E.4.6.1 




Finally, there remains the question of implementing such a system within 
the confines of Ada. The proof that this can be done rests on the KNOMES 
prototype's use of ACTORS, on past implementations of Al languages using 
more traditional languages (eg., OPS-5 using BLISS), and on the 
implementation of a major commercial knowledge-based system environment 
in C. In fact, without the benefits of object-oriented programming as 
implemented in Ada, or the integration afforded by Ada’s development 
constructs, the task for implementing a distributed knowledge-based system for 
OMS would be considerably more difficult. 


M. S. Frank 

McDonnell-Douglas Astronautics Company 
Huntington Beach, California 


E.4.6.2 


