Books & Reports 


fjt Flight Simulation of ARES 
in the Mars Environment 

A report discusses using the Aerial Re- 
gional-scale Environmental Survey 
(ARES) light airplane as an observation 
platform on Mars in order to gather 
data. It would have to survive insertion 
into the atmosphere, fly long enough to 
meet science objectives, and provide a 
stable platform. 

The feasibility of such a platform was 
tested using the Langley Standard Real- 
Time Simulation in C++. The unique 
features of LaSRS++ are: full, six-de- 
grees-of-freedom flight simulation that 
can be used to evaluate the performance 
of the aircraft in the Martian environ- 
ment; capability of flight analysis from 
start to finish; support of Monte Carlo 
analysis of aircraft performance; and ac- 
cepting initial conditions from POST re- 
sults for the entry and deployment of 
the entry body. 

Starting with a general aviation model, 
the design was tweaked to maintain a sta- 
ble aircraft under expected Martian con- 
ditions. Outer mold lines were adjusted 
based on experience with the Martian at- 
mosphere. Flight control was modified 
from a vertical acceleration control law 
to an angle-of-attack control law. Naviga- 
tion was modified from a vertical acceler- 
ation control system to an alpha control 
system. In general, a pattern of starting 
with simple models with well-understood 
behaviors was selected and modified dur- 
ing testing. 

This work was done by P. Sean Kenney and 
Mark A. Groom. of Langley Research Center. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
(see page 1 ). LAR-1 7458 


^ Low-Outgassing Photogram- 
metry Targets for Use in 
Outer Space 

A short document discusses an investi- 
gation of materials for photogrammetry 
targets for highly sensitive optical scien- 
tific instruments to be operated in outer 
space and in an outer-space-environ- 
ment-simulating thermal vacuum cham- 
ber on Earth. A key consideration in the 
selection of photogrammetry-target ma- 
terials for vacuum environments is the 
need to prevent contamination that 
could degrade the optical responses of 
the instruments. Therefore, in addition 


to the high levels and uniformity of re- 
flectivity required of photogrammetry- 
target materials suitable for use in air, 
the materials sought must exhibit mini- 
mal outgassing. 

Commercially available photogram- 
metry targets were found to outgas ex- 
cessively under the thermal and vac- 
uum conditions of interest; this finding 
prompted the investigators to consider 
optically equivalent or superior, lower- 
outgassing alternative target materials. 
The document lists several materials 
found to satisfy the requirements, but 
does not state explicitly whether the 
materials can be used individually or 
must be combined in the proper se- 
quence into layered target structures. 
The materials in question are an alu- 
minized polyimide tape, an acrylic pres- 
sure-sensitive adhesive, a 500-A-thick 
layer of vapor-deposited aluminum, 
and spherical barium titanate glass 
beads having various diameters from 20 
to 63 pm. 

This work was done by fason N. Gross, Henry 
Sampler, and Benjamin B. Reed of Goddard 
Space Flight Center. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). GSG15373-1 


(i Planning the FUSE Mission 
Using the SOVA Algorithm 

Three documents discuss the Sustain- 
able Objective Valuation and Attainabil- 
ity (SOVA) algorithm and software as 
used to plan tasks (principally, scientific 
observations and associated maneuvers) 
for the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Ex- 
plorer (FUSE) satellite. SOVA is a means 
of managing risk in a complex system, 
based on a concept of computing the ex- 
pected return value of a candidate or- 
dered set of tasks as a product of pre-as- 
signed task values and assessments of 
attainability made against qualitatively 
defined strategic objectives. 

For the FUSE mission, SOVA auton- 
omously assembles a week-long schedule 
of target observations and associated 
maneuvers so as to maximize the ex- 
pected scientific return value while 
keeping the satellite stable, managing 
the angular momentum of spacecraft at- 
titude-control reaction wheels, and striv- 
ing for other strategic objectives. A six- 
degree-of-freedom model of the 
spacecraft is used in simulating the tasks, 
and the attainability of a task is calcu- 


lated at each step by use of strategic ob- 
jectives as defined by use of fuzzy infer- 
ence systems. SOVA utilizes a variant of a 
graph-search algorithm known as the A* 
search algorithm to assemble the tasks 
into a week-long target schedule, using 
the expected scientific return value to 
guide the search. 

This work was done by Jim Lanzi, Scott 
Heatwole, and Philip R. Ward of Goddard 
Space Flight Center and Thomas Civeit, Hum- 
berto Calvani, Jeffrey W. Kruk, and Anatoly 
Suchkov of Johns Hopkins University. Further 
information is contained in a TSP ( see page 
1). GSG15436-1 


@) Monitoring Spacecraft 
Telemetry Via Optical 
or RF Link 

A patent disclosure document dis- 
cusses a photonic method for connect- 
ing a spacecraft with a launch vehicle 
upper-stage telemetry system as a means 
for monitoring a spacecraft’s health and 
status during and right after separation 
and deployment. This method also pro- 
vides an efficient opto-coupled capabil- 
ity for prelaunch built-in-test (BIT) on 
the ground to enable more efficient and 
timely integration, preflight checkout, 
and a means to obviate any local EMI 
(electromagnetic interference) during 
integration and test. Additional utility 
can be envisioned for BIT on other plat- 
forms, such as the International Space 
Station (ISS). 

The photonic telemetry system imple- 
ments an optical free-space link with a 
divergent laser transmitter beam 
spoiled over a significant cone angle to 
accommodate changes in spacecraft po- 
sition without having to angle track it 
during deployment. Since the space- 
craft may lose attitude control and tum- 
ble during deployment, the transmitted 
laser beam interrogates any one of several 
low-profile meso-scale retro-reflective spa- 
tial light modulators (SLMs) deployed 
over the surface of the spacecraft. The re- 
turn signal beam, modulated by the 
SLMs, contains health, status, and atti- 
tude information received back at the 
launch vehicle. Very compact low-power 
opto-coupler technology already exists 
for the received signal (requiring rela- 
tively low bandwidths, e.g., <200 kbps) to 
enable transfer to a forward pass RF relay 
from the launch vehicle to TDRSS 


NASA Tech Briefs, August 2011 


33 


