
S(gptembeRgQctobeBi2041[0 


Id@©GdgqDD©3]dd 


Professional 


Bulletin 


Artillerymen 


WWW 































Report Documentation Page 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 


1. REPORT DATE 

SEP 2010 


2. REPORT TYPE 


3. DATES COVERED 

00-09-2010 to 00-10-2010 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Fires. A Joint Publication for U.S. Artillery Professionals. September 
October 2010 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 


5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 


6. AUTHOR(S) 


5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Fires,Building 652, Room 203, McNair Road,Fort Sill,OK,73503 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS (ES) 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 


11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


14. ABSTRACT 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 

unclassified 


b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 


c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER 

ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Same as 

52 

Report (SAR) 



19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





September-i 



ien 201 □ 


Commanding General’s Forward 

Ahead of the power curve: FCoE is on honing edge of growing 
Page 4 strategic leaders 

By MG David D. Halverson 


Mud to Space 

Breaking out of the ‘brick and mortar’ schoolhouse concept: U.S. 
Army Air Defense Artillery and Field Artillery schools on course for 
Page 6 creating competitive learning environment for growing strategic 
leaders 

By BG Roger F. Mathews and BG Ross E. Ridge 


Lead 

Page 8 Growing strategic leaders for future conflict 

By Barak A. Salmoni, Jessica Hart, Renny McPherson and Aidan Kirby Winn 

Operationalizing key leader engagement: Adapting the targeting 
Page is C y C | e f 0 w j n friends and influence people 

By LTC Chad Jones 

develop 

Joint and Combined Fires University concept a year later: 
page 20 Providing leaders and experts in the art and science of Fires 

By Alvin Peterson and Sharon McBride 

Creating culturally astute leaders: Joint and Combined Fires 
page 23 University providing innovative cultural education 

By Sharon McBride 

Page 27 “Danger Close” 

By Jennifer McFadden 

Pac 29 The lion, the starfish and the spider: Hitting terrorists where it hurts 

By CW 3 Bruce E. DeFeyter 


Headquarters, Department of the Army • PB644-10-5 



















New ADA simulator offers high-tech training 

By Marie Berberea 



Achieve 


DISCLAIMER: Fires, a professional bulletin, is published 
bimonthly by Headquarters, Department of the Army under 
the auspices of the Fires Center of Excellence (Building 
758, McNair Road), Fort Sill, Okla. The views expressed are 
those of the authors and not the Department of Defense 
or its elements. Fires' content doesn’t necessarily reflect 
the U.S. Army’s position or supersede information in other 
official Army publications. Use of news items constitutes 
neither affirmation of their accuracy nor product endorse¬ 
ments. Fires is printed by Monarch Litho Inc., a private 
firm in no way connected with the Department of the 
Army. Fires assumes no responsibility for any unsolicited 
material. By Order of the Secretary of the Army: 

George W. Casey Jr. 

General, United States Army 
Chief of Staff 

Official: /jk 

C. 

Joyce E. Morrow 

Administrative Assistant to the 
Secretary of the Army, 1013002 

David D. Halverson 

Major General, United States Army 

Commanding General 
Fort Sill, Okla. 


Editor-in-Chief: Sharon McBride 
Managing Editor: Jennifer M. McFadden 

Art Director: Jason Kelly 
Assistant Editor: Paul Jiron 


PURPOSE: Founded in 2007, Fires serves as a forum 
for the professional discussions of U.S. Army and Marine 
Field Artillery (FA) and Army Air Defense Artillery (ADA) 
professionals, both active and Reserve Component 
(RC); disseminates professional knowledge about the 
FA’s and ADA’s progress, developments and best use in 
campaigns; cultivates a common understanding of the 
power, [imitations and application of joint fires, both lethal 
and nonlethal; fosters joint fires interdependency among 
the armed services; and promotes the understanding of 
and interoperability between the FA’s and ADA’s active and 
RC units—all of which contribute to the good of the FA and 
ADA, Army, joint and combined forces, and our nation. 


Leader development: Preparing Soldiers 
Page 34 f or now anc | f u t u re fight 

By Jason Kelly 

Military occupational specialty 14J 
p 36 transformation: Creating better career 
paths, reducing critical tasks 

By Jennifer McFadden 

Developing leaders who engage the 
Page 38 news media as well as social network 


OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION: Free copies are sent to USA 
and USMC FA units: 7 per corps artillery, FA/fires brigade, 
brigade combat team (BCT), Stryker cavalry regiment 
(SCR), FA Marine regiment and battlefield coordination 
--—-—p ; l3perFA/fires/battalion/ 



fires coordination center (FFCC) and separate baffery or 
detachment; 3 per fire support team (FIST) and combat 
observation lasing team (COLT); and 1 per Master Gun¬ 
ner and Fire Support Officer (FSO). Free copies to Army 
ADA units: 7 per Army air and missile defense command 
(AAMDC) and ADA brigade headquarters; 13 per ADA 
battalion; and 3 per air defense airspace management 
(ADAM) cell and separate battery or detachment.The FA 
and ADA Schools’ departments, directorates and divisions 
each get 2 copies. Other U.S. Army and armed services 
units/organizations and U.S. government agencies that 
work with FA or ADA personnel, equipment, doctrine, 
tactics, training organization or leadership issues may 
request a free copy—including, but not limited to, ROTCs, 
recruiting commands, libraries, attaches, liaison officers, 
state adjutants general, pubfic affairs offices, military 
academies, laboratories, arsenals, major commands, etc. 
Contact Fires at http://sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/. 


forums with responsibility 
Learning to leverage new media 

Page 40 By LTG William B. Caldwell IV, Dennis M. Murphy and 
Antopn Menning 


page 46 Social media best practices 



Qni t-faei coyeifr. 


1LT Christian McGinnis, attached to 1314 Civil Affairs Company, 
17th Fires Brigade, stops during a combat patrol to collect 
information on the needs of the local tribes through Najihiyah, 
Iraq, Sept. 7, 2009. (Photo by SPC Samantha R. Ciaramitaro, U.S. Army) 


SUBSCRIPTIONS: Those not eligible for official distribu¬ 
tion may subscribe to Fires via theTJ.S. Superintendent of 
Documents, P.O. Box37154, Pittsburgh, RA15250-7954 
(1-866-512-1800). 


SUBMISSIONS: E-mail to the Editor, Fires, at firesbul- 
letin@conus.army.mil; mail to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, 
OK 73503-0311; overnight to Building 758, Room 7, 
McNair Road, Fort Sill, OK 73503-5600; or call at DShJ 
639-5121/6856 or commercial (580) 442-5121/6806. 



POSTMASTER: Fires( USPS 309-010) (ISSN 1935-4096) 
is published bimonthly; periodical postage paid by Depart¬ 
ment of the Army at Lawton OK 73501 and an additional 
mailing post office. Send address chanqes to Fires, P.O. 
Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311. 


ADA 24/7 Hotline & E-mail 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 

DSN 978-5312 or 
(915)568-5312 
ada_fires@bliss.army. mil 


FA 24/7 Hotline & E-mail 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 

DSN 639-2204 or 
(580) 442-2204 
redleg@conus.army.mil 








CG’s forward 



COMMAM)Ma GENERAL’S 
FORWARD 



#.h,e3.dl of tfhiD 

p(gA^©jtT’ ^synp^ju 

pCoE is on Iri.Q.rriirrig edge 
growing strategic leaders 

By MG David D. Halverson 

Commanding General of the Fires Center of Excellence and Fort Sill, Okla. 



“What has become increasingly clear over time is that leaders must have a much 

BROADER UNDERSTANDING OF MISSION COMMAND VERSUS COMMAND AND CONTROL. 

Mission command in this increasingly complex world full of joint, interagency, 

INTERGOVERNMENTAL, AND MULTINATIONAL PARTNERS REQUIRES LEADERS WHO UNDERSTAND, 
RESPECT, AND TRUST EACH OTHER." 



GEN Martin E. Dempsey, 

COMMANDER OF THE U.S. ARMY TRAINING AND DOCTRINE COMMAND, MARCH 1, 2010 


G EN Creighton Williams Abrams Jr. once said, “Everyone 
deserves great leadership.” Despite nine years of war 
our Army is establishing a break-through concept 
with our newly released leadership strategy. It’s a strategy that talks 
of decentralization and versatility over a strict centralized command 
and control structure; but what does that mean to the Fires Center of 
Excellence’s mission of growing leaders? 

At its core, decentralization means taking decision making power 
and assignment of accountability for results and pushing those 
responsibilities down to the individual leader and his or her unit at 
lower echelons. There’s less emphasis on command and control and 
more emphasis on ‘mission command.’ Mission command in this 
multifaceted world full of joint, interagency, intergovernmental and 
multinational partners requires leaders who understand, respect and 
trust each other. Although this is already happening on the battlefield 
on a daily basis, lessons learned show that tactical battlefield problems 
tend to be viewed differently by junior leaders as opposed to senior 
leaders. 

Junior leaders often regard tactical problems as puzzles that have 
‘school book’ solutions, while more experienced officers view them 
in a more challenging light, acknowledging the possibility that the 
enemy may not succumb so readily to a predictable course of action. 
Textbook-derived solutions, checklists and processes continue to limit 
knowledge growth of our junior leaders and their ability to be adaptive 
when critical decisions are needed in dealing with complex problems. 

So here at the FCoE we are not only developing leaders but people as 
a whole. We are concentrating on providing training and education that 
develops critical thinking in leaders at all levels, not just at the senior 
level. As a people-based organization, the FCoE has ensured as we 

4 September-October 2010 • Fires 


move away from the doctrinal approach of ‘what to think’ to an 
emphasis on ‘how to think, ’ we are investing in technologies and 
cutting edge curriculum. A critical transformation in education 
and training has taken place across the board in the FCoE as we 
have found that critical thinking and decentralization go hand in 
hand as we change the culture and leadership in the profession 
of Fires. 

I’m proud to say that the FCoE is on target and ahead 
of schedule in facilitating TRADOC’s number one priority 
of growing leaders with critical thinking skills and who are 
competent in their core competencies yet broad enough to 
succeed at operations across the spectrum of conflict. 

In order to grow the type of leaders needed in today’s operations, 
the FCoE began to develop an education concept that included 
creating a Joint and Combined Fires University. JCFU, aground- 
breaking learning organization, provides training and education 
through a mix of delivery methods as outlined by both A Leader 
Development Strategy for a 21st Century Army and the draft 
release of The United States Army Learning Concept for 2015. 

With its inception JCFU has incorporated a lot of firsts, both 
through technology and through outside partnerships. 

We are on track with transforming and eliminating boring 
PowerPoint lectures throughout the FCoE, and we are using 
a blended learning model that includes virtual gaming, mock 
computer applications and technology enabled instruction 
that centers on interaction and facilitated learning. Through 
incorporating these types of learning initiatives students are able 
to immerse themselves in true-to-life situations and simulations 
in order to broaden their experience base and intuitive decision 























making abilities. This will ensure that our Fires leaders are fit to 
fight, as we must train for war. 

We are ahead of schedule in introducing ‘design’ (FM 5-0: The 
Operations Process) into our Fires doctrine. Our staff and faculty 
at Fort Sill are currently using Socratic teaching methods, which 
is a student-centered philosophy that turns all classrooms into 
collaborative problem-solving labs ledby facilitators, not instructors. 
This type of learning environment challenges learners to develop 
their critical thinking skills and engage in critical and analytical 
discussion. Ultimately, our FCoE instructors will use cutting edge 
instructional methods coupled with technical and tactical expertise 
to raise the understanding of all leaders, both junior and senior, so 
they can exploit opportunities, identify vulnerabilities and anticipate 
transitions during a campaign. 

I am proud to report that the FCoE has also formed learning 
partnerships with local universities to participate in civilian 
training and college education which creates other avenues of self¬ 
development and experience for our Fires leaders. Proactive leaders 
today should be able to think through complex issues, to be able to 
get outside their comfort zones and outside the traditional mindset 
to seek solutions. Gaining and experiencing civilian education is 
one way a leader can gain insight and the wisdom to know and 
apply the proper outcomes for training and strengthen civil-military 
relationships. 

One such partnership, that serves as an example of how we are 
using innovation to keep our learning relevant is our partnership 
with the journalism department within the University of Oklahoma’s 
Gaylord College. Officers attending the Field Artillery and the 
Air Defense Artillery Captain’s Career Course get much needed 
media experience by participating in mock-imbed opportunities and 
mock-news conferences during the CCC’s end of course tactical 
field exercise with OU journalism graduate students. It serves two 
purposes; first civilian journalism students learn about the cost of 
freedom and are exposed to our element of national power - our 
military. Second, our Fires students get a chance to interact with 
world-class media to work through complex issues in simple terms 
which is an important skill to practice - especially in a time of war. 


The FCoE is also ahead of schedule in developing a network 
with our joint, interagency, intergovernmental, multinational 
teammates as outlined by the leader development strategy. The 
strategy outlines the need for leaders to operate within a JIIM 
environment as a matter of routine and lead across international 
boundaries to advance national interests. 

Here at the FCoE, for the past few years we have regularly 
been hosting training opportunities with ally nations such as 
Canada, U.K., Singapore, Jordan, Taiwan, Germany, Korea, Japan, 
Iraq, Argentina and Israel - to name a few. These exercises give 
our Fires professionals valuable training experience in working 
in a combined operation. Fort Sill has 29,000 square miles of 
joint military-controlled airspace and 47,000 acres of maneuver 
space to rehearse joint fight tactics. The FCoE actively looks for 
opportunities to bring joint and combined training here because 
it exposes our Soldiers, and the leaders we are growing, to the 
operational environment they will be exposed to in the real fight. 

Our Fires professionals deserve the best possible leadership 
development process to enable them to effectively lead Soldiers. 
The expectations for what leaders should do are captured in the 
Army’s core leader competencies, but a new leadership style is 
emerging, with skills uniquely tailored for success in today’s battle 
field environment. Fires leaders must know how to lead, develop 
others and themselves, and sometimes achieve success under the 
most complex environment in an era of persistent conflict. That’s 
no easy task, so here at the FCoE we are increasing our efforts not 
only to grow leaders with these new criteria, but ensure that our 
most talented leaders have what they need to be a force within the 
Fires profession. 

We are in the business of ‘growing strategic leaders,’ which 
also is the theme of the September-October 2010 Fires Bulletin. 
This edition is full of articles demonstrating the FCoE is ahead of 
the curve in providing a competitive learning environment and 
making sure that our most important core competency - leader 
development - is on time and on task in producing confident, 
competent, versatile leaders of the 21st century Army. 

Fit to Fight! Fires Strong! 


PFC Beau Pendleton and PVT Valeriano Lopez partner up to hit at a virtual target inside the Joint Fires Multipurpose Dome at the Fires Center of 
Excellence, Fort Sill, Okla., July 15 as part of their training to become air and missile defense crew members. For more information on the Joint Fires 
Multipurpose Dome, see page 32. (Photo by Marie Berberea, Fort Sill Cannoneer) 



“WMoBas 

© 0®S ®L? 
©do(3 SCdp 













mud to space 



S MjDTQ 
'SPACE 





HAT®!* t 



mortar 1 schooll 

U.S. Army Air Defense A 
schools on course for ©rpe 
erfi^ijp(^rfimen[t) for grow 


By BG Roger F. Mathews, Chief of the Air Defense Artillery, 


T he Training and Doctrine 
Command has recently circulated 
a draft of the U.S. Army Learning 
Concept for 2015. This learning concept 
outlines the Army’s visualization on how we 
will train and educate Soldiers and leaders 
in individual skills, attributes and abilities 
to execute full-spectrum operations. 

Here at the Fires Center of Excellence, 
we are proud to say we are ahead of the pack 
in developing the capacities as outlined in 
this strategic document for our Fires Soldiers 
and leaders to participate in accelerated 
learning in order to gain the knowledge, 
skills and abilities that they will be tested 
in the most unforgiving environments. 

Lessons learned have shown that our 
Fires professionals need relevant, tailored, 
engaging learning experiences through a 
career-long continuum of learning that is 
not place dependent, but accessed at the 
point of need. 

Here at the FCoE and within the U.S. 
Army Air Defense Artillery and Field 
Artillery branches, we have started the 
process ahead of schedule by being open 
to inventiveness and advances in learning 
technologies and methods to assure we are 
providing the best education for our Fires 
professionals at all levels from advanced 
individual training all the way through our 
officer and warrant officer curriculum. 
Embracing technology is a must in 


order to prevail in the competitive learning 
environment and we are on task in shedding 
outmoded processes and models with more 
adaptive learning systems. 

The FCoE trains and educates more than 
a thousand individuals per year through 
resident courses, distance learning and other 
avenues. Of those we teach Millennials are 
the largest population of students. These 
Soldiers use computers, mobile devices 
and the Internet to learn, and as outlined by 
the Army learning concept we are closing 
the gap to attract and retain a generation 
of young people who know how to use 
technology to learn both formally and 
informally to learn. 

We are also challenging and meeting 
the needs of seasoned Fires professionals 
who have repeated deployments and bring a 
wealth of experience to our schools. We have 
incorporated a learning environment that 
advances Fires professionals from a range 
of generations that takes into consideration 
what each individual brings to the table. 

A ir Defense Artillery. The ADA 
„ branch is currently and will in the 
future incorporate a lot of firsts into ADA 
curriculum, both through technology and 
through cementing outside partnerships 
with civilian enterprises. 

Beyond weapon system hardware and 
software upgrades, 21 st century interactive 
computer driven training devices and 
software packages are in development and 


also being fielded for training use. 

For example, the reconfigurable tabletop 
trainer, which was recently procured by the 
ADA through a partnership with Raytheon, 
is making PATRIOT operator training 
more realistic, capable and affordable. It 
is a state-of-the-art interactive workstation 
that allows standalone or netted training 
to replicate PATRIOT operations in a 
operational environment. It is hoped that 
the trainer will be available for ADA units 
by next year. 

Also currently in development is a virtual 
game, called “Launcher Dogs.” It is an 
interactive, self-remediating program that is 
designed to help ADA Soldiers learn how to 
emplace the major end items of a PATRIOT 
Missile Defense System. It can be used on 
many hand held devices, like an iPod or 
cell phone. It can also be used on a laptop 
computer and interface via the Internet. 
It allows Soldiers to study anywhere, 
anytime and complements traditional 
training methods and allows for individual 
development needs. It incorporates state-of- 
the-art graphics comparable to those seen 
in the science fiction video game “Halo.” 
Like “Halo,” “Launcher Dogs” is in the 
first person perspective; i.e., the player 
experiences the action through the eyes of 
his ‘avatar.’ The end result is a detailed, 
lifelike simulation with text and audio 
instructions that guides the students through 
the tutorial. 6th ADA Brigade has already 


MQDQG G® g)P®M D©g)(°]©[p© wW D® @P© 

^7©e [jD[P® 6](°] ©00®QQ(sj[]D G® ©00@@©©(!D QG ®[p©[PQ'i 


6 September-October 2010 • Fires 
























conducted two, limited double-blind tests 
and a formal pilot program testing for the 
gaming solution is currently under way. 

Currently in use at Fort Sill, Okla., 
is the Joint Fires Multipurpose Dome. 
It’s the newest and largest engagement 
trainer for gunners giving each Soldier 16 
hours of training on the Man Portable Air 
Defense System. The $3.6 million dome 
was designed after a simulator located at 
Fort Bliss, Texas. It has 84 projectors, seven 
computer units, three catwalks and four 
subwoofers - all geared to provide life-like 
training scenarios. Beyond learning how 
to shoot Stinger missiles, once additional 
software is developed, the dome will be 
used to provide other types of instruction 
and simulation for the entire Fires force. 

These are just a few examples of how the 
ADAschoolhouse is leveraging technology 
and adapting training methodologies to 
replicate complexity and hybrid threats in 
the classroom, at home station and while 
deployed. More is yet to come. 

ield Artillery. The FA branch is also 
hard at work incorporating a lot of 
firsts into FAschoolhouse curriculum, both 
through technology and through fortifying 
outside civilian partnerships. 

For example, when teaching Intelligence 
Preparation of the Battlefield to FA officer 
and warrant officer students the FA branch 
now incorporates an Internet application 
called “Google Earth.” 

@©HiQ[p©®©[]Q® ODD 


“Google Earth” is a virtual globe, 
map and geographic information program 
that super-imposes images obtained from 
satellite imagery and aerial 3D photography. 
Incorporating this particular technology 
is particularly useful in situations where 
geography is important - like Afghanistan. 
Mountainous terrain can severely affect 
shooters’ ability to see the targets they 
are engaging. “Google Earth” also allows 
FA soldiers to overlay weather effects 
and opposing forces’ doctrine on top of 
geography and can give commanders a 
good idea of what is possible, impossible 
and likely. By teaching how to use “Google 
Earth,” IPB has evolved into an increasingly 
useful and sophisticated analytic method. 

The FA also recognizes the role gaming 
can play in the capability of units and 
Soldiers to train and learn. One specific 
initiative currently under analysis and 
development is the Army Artillery Ballistics 
Concepts Trainer, which was created in 
order to address the need for junior officers 
to develop and master ballistics concepts and 
visualize the effects of inputs on munitions’ 
accuracy. 

The FCoE Directorate of Training and 
Doctrine is working with Training and 
Doctrine Command Capabilities Manager 
Gaming to develop a gaming technology 
that will address this requirement. When 
fully developed, this technology would be 
available for distribution to FA users at the 



schoolhouse and in the field. 

Another example of forward thinking 
is the FA’s partnership with the journalism 
department within the University of 
Oklahoma’s Gaylord College. Through 
this partnership, journalism and strategic 
communication graduate students, and 
officers attending the FA Captains’ Career 
Course both get much needed media 
experience by participating in mock imbed 
opportunities and mock news conferences 
during the CCC’s end of course tactical field 
exercise. 

This “Media on the Battlefield” training 
is designed to get leaders comfortable 
talking with journalists and other media 
entities while keeping operational security 
in mind. 

ontinuously adapting. Both 
the ADA and FA branches are 
constantly assessing and identifying what 
our Fires professionals need to learn and 
listening to requirements from units at 
all levels currently engaged in tactical 
environments. The refinement to this 
concept will be ongoing, but we are on time 
and on target in developing our Fires force 
while encouraging life-long learning and 
development. We want to grow leaders who 
are competent in their core competencies 
yet broad enough to succeed at operations 
across the spectrum of conflict. 

Fit to Fight! Fires Strong! 


f^heBp ©®[PO IS ijDjJ 3S 3Ii©0©© 




30®oo© asp®©© sGd© ©[psoSPoaDDD ®(? ©©mfiffisEo® 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 7 



















lead 





Growing strategic leaders 
for future conflict 



By Barak A. Salmoni, Jessica Hart, Renny McPherson 
and Aidan Kirby Winn 


G lobal operations since 2001 highlight certain 
characteristics of the U.S. military’s emerging 
operating environment. Future operations will likely 
take place “amongst the people” in a wide range of unpredictable 
environments (See Rupert Smith, The Utility of Force: The Art 
of War in the Modern World (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2007), 
5-6, 280-91.) Managing these conflicts will require extensive 
collaboration between military and civilian agencies representing 
a range of governments, intergovernmental organizations, and 
nongovernmental organizations. Likewise, general-purpose forces 
will make larger contributions to tasks previously reserved to special- 
operations forces. These two components will experience greater 
intermixing and burden sharing. These operating environment 
characteristics and 
functional implications 
have been referred to 
as “irregular warfare,” 

“hybrid war,” and “full- 
spectrum operations.” 

In ongoing operations 
in Iraq, Afghanistan, and 
elsewhere, effective se¬ 
nior leaders are those able 
to grapple successfully 
with the dynamic emerg¬ 
ing environment and its 
functional implications. 

Along the way, leaders 
have developed important 
insight regarding the char¬ 
acteristics of successful commanders and the measures required to 
ensure future leaders possess these characteristics. As the Depart¬ 
ment of Defense seeks to develop a cadre of senior joint-force 
leaders for operational and strategic command in “multi-modal 
conflicts,” these views are worthy of serious consideration. (See 
Michael Evans, “From Kadesh to Kandahar: Military Theory and 
the Future of War,” Naval War College Review). 

To illuminate andbegin to codify attitudes toward strategic-level 
leadership development, the authors selected a group of SOF and 
GPF leaders who have commanded at the colonel or Navy captain 
level and higher in recent irregular and hybrid warfare environments. 
(The sample included 37 interviewees. A third were at the three- or 
four-star level; more than 40 percent were at the one- or two-star 
level; while 25 percent were colonels or Navy captains. Roughly 
60 percent of this pool represented SOF, while the remainders were 
GPF leaders. As for service, nearly 60 percent were Soldiers and 
25 percent Marines. Eleven percent were Navy sea, air and land 
special forces, and the remaining two interviewees were Air Force 
special operations senior leaders. 

8 September-October 2010 • Fires 


In terms of assignments, general officers included combatant 
commanders and deputy combatant commanders, theater special 
operations commanders, and component commanders for U.S. 
Special Operations Command. Interviewees at this level also 
included corps- and division-level commanders and senior service 
educators. At the colonel or Navy captain level, in addition to serving 
for former Special Forces group and battalion commanders, the 
authors interviewed leaders of combined joint special operations 
task forces, SEAL teams, and special-mission units, as well as 
Army brigade combat team and Marine regimental combat team 
commanders. Interviewees had recent operational experience in 
Iraq, Afghanistan, U.S. Pacific Command, Southern Command, 
and European Command. In terms of criteria for selection, 25 were 
selected by senior policy-makers in the Office of the Secretary 
of Defense; the remainder was selected based on interviewee 
recommendations. 

In extensive interviews, they reflected on the characteristics 

required for effective 
senior-level leadership 
and provided recom¬ 
mendations for leader 
development. Their re¬ 
sponses highlighted the 
characteristics, educa¬ 
tional experiences, and 
assignments this cohort 
considered relevant to 
success in the unpre¬ 
dictable operating envi¬ 
ronments of today and 
tomorrow. 

haracteristics 
of strategic 
leadership. The 
interviewees’reflections on necessary strategic leader characteristics 
fall into three broad categories: cognitive, interpersonal and 
managerial styles. Each style comprises a cluster of qualities, 
skills, and cultivable traits that the officers associated with each 
other. With respect to the first style, interviewees focused on 
cognitive processes aiding in problem-solving. Most prominently, 
interviewees distinguished between “how-to-think” and “what-to- 
think” approaches, with the former embracing flexibility of mind 
and diverse intellectual disciplines. How-to-think approaches 
emphasize the importance of understanding the parts of a problem in 
relationship to each other, as well as the different perspectives and 
needs that problem-solving partners contribute. Such approaches 
entail developing problem-solving methodologies that serve to 
reconcile competing viewpoints while remaining focused on the goal. 

A how-to-think framework also accounts for consequences 
of decisions, over time and across multiple levels and lines of 
operations, while tolerating iterative problem-solving in the absence 
of perfect solutions. (For further exploration, see John F. Schmitt, 
“A Systemic Concept for Operational Design”). 


“Odd eEDgjEtagj ®[pcscFe(S®OQ© to Op©^ 
Z^Go©mB©3©[]i) D ©rata] ©0 ©©e!d[]i)©p©o 

©{?{?©@®0\V7© ©©mB®p 0©©c°]©p© 

©p© sBo®©© afeD© e® gjpappD© 
©Da® 3 ©©eiLte% raflsCo eCo© 

©DuD©Pg]3[lQg| ©DQ\150P®[lQ[liIl©[lQS ©©GO 
0S© (tam@3B®[jO©D BdcdpDB®©^®®©^ 





Afghan National Security Forces gather together at the new location of the Marjaneh Afghan Uniformed Police checkpoint in Paktika province, 
Afghanistan, June 28. (Photo courtesy of Combined Joint Task Force 101) 


As one GPF officer said, “It’s being able to look at a problem, 
think about the influences associated with the problem, think 
about potential solutions to the problem, and go deeper into the 
second- and third-order effects.” Officers considered the how-to- 
think method essential for cultivating other important cognitive 
qualities, particularly the ability to think analogically from one 
case to another. Interviewees spoke of stepping outside events 
and intellectual processes to observe in real time how they and 
others proceed and learn. One corps-level commander referred to 
this method as “going up onto the balcony,” with one SOF leader 
similarly emphasizing the ability to turn observations into course 
corrections in dynamic time. These comments suggest the need 
for leaders at this level to “see inside their own thought processes” 
through “meta-cognition,” or “thinking about thinking.”(See Gary 
A. Klein, Sources of Power: How People Make Decision.) 

Interviewees valued such approaches not solely because they 
helped officers make the switch to operational from tactical, and 
to strategic from operational. They praised the ability to harmonize 
tactical actions with operational objectives and strategic goals, 
beginning with recognizing a decision’s implications at each 
level. Harmonization requires coordinating actions in an attempt 
to reinforce one another and influence multiple target audiences, 
while maintaining the necessary strategic long view. 

uild relationships one at a time. A second cluster of 
characteristics frequently referenced by interviewees 
focuses on interpersonal styles. Among them, sociability and a 
preference for relationship building are regarded as absolutely 
critical to every aspect of planning, leading, and managing complex 
operations. In fact, interviewees frequently associated terms such 
as “communicator,” “facilitator,” “consulter,” and “collaborative 
space maker” with the term “commander.” 

In many cases, commanders in combat and other contexts 
also preferred to “command through influence.” In this respect, a 
fundamental responsibility of strategic leadership entails building 
bridges across institutional divides through cultivating sincere 
personal relationships. One senior Marine put it this way: “This is 
a people business. Success in this comes from 
relationships.” 

Interviewees at every level reinforced 
the need for cross-cultural capabilities and 
affirmed the utility of language and foreign 
culture skills, with special-operations forces 
leaders acknowledging critical shortfalls in this 
area. (For additional emphasis on challenges of 
language and culture skills, see Eric T. Olson, 

“National Security Leaders Forum.”) 

Underlining the critical importance of 
multiculturalism, one interviewee having an 
immigrant background emphasized his equal 
comfort and competence in the “two worlds 
[and] two cultures” of his parents and the 
English-speaking United States. He felt that 
background primed him to be comfortable in 
operations with other services and branches of 
government, other countries’ security forces, 

GEN David H. Petraeus, commander of International 
Security Assistance Force, walks through Zer-e- 
koh valley in the Herat province of Afghanistan, 

July 29. (Photo by SSgt Bradley Lail, U.S. Air Force) 


and nongovernmental organizations. Indeed, while endorsing the 
need to work effectively in the cultures of foreign nations, many 
interviewees went on to affirm a much broader conception of 
multiculturalism: the capacity to work comfortably, seamlessly, 
and empathetically with interagency counterparts, members of 
other services, and NGOs, in spite of differences in institutional 
cultures and processes.(For similar views, see Mark R. Reid, “The 
Necessity of a Good Fight: A Multicultural Approach to Productive 
Conflict in Operational Level Staffs”). Likewise, the most senior 
SOF and GPF interviewees considered the ability to communicate 
across the SOF-GPF institutional and cultural divide as a key 
strategic leader characteristic. (For additional views on this subject, 
see Carlo Munoz, “More Understanding Urged between Elite and 
Conventional Forces,” Inside the Pentagon , 12 February 2009.) 
Enablers of multiculturalism and relationship focus include a fusion 
of confidence and humility, which produces openness to different 
ideas, even from other organizations or subordinates. Humility is 
also expressed through approachability and humor. Interviewees 
noted humor as a defining characteristic of their successful seniors, 
with one combatant commander seeing humor as helping leaders 
to embrace an “output orientation through a spirit of collaboration” 
driven by “social energy.” According to a former Combined Joint 
Special Operations Task Force commander and senior service civil 
affairs leader, this social energy permits “staff guerrilla warfare” 
or, in the words of a GPF division-level commander, “maneuver 
warfare in the gaps and seams” of bureaucracies, based on personal 
relationships and the avoidance of explicit confrontation. 

riting skills are a critical asset. Afinal set of characteristics 
considered critical to irregular warfare leadership 
relates directly to a leader’s managerial style. Respondents 
noted three characteristics in particular: communication skills, 
an understanding of organizations, and mentorship. Articulating 
thoughts logically and clearly were viewed as basic to successful 
leadership. “The number-one skill at the senior level, even at field- 
grade level, is to write.” SOF and GPF educators lamented the 
absence of this skill among many mid-level officers. Interviewees 





sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 9 

















underscored the importance of tailoring communication to different 
audiences, inspiring the acceptance of ideas requiring collaboration 
among diverse partners. Interviewees considered communication a 
core function of highest-level leadership, involving the generation 
of a compelling idea; conveying it effectively and continually 
to stakeholders; ensuring it is appropriately communicated by 
subordinates to institutional implementers; and reinforcing the 
idea through action. As one senior GPF leader said, “True strategic 
leadership is about trying to get the big ideas right, and it is then 
about communicating those big ideas effectively to your subordinate 
leadership.” 

nderstanding the dynamics of culture. Regarding 
organizational skills, officers at every level spoke of 
coordinating the activities of task-oriented staffs whose members 
represented multiple organizational interests. This task necessitated 
understanding organizational dynamics and cultures at the 
conceptual and applied levels. In fact, some interviewees pointed 
to a form of strategic leadership that was purely organizational 
in focus, distinct from but required for combat leadership. They 
regretted the absence in their professional military education of a 
focus on organizational theory. 

entoring is not optional task. Finally, interviewees 
perceived a strong relationship between leadership 
and mentorship. The majority considered a leader-teacher-mentor 
functional triad an inherent responsibility of commanders at every 
level. As such, today’s best leaders consciously guide and teach their 
juniors, through both explicit instruction and exemplary conduct. 
Mentors also exercise a tacit though compelling moral suasion; 
“He [my mentor] was someone you never wanted to disappoint” 
was a frequent theme in this regard. A significant minority felt 
that mentorship included guidance of junior leaders toward 
developmental assignments, and efforts to ensure the availability 
of opportunities for rising leaders to demonstrate their skills. More 
significant is the strong valuation placed on mentorship as part of 
a leader’s managerial style, as well as the oft-heard misgiving that 
neither individual branches nor services provide adequate channels 
for its development. Some respondents felt a mark of leadership 
was the rigorous pursuit of mentorship from senior colleagues: 
“Mentorship is a two-way street.” 

trategic levels of leadership. Alongside these three elements 
of a strategic leader’s managerial style, several 
respondents, to include two combatant commanders, a theater-level 
commander, and a commander of global SOF elements, pointed 
to additional attributes as integral to credible leadership in an 
operational context. These attributes begin with baseline tactical 
excellence, partly as a matter of authenticity among juniors; equally, 
tactical prowess allowed senior leaders to understand implications 
at the unit level of operational decisions. The higher operational 
and strategic levels of leadership, however, require a fusion of 
physical, mental, and psychological endurance. As senior theater- 
level commanders put it, physical strength sustains “grinding” 
intellectual exertion: “You have to have the physical component 
Soldiering is still an outdoor sport.” 

Taken together, interviewees felt these cognitive, interpersonal, 
and managerial styles typified the best of today’s general-purpose 
and special-operations forces senior leaders operating in hybrid 
environments. Of course, such leadership styles are also useful 
in conventional contexts. Not only did interviewees note these 
traits in leaders they had admired since the 1970s, notably, recent 
research affirms the utility in conventional contexts of the cognitive, 
interpersonal, and management styles examined here, particularly in 
cases where senior officers occupy leadership positions outside their 
domain of specific expertise. (See Lynn Scott, Steve Drezner, Rachel 

10 September-October 2010 • Fires 


Rue, and Jesse Reyes, Compensating for Incomplete Domain.) 

Yet, at least one theater commander felt these characteristics 
“highly important, particularly in preparation for being an 
irregular warfare leader” in environments characterized by kinetic 
limitations, diverse partners, and different kinds of conflict occurring 
simultaneously. Furthermore, most respondents felt it possible to 
cultivate these styles throughout a career. Interviewees asserted it 
was the duty of individuals to develop these leadership characteristics 
throughout their career, with military organizations providing the 
appropriate opportunities and incentives. 

ey experiences. In explaining the significance of the 
leadership characteristics they highlighted, interviewees 
made frequent reference to the paths their own careers had taken. 
Their collective experiences present a number of important 
commonalities in the domains of education and developmental 
assignments. First, a variety of broad educational experiences is 
found among most senior officers’ careers, including early joint 
schooling as well as civilian education. Second, most interviewees 
served in joint billets, not simply once or as a senior field-grade 
officer, but at various career stages in operational and staff capacities. 
Third, many officers cited holding a senior-level staff, aide, or 
assistant position as being significant to the remainder of their career. 
Along with gaining perspective on organizational dynamics at the 
macro-level, interviewees felt that being a military secretary to a 
senior Department of Defense civilian, or an aide to a service chief, 
provided insight into how senior leaders think, plan, and interact, 
as well as an opportunity for one-on-one mentorship. 

As one interviewee said, “Being an aide is an opportunity 
no one else gets to see the man behind the mask and the inner 
workings of the Army.” Fourth, for many SOF interviewees, a 
position permitting GPF exposure was significant. One theater-level 
commander with a SOF background considered an assignment to 
conventional forces as “highly important” to his development. 
Finally, substantive international exposure through education or 
assignments is beneficial. Collectively, these experiences appeared 
crucial to cultivating characteristics that permit the joint force to 
counter hybrid and irregular threats. 

ivilian education is a must. The range of education proving 
useful to interviewees featured educational experiences 
beyond traditional military schooling, to include civilian education. 



Graduate school admission test preparation books sit on a shelf at the 
resource library in the Base Education Center at Marine Corps Base 
Camp Lejeune, N.C., July 7. (Photo by CpI Jo Jones, U.S. Marine Corps) 
















1 st Lt. Ryan Kohrig (right), a Webster University graduate student, works on his computer during a management class taught at the Base Education 
Center at Camp Lejune, July 7. (Photo by CpI Jo Jones, U.s. Marine Corps) 


While most officers believed service instruction was valuable, many 
suggested a need for improvement. One SOF colonel spoke to 
deficiencies in the military education system, primarily at the senior 
leadership level, when he said, “We don’t educate to be generals.” 
While not all career tracks demonstrated extensive educational 
opportunities outside the military, specific types of military courses 
were integral to leadership development, particularly when it was 
available with another service or some other more flexible version 
of military schooling. These settings include the College of Naval 
Command and Staff, School of Advanced Military Studies, andNaval 
Post-graduate School. In these experiences, schooling reinforces 
jointness and how-to-think cognitively in a military context. 

Though commanders’ courses, war colleges, and general officer 
capstone courses aid in this effort, many interviewees recommended 
that officers constantly seek ways to broaden horizons beyond the 
tactical and operational levels, so the services do not “start having 
generals who want to think like battalion commanders.” 

While not all interviewees experienced an education at civilian 
institutions, those who did found it of the greatest value in their 
evolution to strategic-level leadership positions. Presenting ideas 
to nonmilitary students and learning to accommodate for civilian 
approaches to national security contributed dramatically to 
thinking, communicating, and relationship-building skills. Civilian 
education permitted an understanding of the relationship between 
the legislative and executive branches in the formation of national 
security strategy and the authorization of military operations. One 
senior SOF leader felt his civilian experience “was massively 


valuable because I learned that the military is not the center of the 
universe. It showed me how much else was out there.” 

oint and interagency experience is a must. Exposure to joint 
and interagency environments throughout a career 
facilitated interpersonal and managerial growth for the interviewees 
and aided in the transition from the tactical to strategic. Referring 
to his own experiences with a special-mission unit, one officer 
articulated a consensus in saying that he would have preferred 
to understand better the interagency process prior to a combat 
deployment as a commander. That knowledge would have permitted 
greater leverage and synchronization. A recently deployed theater 
commander spoke of the value of interagency exposure: “You have 
to learn to interact with those who have totally different backgrounds 
and value sets, like [the Department of] State. They have a different 
value set that they celebrate. SOF should increase its interface in 
every part of the interagency, to include mid-grade leaders.” 

Others spoke of joint billets as important to providing a 
perspective that embraces diverse military options of equal value. 
Rather than limitation to the minimum number of mandatory 
assignments for promotion to general officer, interviewees opined 
that joint exposure should be frequent. A senior SOF educator said, 
“You need to get joint as fast as you can. Get in to other units, 
other opportunities. You are at a disadvantage if you think there is 
only one way to do things.” While one combatant commander felt 
jointness should grow from a foundation of service and functional 
competency, other respondents considered joint exposure equal in 
importance to service competency, the former necessary for the 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 11 











latter: Do you wait, and get service competency first? I disagree. 
Joint and service are part and parcel; how can you be competent in 
one without seeing the other? We are going to always fight joint at 
every level. It needs to be the whole career, [and] it strikes me as 
odd that there is anything but that. It’s all joint. 

enior staff roles give perspective. A large portion of the 
interviewees agreed that Pentagon assignments or staff 
jobs at combatant commands are “essential to gain senior command 
perspective.” Nearly every three- and four-star interviewee 
advocated staff time at the Pentagon or a combatant command. Such 
tours are significant to giving a mid-career officer an understanding 
of how to coordinate and resource theater-level operations, leverage 
interagency capabilities, and harmonize the functions of a large 
organization’s disparate elements. As one former combined joint 
special operations task force commander said, “It would have 
made me a better tactical leader if I had understood the strategic 
side better.” 

For many SOF members, a GPF billet during their field-grade 
years was instrumental to understanding how large organizations 
function. Because SOF officers typically lead small, elite teams, this 
exposure to a large organization is valuable for future leadership 
assignments. Special operations interviewees also felt increased 
intermixing and cross-socialization permit better GPF understanding 
of SOF. A former CJSOTF commander indicated, one “need[s] to 
be able to explain to GPF leaders-how what you are seeing and 


proposing helps them and their tactical, operational, and strategic 
goals-synching all of this with a theater-level strategy.” As they rise 
to the theater and global level, SOF leaders will need to coordinate 
with, and even command, GPF formations, while general-purpose 
leaders will find special-operations elements under their command 
or in their battle space. One special-mission unit commander 
emphasized this point, noting that “there needs to be a hybrid 
military.” 

Individual SOF leaders should pursue GPF billets, and officers 
in both components should seek to work together in supporting and 
supported roles. A general-purpose force combatant commander 
and his special-operations force deputy concurred, “We absolutely 
recommend GPF billets for SOF and SOF billets for GPF.” (See 
“Strategic Plan for Transforming DoD Training”). 

nternational exposure. The majority of interviewees placed 
a special premium on acquiring international exposure in 
order to foster skills important to the uncertain battlefields of 
irregular warfare. Interviewees particularly cited recurring training 
experiences while deployed with foreign militaries as ideal for 
understanding diverse national security cultures, the United States’ 
status in regional calculations, and the art of the locally possible. 
This expertise allows one- and two-star generals or admirals to 
manage regional security relationships at the DoD level. Equally 
as significant for theater-level IW, training experiences facilitate 
first name-basis relationships with local military leaders that 



Chief of Staff of the Army GEN George W. Casey Jr. addresses Soldiers with Task Force Mountain Warrior at Forward Operating Base Fenty, Afghanistan, 
April 30. (Photo by D. Myles Cullen, U.S. Army) 



12 September-October 2010 • Fires 



















COL Richard Knowlton, commander of 115th Fires Brigade, removes his 
own 115th FiB combat patch and places it on LTC Al Morris' right arm at 
Camp Ramadi, Iraq, Aug. 21,2009. Morris is the battalion commander 
of 3rd Battalion, 157th Field Artillery, Colorado Army National Guard. 

(Photo by SSG Liesl Marelli, U.S. Army) 


prove crucial to multinational operations. While coordinating 
multinational special operations, one interviewee said, “I knew 
these guys, from Germany [and the] UK.” Another indicated that 
his Jordanian SOF liaison had been a classmate. Individuals should 
seek international exposure at various points during their career, 
whether with NATO partners, through foreign education, hosting 
of international officers at U.S. schools, or in more autonomous 
“Foreign Area Officer-like” contexts. 

Some officers also highlighted the utility of pre-accession 
experiences, such as backpacking in the Arabian Peninsula or 
extended travel through South Asia. They credited these experiences 
with making them comfortable in foreign areas and introducing 
them to those very regions in which they later operated as senior 
commanders. One SOF interviewee reflected that in operating in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan after traveling there as a youth, “I was 
coming home.” Another SOF commander related, “I have been 
immersed in foreign cultures for extended periods of time. That 
puts you outside your comfort zone and forces you to adapt.” These 
experiences teach officers how to interact with other cultures, 
cultivating patience, humility, and curiosity. For those without 
pre-accession multicultural experiences, time in uniform interacting 
with foreign civilians proved equally valuable. One senior Marine 
leader commented, “My United Nations Palestine tour prepared me 
for my leadership post. It was ‘immersion training.’” 

C oncerns and cautions. The interviewees agreed on much 
of what is required to shape IW leaders-both characteristics 
as well as essential formative experiences. Yet, more than three- 
quarters expressed the belief that the career paths preparing them 
to lead effectively had been anomalous, diverging from service 
norms. Likewise, many felt their progression to senior command 
billets relied on happenstance. According to one deputy combatant 
commander, “My career has been an aberration. I am surprised I have 


“(DpeipgMsmgiDD^D 

sms 

eflfflsa?© Cdsk© 0 

(pm© smoaniaB emS 

®[? ®3DDDfeg© sqpaffems© fep 

©E33©@(iBmg gDqqb ®l? GCdoBp 

GCdoddd am mmppac^atqlQfrt^ 
dtegjf©© ®[? ©amGfeaO [peraass© 
smll ®p©oa(3B®ciiaD gfflR5y a SB 

achieved up to this level.” These views emerge from interviewees’ 
sentiments and perceptions of service institutional preferences, 
rather than from statistical assessment of the officers’ careers. (See 
Department of the Army Pamphlet 600-3, Commissioned Officer 
Professional Development and Career Management). 

More significantly, however, these senior leaders acknowledged 
the underlying value of their particular experiences to career 
progression, and also expressed the desire for their services to 
value such experiences institutionally. This concern is significant, 
as interviewees shared their views at a critical juncture in the 
life of the organizations they represent. Operationally, the U.S. 
military is engaged in sustained, complex multi-theater operations. 
Organizationally, both SOF and GPF are experiencing structural 
growth. The confluence of these operational and organizational 
trends renders the recommendations of today’s leaders quite relevant 
to the future. 

K inetic emphasis. Operationally, today’s company- and field- 
grade officers have experienced a great amount 
and diversity of combat experience far exceeding that of their 
predecessors, which grants them an unprecedented degree of tactical 
prowess and operational ability. A former CJSOTF commander 
said, “In my career [prior to 2001], you’d be lucky if you had one 
or two live missions in a career. We now have kids [captains and 
majors] that do four to five missions a night.” The latter’s ability 
to think and adapt to changing tactical circumstances is much more 
honed. Likewise, the extended performance of conventional U.S. 
forces in increasingly diverse roles has ensured that GPF junior 
leaders are skilled in core IW competencies. 

Yet, combat exposure entails an opportunity cost. Summing up 
the operational implications of repeated deployments, one theater 
special operations command leader stated, “We’re paying a price. 
We have accepted that as the price for defending our country, even 
if we don’t realize it. I believe, hope, and pray that we can restore 
some balance to our deployments and our operational tempo. I 
hope that group [a Special Forces group] can go back to what 
really matters; building partner capacity so that those we train can 
do things for themselves. I look at that now as a transition because 
we are at war.” (See Sean D. Naylor, “Special Ops ‘Surge’ Sparks 
Debate,” Army Times , 23 December 2008). 

Beyond the operational implications of kinetic operations are 
those events related to developing required leadership characteristics. 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 13 



















In discussing the latter, interviewees often referred to noncombat 
experiences, considering them instrumental in developing necessary 
senior-level leadership skills. Due to continuing commitments in 
Iraq and Afghanistan, today’s captains through Navy commanders 
or lieutenant colonels may not be able to take part in these 
developmental experiences. One might argue that it is today’s 
senior leaders who missed out-on combat. Yet, if noncombat and 
nonmilitary assignments were contributing factors in the mid-career 
preparation of today’s senior leaders for theater- and global-level 
success, it would only seem logical that it is equally important to 
ensure that tomorrow’s senior leaders receive similar developmental 
opportunities. 

While operations in Iraq and Afghanistan demand diverse 
capabilities, a sustained focus on a single operational mode 
(counterinsurgency tinged with counterterrorism) and geographic 
area (Muslim eastern Middle East and South Asia) can narrow 
perspectives, at the very stage in a career when they need to be 
broadened. As one combatant commander put it, “War can be 
a narrowing education . . . It’s the dramatic instance fallacy,” 
whereby younger officers come away from an experience feeling 
“I went to Iraq; I now understand all war.” A deputy combatant 
commander and career special operator agreed, opining, “We’re 
so focused on the war that we have people only doing that, and 
not getting the broader experience .... Sure, we want guys with 
that war experience, but... we need broader [perspectives].” An 
early operational career dominated by combat might influence an 
individual’s understanding of what it means to be a leader in future 
environments. According to a SOF component commander, “It 
is easy to be wooed by the siren of the kinetic,” and as the latter 
becomes the dominant operational mode for both SOF and GPF, 
it can influence values and career preferences. The very breadth 
of their careers and the diversity of their noncombat experiences 
have taught today’s senior leaders, however, that “nothing that 
direct action forces do is decisive,” and that “victory is not in the 
killing.”(See Carlo Munoz, “SOCOM Chief Advocates ‘Balanced 
Warfare’ Approach for Future,” Inside the Pentagon , 12 February 
2009.) 

rganizational growth. Beyond the influence of 
current operations on senior leader development are the 
implications associated with organizational expansion. In response 
to the diverse security challenges facing the United States, both GPF 
and SOF are growing in size. The Army has programmed overall 


growth of more than 74,000 soldiers by 2013, while Congress 
has recently approved a temporary increase of 30,000 soldiers in 
the active component (See figure 1 Number of Active component 
Soldiers). This expansion will permit SOF and GPF to maintain 
operational tempo and gain the time and space for the developmen¬ 
tal opportunities the interviewees recommended. This balance 
is critical, especially as it relates to the socialization process of 
newly minted special operators. It will permit them to understand 
important relationships: kinetic versus non-kinetic means, direct 
action versus “by, through, and with,” and SOF specificity versus 
integration with GPF. 

The growth in special-operations forces will be of tremendous 
benefit to the future joint force if it avoids the systematization 
and bureaucratization that discourages the diverse experiences 
responsible for producing today’s senior IW leaders. Some SOF 
interviewees articulated this concern as an instinctual disquiet 
that “big is the enemy of SOF.” More pointedly, a current U.S. 
Special Operations Command strategist suggested that the growth 
of his component might result in “Big Army-like” practices, where 
specific and narrow command and staff billets might be preferred 
over broadening assignments. 

A final organizational concern relates to the impact of more than 
a generation of SOF cultures. Overtime, different SOF components 
have come to understand and work effectively with one another, but it 
was a major concern to at least four respondents, with experience as 
combatant command, corps, Joint Special Operations Command, and 
CJSOTF commanders, that there was a real possibility of attitudinal 
self-insulation of SOF from GPF. One suggested that while today’s 
SOF leaders were “bom joint,” their younger counterparts might 
have a more narrow view of what joint means: “I think sometimes 
in the SOF community, we think of joint as joint with other SOF .. 

.. It’s not the broader joint.” Fikewise, commanders who have led 
both “black” and “white” SOF units decried the channelization of 
special operators into one or the other track, so that, particularly for 
“black SOF,” leaders who are colonels or Navy captains and higher 
are “myopic” in perspective. As one corps-level commander with 
a short time in SOF put it, a one-star admiral or general who has 
spent his whole career in “black SOF” will “be very, very good at 
mnning operations. If we want him to mn SOCOM as a four-star we 
would have done him a disservice, [because] he won’t know how 
to command a large organization.” Along with other organizational 
changes and the complexion of current operations, narrow 

career paths in the developmental 
phase may be precursors of even 
narrower career preferences at the 
senior levels, with implications for 
strategic perspective. 

nstitutional changes. To achieve 
a strategic perspective equal to 
theirtacticalandoperationalprowess, 
today’s officers need to pursue 
the developmental opportunities 
interviewees highlighted. The joint 
force andDoD should institutionally 
support and leverage such choices. 
The experiences and reflections of 
interviewees suggest four central 
institutional recommendations. 
First, service and DoD leadership 
should create more “opportunity 
space” for the educational and 
developmental assignments that 
foster the cognitive, interpersonal, 


Figure 1: Number of Active component Soldiers 
560000 


540000 

520000 

500000 

460000 



460000 


jP ,<7 & jp ,</ A 7 /P .o 1 /P jf 

<T <T <T <T <T <T <T <T <T <T 

(Source: Deputy Chief of Staff Personnel (G1), Headquarters, Department of the Army) 



14 September-October 2010 • Fires 













GEN George W. Casey Jr., U.S. Army chief of staff, addresses approximately 1,000 military officers at the Naval Postgraduate School as part of the 
Secretary of the Navy’s guest lecture series in Monterey, Calif., May 13. The NPS is an academic institution whose emphasis is on study and research 
programs relevant to the Navy’s interests, as well as to the interests of other arms of the DoD. (Photo by Myles Cullen, u.s. Army) 


“Odd (aH&ap ©® @o©g©© 

©[°)g)®© B 0© fe stfMseiO 
©® pRiPMs ©Cl© DffsjCo© ®3oQ3a[SajLigiD 
®[°)[°)®[p©DI]DD0©0©© B Gd®©Co 0Dl]©0(3© 
®go( 3 ®oo©©0(3© ©Co© gdoBOB©©^® 


and managerial skills previously discussed. 

Such opportunities will contribute directly to 
the ability of these officers to succeed in the 
j oint and interagency communities at the highest 
operational and strategic levels. Second, the 
DoD needs to institutionally encourage the type 
of interaction among its subcomponents and 
the interagency and international partners that 
are likely to be of strategic value. Third, DoD 
should implement service-appropriate methods 
for systematically identifying prospective leaders 
at the mid-grade point in their careers, thus 
enabling them to take advantage of developmental opportunity 
experiences. Fourth, branches, services, and the DoD as a whole 
should establish institutional policies to support the “out-of-the- 
mainstream” preferences by officers that support the development 
of leadership characteristics. This process may require a shift in 
organizational culture, in terms of consideration for promotion, 
staff assignments, and command. Ultimately, the objective is for 
mid-career officers to gain a conviction that far from imperiling 
their careers, these nonstandard assignments will help them advance, 
pportunity space. In order to effectively create opportunity 
space, it is critical to provide the right educational 
opportunities, both inside and outside the military. A common thread 
among interviewees there weren’t enough opportunities for an 
adequately broad, liberal education. An Army senior leader opined, 
“A broad educational base is a necessity .... It is something that 
is in most cases the most beneficial to conceptualizing strategy.” 
Despite the criticality of senior military education to developing a 
broad background and strategic level leadership, most interviewees 
did not believe their military education alone was adequate to 
accomplishing that objective. 

Interviewees’ suggestions to address education shortfalls 
centered on “out-of-the-comfort-zone experiences.” The services 
will need to implement the opportunities for civilian education 
recently allowed by DoD policy. (For policy on broadened civilian 
educational opportunities, see Department of Defense Instruction 
1322.10, “Policy on Graduate Education for Military Officers”). 

Given the requirement for today’s senior leaders to build and 
manage complex organizations, organizational dynamics should 
be part of the curricula at intermediate and senior-level schools. 
One interviewee explicitly recommended that organizational theory 


become a core element of military education, and others endorsed 
that suggestion. 

SOF leaders were concerned with education specifically relating 
to their community. Though praising initial training, interviewees 
noted the lack of a career-long SOF continuing education program. 
As one senior educator stated, “Our training is great .... I give 
U.S. an A-. But on the education side, I give U.S. a C+.” Some 
spoke very highly of the Defense Analysis program at NPS, while 
others touted the benefit of SOF electives at various staff colleges. 
Most thought, however, that what was missing was clear guidance 
delineating the type of educational experiences appropriate to SOF. 
Special operators would benefit if SOCOM or individual service 
components articulate a “consolidated SOF educational trajectory.” 
While not dictating a single educational path, this program should 
link existing SOF educational assets in a logical progression, while 
maximizing out-of-service opportunities in keeping with this new 
developmental strategy. 

nteractions of strategic value. The interviews highlighted the 
need for institutional support of a series of sustained 
interactions: between general-purpose and special-operations 
components, “white” and “black” SOF, and the military with 
the interagency and NGO communities. While these interactions 
do occur, they often take place during in-theater operations. 
Interviewees felt it would be much more useful for such interactions 
to commence prior to deployment. The services and DoD could 
contribute markedly to leader development by ensuring that this 
cross-pollination occurs early, possibly through assignments, 
internships, and training. Many interviewees felt that SOCOM and 
DoD should diversify the nonkinetic experiences associated with 
the “black SOF world.” 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 15 










“□□□©aRvfes© ©m3 [kP©DD@CD@© ©DotsotM] qo©© foogCo gDd© 
gUSsfc ©m3 SCd© ©©[RR35 feju KSgOlMEg] © ©©DuiiiflEElgflsm 
off ®3 do 3EI[S30Q©D ©m3 (3a®Q®pyD©D^ gqjDtajfem©©© ©oq3 

[iD®DQC£XFflDD@] DDtSQQDDDSBDQSC^QSIffl ©©©BgpIDilXnjQg© 1 3DDIIF<IX10g]DD 

proom®3foGO ©oqi3 ®@dq©0(3©(p© , 30®oq (Fodp ©©omomaDodn® 


Beyond interactions between contributors to theater- and global- 
level irregular warfare, interviewees felt U.S. personnel needed to 
increase their interaction with a broad array of foreign militaries. 
Reflecting on international opportunities and the gains they provide 
to cross-cultural understanding. 

“We need to maximize experiences with foreign officers. We 

have to get more of them here and more of U.S. over there_We 

have very few U.S. officers overseas (at foreign military schools). 
That’s a problem .... We should fund visits to foreign countries 
for those officers who became close with foreign officers who came 
to the United States..” one interviewee remarked. 

Requiring and incentivizing these exchanges at the individual 
and unit level will pay dividends in operational capability and 
military-to-military diplomacy. 

iverse career paths. The skills and experiences that the 
maj ority of interviewees viewed as critical for leadership 
development were generally outside standard career paths as officers 
understood them. Many considered themselves lucky to return to the 
service mainstream in order to contribute their experience-won skills. 
To eliminate this paradox, services and branches should use both 
the stick and the carrot by requiring a combination of educational 
and developmental experiences and honoring nonmainstream 
assignments through promotion and consideration for command. 
According to a combatant commander, “The system- has to tolerate 
non-standardness. We should celebrate it.” A fellow combatant 
commander concurred, asserting “you want people who specifically 
come from different career paths.” Though some respondents 
suggested formalizing the consideration process for advancement 
based on nonstandard merits, most felt “it would be very difficult 
to do so. You can’t create committees. You do it by taking steps to 
ensure that these individuals are promoted and progress and that 
there are opportunities for these people.” Interviewees affirmed that 
this “honor [ing]-through-consideration” of nonstandard career paths 
should also be applied to officers who have developed a regional 
focus, as well as to noncombat arms leaders whose planning, 
leadership, and management skills ensure overall IW effectiveness, 
fficers for mentorship. Identifying exceptionally talented 
leaders remains a challenge. Most interviewees felt 
“we generally get it right” with respect to identifying prospective 
future leaders. Some, however, were uncomfortable regarding the 
lack of rigor in identifying those officers at mid-career with the 
skill-sets, abilities, and background to excel at leading in hybrid 
environments. According to one SOCOM component commander, 
“Sometimes guys who are eye-wateringly good just don’t get 
noticed.” Again, while interviewees rejected a formal process, 
several did advocate a means to identify subordinates with an 
aptitude for these developmental experiences. For a number of 
respondents, this would entail services inculcating in senior leaders 
and understanding of mentorship that is predisposed toward guiding 
subordinates who are deemed deserving. 

Though not addressed by interviewees, identification and 

16 September-October 2010 • Fires 


mentorship are also significant from the perspective of the tradeoffs 
that the developmental and broadening experiences highlighted in 
this article entail. Such tradeoffs present themselves in terms of 
increasing specific domain competency and familiarity with one’s 
own service. In confronting the constraints of time-both in terms 
of career progression and operational tempo-it is doubly important 
to develop programs and policies capable of identifying the right 
officers, at the appropriate stages in their careers, for mentorship 
and experiential broadening, if they are to develop the skills and 
abilities required to fill senior leadership positions in the joint force. 
Additionally, any approach to identifying and mentoring a cadre 
of joint force senior leaders will need to ensure that it provides 
opportunities for broadening exposure that are balanced against 
the requirement to focus on specific expertise. 

lusters of characteristics. Interviewees highlighted 
three clusters of characteristics necessary for successful 
IW leadership: cognitive, interpersonal, and managerial styles. 
These characteristics permitted them to understand their operating 
environment and plan successfully at the theater and strategic 
level. These same characteristics prepared them to marshal 
human and organizational resources while also equipping them to 
lead and inspire subordinates. While indicating a preference for 
career breadth, interviewees valued similar types of education, 
developmental assignments, and life experiences that cultivated 
the characteristics they deemed so important. In particular, they 
recommended diverse educational exposure, to include civilian 
institutions; recurrent joint assignments and exposure to the 
interagency processes and norms; assignments on theater- and 
strategic-level staffs in proximity to senior military and civilian 
leaders; substantive mixing between SOF and GPF forces; and 
repeated exposure to foreign cultures and their militaries. 

In order to ensure that current operational tempos and institutional 
growth permit availability for these experiences, interviewees 
suggested modifications to institutional measures and policies. 
These recommendations involved creating billets for emerging 
leaders that permit them to take advantage of nontraditional 
developmental opportunities, and institutionally rewarding them 
for doing so. Interviewees affirmed the need for rigorous and 
sustained mentoring at the individual level, as well as development of 
institutional measures supporting mentorship. In sum, interviewees’ 
insight focused on ensuring that individual officers’ choices and 
institutional measures increase the likelihood that the characteristics 
and experiences identified here are found among the joint force’s 
future leaders, who will grapple with the challenges of diverse 
global operations in the midst of organizational change. 


Dr. Barak A. Salmoni is a political scientist, Jessica Hart is a research 
assistant, Renny McPherson is an adjunct staff member and former 
project associate, and Aidan Kirby Winn is a project associate, all at 
the RAND Corporation. 









Fire 



AUfhQft 

<§UDt 



A rticle subjects. Fires strives to be 
“forward-looking.” We’re at the 
dawn of a new Army transformation. 
Many exciting things are taking place in 
the field and air defense artillery fields of 
expertise. Article subjects should therefore 
be current and relevant. Writers may share 
good ideas and lessons learned with their 
fellow Soldiers, as exploring better ways 
of doing things remains a high emphasis 
with Fires. 

If an article subject is significant and 
pertains to field artillery or air defense 
artillery and its diverse activities, as a rule 
of thumb we’ll consider it appropriate for 
publication. Article subjects include (but 
aren’t limited to) technical developments, 
tactics, techniques and procedures; how¬ 
to pieces, practical exercises, training 
methods and historical perspectives (Army 
Regulation 25-30, Paragraph 2-3, b). 

We are actively seeking lessons-learned 
articles which will enhance understanding 
of current field and air defense artillery 
operations. The magazine’s heart is 
material dealing with doctrinal, technical 
or operational concepts. We especially 
solicit progressive, forward-thinking and 
challenging subject matter for publication. 
In addition to conceptual and doctrinal 
materials, we encourage manuscripts 
dealing with maintenance, training or 
operational techniques. 

Good ideas or lessons-learned articles 
should have two closely related themes: 
one, what did you learn from what you 
did? The second theme is: what is most 
important for others to know, or what will 
you do differently in the future? Include 
only the pertinent information on how you 
did it so someone else can repeat what you 
did. Don’t include a blow-by-blow of your 
whole deployment. The article’s emphasis 
should be that your unit has a good idea or 
some lessons-learned to share. 

Steps involved in submitting an article 
to Fires are outlined following. 

All articles should have the bottom line 
up front; however, to better ensure your 
chances of publication, we recommend 
that you read all the criteria contained in 
this article as well as apply the guidance 
contained in the Fires style manual at 
sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/style. 
asp for more details. We do not pay for 
articles or illustrations other than providing 


contributors with complimentary copies of 
the magazine. 

Fires is not copyrighted. All material 
published is considered in the public domain 
unless otherwise indicated. (Occasionally 
we use copyrighted material by permission; 
this material is clearly marked with the 
appropriate legal notification.) 

If you get permission to use someone 
else’s graphic or photo, especially from 
the private sector, we need proof of that in 
writing. 

etting started. Select a relevant topic of 
interest to the U.S. Army field and air 
defense artillery community. The topic must 
professionally develop members of these 
fields. Write an outline to organize your 
work. Put the bottom line up front and write 
clear, concise introduction and conclusion 
paragraphs. Follow the writing standard 
established in Army Regulation 25-50, 
Preparing and Managing Correspondence, 
Section IV (the Army writing style), and 
Department of the Army Pamphlet 600- 
67, Effective Writing for Army Leaders, 
especially Paragraphs 3-1 and 3-2. 

The Army standard is writing you can 
understand in a single rapid reading and 
is generally free of errors in grammar, 
mechanics and usage. Also see Fires' 
style manual. Maintain the active voice as 
much as possible. Write “Congress cut the 
budget” rather than “the budget was cut 
by Congress.” (Department of the Army 
Pamphlet 600-67, Paragraph 3-2, b[l]). 
Write as if you were telling someone face-to- 
face about your subject: use conversational 
tone; ‘I,’ ‘you’ and ‘we’personal pronouns; 
short sentences and short paragraphs. 
Articles should be double-spaced, typed, 
unpublished manuscript, between 3,000 
and 3,500 (or less), but no more than 
5,000 words, including inline citations as 
appropriate. 

Authors should check their articles’ 
contents with unit commanders or 
organization directors or S2s/G2s to 
ensure the articles have no classified or 
operations security information in them. 
Clearance requirements are outlined 
in Army Regulation 360-1, Chapter 5, 
Paragraph 5-3. Headquarters Department of 
the Army/Office of the Secretary of Defense 
clearance is required if your article meets any 
of the criteria listed there. Article clearance 
is further covered in Paragraph 6-6, with 


procedures on how to do so outlined in 
Paragraph 6-9. The bottom line on most 
article clearance is discussed in Paragraph 
6-6. While you certainly may ask your 
local Public Affairs Office’s advice, it is the 
“author’s responsibility to ensure security 
is not compromised. Information that 
appears in open sources does not constitute 
declassification. The combination of several 
open-source documents may result in a 
classified document.” 

So while the Fires staff may question 
the sensitivity of an article we receive, it 
is not our responsibility to officially clear 
articles, however if we do see something 
within an article that might cause concern, 
we reserve the right to withhold publication 
of such an article until it is thoroughly 
vetted with the proper subj ect matter expert 
or Army authority. But it still remains the 
author’s responsibility, as outlined in Army 
Regulation 360-1, not to compromise 
national security or U.S. Army operational 
security matters. 

We reserve the right to edit an article, so 
the Fires staff will edit all manuscripts and 
put them in the magazine’s style and format. 
The author of an article or interviewee will 
receive a courtesy copy of the edited version 
for review before publication, however, if 
the author does not get back to the Fires 
staff with any questions or concerns within 
a specified suspense date (typically five to 
seven working days) it will be assumed the 
author concurs with all edits and the article 
will run as is. 

Except in the case of Armywide 
news items, authors should not submit 
a manuscript to Fires while it is being 
considered elsewhere. A comprehensive 
biography, highlighting experience, 
education and training relevant to the 
article’s subject and credentialing the author 
as the writer of the article also is required. 
Include e-mail and mailing addresses and 
telephone, cell and fax numbers. Please 
keep this information current with Fires 
for as long as we’re considering the 
manuscript. 

hotographs and graphics. For the 

photographer’s guide, visit sill-www. 
army.mil/firesbulletin/submissionguide. 
html. 

end the article. E-mail the editor at 
firesbulletin@conus.army.mil. 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 17 







lead 



Interpreter AN Ahmad leans in to hear village elder Haji Wizeryull during a key leader engagement in Kandarou, Afghanistan, July 23, 2009. 

(Photo by SPC Evan Marcy, U.S. Army) 






□ 

□ 


Adapting the targeting cycle to 
win friends and influence people 


By LTC Chad Jones 


-"he ability to understand, inform and influence key 
audiences is critical to success in today’s battle space. 
The unprecedented flow of information, facilitated by 
modem technology and media distribution methods, demands a 
robust and multi-faceted approach to strategic communication. 
For some time, U.S. forces have recognized what public affairs 
and information operations can bring to the fight. But as I-Corps 
(formerly Multi-National Corps Iraq) learned during our year in 
Iraq, key leader engagement is not only just as important; it is 
absolutely critical to accomplishing the mission. 

Recognizing the need to synchronize KLE with a full range of 
lethal and non-lethal effects, the commander gave the KLE mission 
to the joint fires and effects cell. With no 4 KLE’ billets on the joint 
manning document, I-Corps formed, out of hide, a full-time team of 
six officers, with backgrounds in information operations, intelligence 
and targeting. This cell reported to the effects coordinator, and 
received guidance from him as well as the deputy commanding 
general for operations. 

At first, the KLE cell struggled to find a niche. We knew that 
the I-Corps would engage a wide range of leaders: some military 
and some civilian, some foreign and some domestic. Examining the 
effects we were after helped us draw a game plan. We defined ‘key 
leaders’ as foreign leaders (Iraqi Security Forces or Government 
of Iraq) we sought to influence; as opposed to U.S. or coalition 
leaders (visiting general officers, elected representatives or political 
appointees) we sought to inform. And while we knew engagements 
would occur at every echelon, we focused our efforts on those 
involving the corps commander and his deputies. 

With this in mind, our mission became clear. The KLE cell would 


support the engagement of key Iraqi military and civilian leaders 
in order to communicate information, build trust and confidence, 
gamer support for operations, and influence decision-making, so 
that they acted in our collective interests. 

A dapting the joint targeting cycle. In traditional targeting, 
. the joint targeting cycle is used to describe the iterative 
process to nominate, plan, prepare, execute and assess targets, in 
support of the commander’s stated objectives and intent. Although 
our intended effects were obviously different from those on which 
this cycle was based, we found the process to be a good fit for KLE. 

Step 1: Commander's objectives . Understanding the 
commander’s intent, objectives, desired effects and end state 
developed during operational planning provides the impetus for 
the conventional targeting process, according to Joint Publication 
3-60 (Joint Targeting), Joint Staff (2007), p. II-3. We found the 
same to be tme for KLE: selecting engagement targets, crafting 
themes and messages, and developing schemes of engagement, 
all began with an understanding of the commander’s intent and 
desired effects, in the context of the broader plan or order. 

Step 2: Engagement target development. Target development 
involves the systematic examination of target systems to determine 
the type of action that must be exerted on each to create the desired 
effects (see JP 3-60, p. 11 -4). For KLE, this meant uncovering what 
people thought, how they perceived the operating environment, 
and why. It required analysis of the informational and cognitive 
dimensions that permeated political, military, economic, social and 
informational networks, according to Commander’s Handbook for 
Strategic Communication, U.S. Joint Forces Command (2009), p. 
1-4. This involved extensive (and continually refined) background 
research and analysis, and meant combining a range of biographical 
and demographic information, such as religious, political and tribal 
affiliations, personal history, and key relationships, with a synopsis 


18 September-October 2010 


Fires 

























of recent interactions with other key players in the battle space, to 
form an elaborate target profile. 

Step 3: Capabilities analysis. Evaluating available capabilities 
against desired effects to determine the options available to the 
commander is the third step in the joint targeting cycle (see JP 
3-60, p. 11-10). For KLE, it was the most rigorous. It involved 
crafting themes and messages, integrating them with those delivered 
via public affairs and information operations, and synchronizing 
them with those delivered by our higher headquarters and the U.S. 
Embassy. 

We looked carefully at timing, to maximize synergy with other 
activity or events occurring in the battle space; and at tempo, to 
maximize receptivity of the engagement target. The U.S. Joint 
Forces Command’s Commander’s Handbook for Strategic Com¬ 
munication and Communications Strategy has a good discussion 
on timing and tempo. It points out that timing of the message is im¬ 
portant for myriad reasons, including synergy with 
other messages/events, receptivity of the audience, 
momentum, audience motivation/expectations, 
and stimulus response patterns. Tempo of 
message delivery can directly affect how 
the audience decides to take action. A 
single attempt to reach an audience 
will likely be in¬ 
effective just as 
a continual drum 
beat of a specific 
message or type 
of message can 
result in the re¬ 
ceiving audience 
over time treating it as 
noise. However, a well- 
timed message at the op¬ 
timum tempo can have 
significantly increased 
effect (see Com¬ 
mander’s Hand¬ 
book, p. IV-17). 

This step also 
entailed pairing 
senior U.S. lead¬ 
ers with specific 
engagement tar¬ 
gets. Although difficult at first, this 
became easier as the command group 
established habitual relationships with 
their Iraqi partners. 

The commander’s handbook also has a good ^ 
discussion of delivery vehicles, noting that T 
construction of the message must include considerations for 
resonance with the intended audience, but the delivery vehicle 
can also significantly distort, impede, or facilitate reception by the 
audience (see Commander’s Handbook, p. IV-16). 

Step 4: Commander’s decision and force assignment. The fourth 
step in the joint targeting cycle involves the preparation and release 
of tasking orders to executing forces. For KLE, this step included 
the commander’s validation of desired effects and a fine-tuning of 
themes and messages. It culminated with his approval of a proposed 
4 scheme of engagement, ’ which specified who was engaging whom 
on a given topic, in what sequence, during what time period. This 
all occurred during a weekly ‘KLE Synchronization Board,’ which 
was chaired by the I-Corps commander, facilitated by the KLE cell, 


Commander's 

objective 


I 



Engagement 

development 


Mission planning 
and execution 


Commander's 
decision and force 
assignment 


and attended by all deputy commanders and I-Corps primary staff. 

Step 5: Mission planning and execution. In mission planning 
and execution, capability providers conduct tactical-level planning 
to support target execution. This includes target validation, where 
planners conduct an analysis of the situation to determine if planned 
targets still contribute to the commander’s objectives, and how 
planned actions will impact other friendly operations (see JP 3-60, 
p. II-12). For KLE, this involved preparing the commanding general 
and his deputy commanders for their individual engagements. This 
preparation included a review of the engagement target’s profile 
and analysis of related activity in the operating and information 
environments. 

Step 6: Assessment. The last step in the joint targeting cycle 
consists of the collection and analysis of information about the 
engagement to determine whether or not it was successful in 
achieving the desired effects. For KLE, this meant the collection and 
analysis of post-engagement executive summaries, 
as well as an examination of the information and 
operating environments in the days and weeks 
following the engagement. 

Because KLE, like public affairs 
and information operations, attempts 
.to create outcomes primarily in 
the cognitive 
dimension, it was a 
challenge to quan¬ 
tify effectiveness. 
We relied on the 
engager’s indi¬ 
vidual assessment, 
captured in the 
engagement executive 
summaries, and on 
the command group’s 
collective assessment, 
made during the 
weekly KLE 
synchronization 
board. 

To be clear, 
KLE is not about 
engaging key 
' leaders when a 
crisis arises; by 
it is almost always too late. Rather, 
is about building relationships overtime 
with enough strength and depth, so that they 
can then support our interests whether in a crisis 
or not. And it’s about having a process - like the 
one used by I-Corps during our year in Iraq - to 
nominate, plan, execute and assess engagement targets, in support 
of the commander’s objectives and intent. 


Lieutenant Colonel Chad Jones was the chief of the Key Leader 
Engagement Cell for Multi-National Corps - Iraq, from January 2009 
to February 2010. Prior to his tour in Iraq, he served in information 
operations positions at U.S. Space Command in Colorado Springs, Colo., 
and U.S. Strategic Command, in Omaha, Neb. He received a Master 
of Science in Information Operations from the Naval Postgraduate 
School in December 2006. 


Capabilities 

analysis 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 19 













develop 



Joint, andl Combined Fires 




teaeteir si ajfijd) eas Beretss, ijfu 
Isjfig) ai^tg ajfi^) seisir i ee, ejjfp Piliresi 


By Alvin Peterson, chief of Training Development, Directorate of Training and Doctrine, Fires Center of Excellence, 

and Sharon McBride, Editor-in-Chief, Fires Bulletin 


"(Our) environment demands that we develop leaders who understand the context 

OF THE FACTORS INFLUENCING THE MILITARY SITUATION, ACT WITHIN THAT UNDERSTANDING, 
CONTINUALLY ASSESS AND ADAPT THOSE ACTIONS BASED ON THE INTERACTIONS AND 
CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ENEMY AND ENVIRONMENT, CONSOLIDATE TACTICAL AND 
OPERATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES INTO STRATEGIC AIMS, AND BE ABLE TO EFFECTIVELY TRANSITION 
FROM ONE FORM OF OPERATIONS TO ANOTHER. WE SEEK TO DEVELOP LEADERS WHO WILL 
THRIVE IN THIS ENVIRONMENT." 

A LEADER DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY FOR A 21 ST CENTURY ARMY, NOVEMBER 25, 2009 



R ecognizing the need for a 
transformation in training and 
education, the Fires Center of 
Excellence began to develop a concept for 
the Joint and Combined Fires University 
in 2008. Although, the university’s concept 
pre-dates the November 2009 release of A 
Leader Development Strategy for a 21st 
Century Army, and the May 2010 release 
of The United States Army Learning 
Concept for 2015 , the FCoE is on target 
and ahead of schedule in providing a path to 
achieving TRADOC’s number one priority 
of developing leaders and providing Fires 
professionals a variety of avenues for 
learning. 

The concept of the JCFU, is that of an 
innovative learning organization, and it 
will provide training and education through 
a mix of delivery methods as outlined by 
both of these critical concepts, as well as a 
blend of institutional, operational, and self¬ 
development domains. Access to JCFU, is 

20 September-October 2010 • Fires 


located behind the AKO firewall on the Fires 
Knowledge Network, log onto https ://www. 
us.army.mil/suite/page/586282. JCFU 
is scheduled to be at initial operational 
capability by summer 2011. 

On the JCFU website is a multitude of 
online courses, distance learning classes, 
virtual reality learning opportunities and 
links to obtaining traditional classroom 
instruction, most of which are available 
upon request now. 

Students can also currently access JCFU 
resources from the Field Artillery or Air 
Defense Artillery branch schoolhouses 
as a part of the FCoE, through civilian 
universities that have partnerships with 
JCFU, other sister service schoolhouses or 
from their home station. JCFU will provide 
blended learning and the highest quality 
training, education, and development 
opportunities for Army, joint, interagency, 
and coalition partners in the art and science 
of lethal and non-lethal Fires. 


J CFU was born out of necessity. 

Critical decision making is no 
longer exclusive to senior leaders in the 
operational environment. Junior officers, 
junior NCOs and Soldiers - all must make 
critical decisions on today’s battlefield. 
MG David Halverson’s Fires Functional 
Concept , which is nested with the Army 
Operating Concept and th &Army Capstone 
Concept , describes a future characterized 
by uncertainty, complexity, rapid change 
and persistent conflict. 

These concepts also dictate the necessity 
of developing leaders who understand 
the context of factors influencing the 
military situation, who can act within 
that understanding, continually access 
and adopt those actions based on the 
interactions and circumstance of the enemy 
and environment, consolidate tactical and 
operational opportunities into strategic 
aims, and be able to effectively transition 
from one form of operations to another. 






















These Army leaders also must have the 
knowledge and skills necessary to train and 
employ modular force units, be culturally 
aware and astute, be capable of executing 
mission-type orders and the commander’s 
intent, and finally, be leaders of character. 

So, how do we make sure all these 
knowledge requirements are met, knowing 
Soldiers and leaders typically do not 
have enough time between deployments 
and missions to attend traditional Army 
schools? The FCoE answered this challenge 
by standing up the JCFU to deliver vital 
knowledge directly to those who need it 
the most and in formats that are easily 
understood. 

From a Fires perspective, through 
developing the JCFU concept, Soldiers, 
Marines, Airmen, Sailors, allied nations, 
coalition partners and interagency personnel 
are being trained with the necessary skills it 
takes to be a leader on the battlefield today. 
The JCFU concept provides the individual 
learner a 4 one stop portal ’ in which they will 
be able to manage and access their career 
progression and operational training and 
education needs. 

The JCFU concept is quickly becoming 
the model for all of TRADOC to follow to 
facilitate life-long learning with a 24-hours, 
seven-days-a-week, reach-back capability. 
Since 2008, JCFU concept has been 
continuously evolving and expanding to 
add more courses, instructors and resources 
for Fires professionals. 

echnology at your fingertips. The 
JCFU concept is on the cutting edge 
of leveraging emerging technology to bring 
live, virtual, and constructive training and 
education to the Fires professional. Several 
gaming and simulation applications are 
currently in development or are now in 
use which enables students to immerse 
themselves in true-to-life scenarios in 
order to broaden their experience base and 
intuitive decision making abilities at the 
touch of a keystroke. 

For example, currently in use by the 
F CoE Noncommissioned Officer Academy 
is a virtual interactive training experience 
called “Danger Close.” The Senior Leader 
Course and Advanced Leader Course 
for both Field Artillery and Air Defense 
Artillery at Fort Sill have included “Danger 
Close” in a 10-hour and four-hour blocks 


of instruction. The platform uses state-of- 
the-art graphics and scenes using Soldiers 
filmed on location at Fort Sill. Students in 
the classroom experience the action through 
the eyes of an avatar, in this case they can 
choose between an officer or an NCO, in 
order to explore NCO and officer interaction 
in a variety of situations from garrison to a 
deployment. 

Through lessons learned and 
experiencing consequences from decision 
making, the role-players make life-and- 
death decisions and learn the outcome of 
those decisions - it is personalized training 
at its best. Currently, small group leaders 
use it as a tool for developing young leaders 
and as a refresher for seasoned Soldiers. 

Another example, although still in the 
development stage is “Virtual Platoon.” 
This interactive game concept focuses more 
on the role of officer. This game exercises 
a lieutenant’s decision making abilities 


and overall knowledge of Army programs 
and support systems by immersing him in 
a variety of complex scenarios from pre¬ 
deployment to post deployment, in garrison 
as well as during deployment. The officer 
receives feedback about his decisions from 
avatar mentors or JCFU instructors. In many 
cases, the young officer will be forced to 
deal with the consequences of his decisions 
and reflect how he could have done better. 

Yet another example of how the JCFU 
concept is setting the example by embracing 
technology and scenario based curriculum 
is the newly developed “Collateral Damage 
Decision-making Tool” or CDDT. The 
platform uses graphics comparable to those 
seen in the science fiction video game 
“Halo.” 

“Development for CDDT has been 
completed, and it is going through the 
validation process now,” said Christin Pena, 
an instructional systems specialist with the 


Collateral Damage Decision-making Tool allows users to make decisions in a simulated operational 
environment where they can safely observe the outcomes of their choices. 


“dEHIi has, been ojl the, cutting ejjg£> of 
l ever agjng emerging technology to bring 
live, virtual, end construc tive, tr ainin g 
and educat ion t® the Fires prof ession al.” 





COLLATERAL DAMAGE 


Scenario 1: 

Scenario 1 : 

School pay* 

religious Holiday 

Scinirls 

Ecarvarla 

(TOE 

fiOE 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 21 






















Dr. Mahir Ibrahimov talks with children in a local village during a 
mission to open two water treatment plants in Balad, Iraq, Feb. 
26, 2005. Dr. Ibrahimov is now the FCoE’s cultural advisor and 
head of the JCFU Cultural & Foreign Language Program (Photo 

courtesy of 28th Public Affairs Detachment) 


FCoE Education Technology Branch. 

With the constantly changing operational 
environment, the JCFU required aresponsive 
capability to deliver immersive, virtual 
decision games and simulations, Pena said. 

So, the FCoE responded by developing 
a semi-immersive, student-centered, virtual- 
decision gaming capability, she said. The 
capability utilizes Virtual Battlespace 
2 or VBS2 to develop realistic, virtual 
scenarios that are deliverable outside of 
the actual game to provide facilitated or 
distributed instruction. The capability will 
be integrated into the JCFU’s institutional, 
self-development and operational domains 
by delivering training, education and 
experience anywhere at any time. 

“Leveraging this gaming technology 
has allowed the FCoE to create a scenario- 
based game immersing the Soldier in a 
simulated operational environment where 
they can safely observe the outcomes of 
their decisions,” Pena said. “The focus of 
this training is to minimize or eliminate 
collateral damage. The Soldier observes a 
virtual scenario and then determines his/ 
her course of action. 

“After the decision is made, the Soldier 
can observe how that decision impacts not 
only the current situation but also second and 
third-order effects. CDDT will be delivered 
on CD’s, facilitated in classrooms as well 
as posted online through FKN,” she said, 
ultural immersion. The Army 
Culture and Foreign Language 
Strategy released in 2009, highlighted 
operational experiences in Somalia, the 
Balkans, Afghanistan and Iraq with having 
critical gaps in the Army’s capability to 
influence and operate effectively within 
different cultures for extended periods 
of time. Battlefield lessons learned have 
demonstrated that language proficiency 
and understanding of foreign cultures are 
vital enablers for full-spectrum operations. 

Optimal leaders must be “culturally 
astute and able to use this awareness and 
understanding to achieve an in cultural 
edge ... with great language capabilities 
and capacities.” In a nutshell, leaders must 
understand how culture affects military 
operations. 

With a growing awareness that U.S. 
military forces operating in other countries 
must be knowledgeable and respectful 
as possible of that nation’s customs and 
languages, once again the FCoE’s JCFU 
concept is leading the way by hiring a 
cultural advisor, who has totally revamped 
the traditional teaching approach for 
Soldiers to learn culture and foreign 
language. 

Dr. Mahir Ibrahimov, who is fluent in 
22 September-October 2010 • Fires 


five languages and versed in 
many cultures, is currently on 
board as the FCoE’s cultural 
advisor, and is the head of 
the JCFU Cultural & Foreign 
Language Program. 

Ibrahimov has created 
an innovative, multipronged 
approach toward learning 
that is geared for each level 
of leader to prepare them for 
living and working in a new 
country, preventing culture 
shock, easing the transition and 
creating awareness of different 
cultural and individual styles 
to maximize operations. 

When deployed in a 
foreign land and among a 
foreign culture, sometimes the 
smallest things are important 
and can lead to success or 
failure. For example, some 
Soldiers may not know that 
the hand signal for ‘OK’ is 
perfectly fine in the Western 
world, but such a gesture might 
cause offense in some areas of the Middle 
East. Beyond migrating unintentional 
insults, cultural interpretation, competence, 
and adaptation are prerequisites for 
achieving a win-win relationship in any 
military operation. 

A commander from 3rd Infantry 
Division observed in an after action review, 
“I had perfect situational awareness. What 
I lacked was cultural awareness. I knew 
where every enemy tank was dug in on 
the outskirts of Tallil. Only problem was, 
my Soldiers had to fight fanatics charging 
on foot or in pickups and firing AK47s and 
RPGs. Great technical intelligence... wrong 
enemy.” 

Operational commanders who do not 
consider the role of culture during mission 
planning and execution invite unintended 
and unforeseen consequences, and even 
mission failure. 

“I’m sharing my expertise with the 
troops. I’m providing our troops with 
the most current and broadest possible 
understanding of the various cultures that 
our troops are liable to encounter during 
potential future deployments,” Ibrahimov 
said. 

Items in FCoE Cultural & Foreign 
Language Program’s arsenal include a 
“Cultural Awareness and Language Training 
Package” developed by Ibrahimov, which 
is a portable training option for Soldiers 
that includes several foreign language 
CD’s, a cultural awareness scenario-based 
game called “Army 360,” language flash 


cards, and field expedient language smart 
books allocated from the Defense Language 
Institute for our troops’ use. 

Ibrahimov also established a Culture 
and Foreign Language Resource Center in 
the Morris Swett Technical library, where 
students have access to computers for self- 
paced training, various cultural awareness 
books and numerous other applicable digital 
and traditional learning resources. 

He also worked tirelessly to establish 
formal partnerships with civilian universities 
and other subj ect matter experts from across 
the nation to conduct culture and foreign 
language seminars here at Fort Sill. 

Ibrahimov also made available on the 
FKN website (https://www.us.army.mil/ 
suite/doc/21617522), a dedicated FCoE 
Cultural & Foreign Language Program 
resource page, which contains cultural 
awareness and foreign language knowledge, 
information on past seminars, information 
on the program, media coverage of the 
events, foreign languages guides, links to 
the Defense Language Institute, Foreign 
Language Center resources, as well as 
the CIA Fact Book - the list and site are 
constantly being updated. 

o more death by PowerPoint. 
Beyond revamping training, 
the JCFU concept has also overhauled the 
way its instructors teach. Rather than using 
old standard Army techniques of lecture 
peppered with PowerPoint slides, adult 
learning theories are now being incorporated 
into all the JCFU’s curriculum at both the 











FA and ADA schoolhouses. 

Research shows that those who learn 
best are those who take responsibility for 
their own learning and who are given the 
opportunity to reflect and dialogue during 
the training and education process. 

With the help of the Internet, and a 
variety of communication, visualization, 
and simulation technologies, the old 
Army’s standard of “70 percent and go” is 
no longer an appropriate standard where 
the achievement of learning outcomes are 
directly tied to meeting the needs of the 
Army for values based, culturally astute, 
critically thinking Soldiers and leaders. 

The process of developing cadre steeped 
in the art of facilitated learning through 
reflection has already begun through the 
JCFU concept. Staff and faculty at Fort 
Sill are currently being trained to use 
Outcome-Based Training and Education 
as well as other Socratic teaching methods, 
developed from Plato’s Socratic Dialogues. 
The Socratic method of teaching is a 
student-centered approach that challenges 
learners to develop their critical thinking 
skills and engage in analytic discussion. 
Ultimately, JCFU instructors will use cutting 
edge instructional methods coupled with 
technical and tactical expertise to raise the 
understanding of all students. 

T he future is now. When the Leader 
Development Strategy for a 21st 
Century Army was released it articulated 
the characteristics the Army desires in 
its leaders as they progress through their 
careers. Even though this doctrine is new, 
some of the factors that make a great leader 
haven’t really changed. For example, the 
ability to be innovative, execute and be a 
strong role model for Soldiers is always 
essential, but in addition to these qualities, 
a new leadership style is emerging, with 
skills uniquely tailored for success in today’s 
battle field environment. 

The JCFU concept is at the heart of these 
changes and is quickly setting the standard 
for the rest of the Army to follow. The JCFU 
concept is serving as the catalyst for the 
transformation of training and education 
not only here at Fort Sill but for the rest of 
the Army. The JCFU concept is a learning 
organization that will, through the process of 
reflection and analysis, continuously strive 
to determine the training and education 
needs of today and tomorrow’s Soldiers 
and leaders. 

Fit to Fight! Fires Strong! 


Oipeaitsifir KEi) e.iulteiLiir 'alll^ 


Haji Abdul Manaf, Nawa district governor, makes opening remarks during a 
regional stability shura at Forward Operating Base Geronimo, Afg 
July 26. The shura provides a way for leadership throughout the province 
to address challenges. (Photo by Sgt Mark Fayloga, U.S. Marine Corps) 


Jjsiir iifcj arfiejj ( SQii ro teirriesIl 
fpirres) lUrrij^eiTsi^ girsydeliirigii 
irfirfiQM at^i^ ej siulfciurp ali 
edueatieirii 

By Sharon McBride 

Editor-in-Chief 

D espite growing awareness among Army leaders to include foreign cultural 
education as apart of training and operational planning, the roles that culture 
and religion play in successful missions and deployments are often 
overlooked. 

Battlefield lessons learned have confirmed that language skills and understanding 
of foreign cultures are crucial for success in full-spectrum operations. Often, cultural 
understanding is necessary both to defeat adversaries and to work successfully with allies. 

The Army Culture and Foreign Language Strategy, which was released in 2009, 
highlighted operational experiences in Somalia, the Balkans, Afghanistan and Iraq with 
having critical gaps in the Army capability to influence and operate effectively within 
different cultures for extended periods of time. 

In an effort to develop adaptive, agile and culturally astute leaders with the right blend 
of culture and foreign language capabilities, the Fires Center of Excellence’s Joint and 
Combined Fires University is leading the way with its implementation of a Cultural and 
Foreign Language Program. 

Dr. Mahir Ibrahimov, who is fluent in five languages and versed in many cultures, 
was hired as the first TRADOC Cultural and Foreign 
Language Advisor, and is the head of the CFLP 
here at Fort Sill, Okla. 

Changing our current teaching 
paradigms required new ideas and the 
ability to go beyond providing Soldiers 
and leaders a rudimentary foundation 
in foreign culture and language 
familiarization. Traditionally, 
cultural training tended to be overly 
simplistic and lacked a context for 
cultural understanding, Ibrahimov 
explained. 

The curriculum developed by 
CFLP helps Soldiers and leaders 
develop critical thinking skills needed 
to understand how culture might 
influence the outcome of an operation 
Ibrahimov has created a holistic 
approach to cultural training that 
is now being looked at closely by 
TRADOC for other installati 
to emulate. 









According to Ibrahimov, becoming 
aware of cultural dynamics is a difficult task 
because culture is based on experiences, 
values, behaviors, beliefs and norms. In 
many cases, Soldiers may experience a 
foreign culture for the first time during 
a deployment, and as a result may 
inadvertently be disrespectful. 

For example, in Iraq, the left hand is 
not used for contact with others, eating or 
gestures; it is considered unclean. When 
talking with an Iraqi, especially during 
key leader engagements, close personal 
interaction is customary and distance is 
considered rude. Try all food and drink 
offered, and it’s important to appear relaxed 
and friendly; social interaction is critical in 
building trust. Cultural awareness training 
would help overcome the ‘culture shock,’ 
and give Soldiers the ability to adjust to an 
indigenous culture as quickly as possible to 
get the mission done. 

It should also build on the foundation 
of an individual’s existing leader attributes 
which in turn reinforces the core leader 
competencies of leading others, developing 
oneself and achieving results. Cross-cultural 
training should focus, in particular on 
character, presence and intellect. (See figure 
1.1 Cultural Awareness Objectives). 

Some programs define cultural 
immersion as simply ‘being there, ’ asserting 
that physically being in another country is 
an immersion in itself and that knowledge 
of another culture and language will follow 
naturally. 

“That isn’t always the case,” Ibrahimov 
said. When developing a comprehensive 
program, Ibrahimov determined that 
three cultural competency levels (cultural 
awareness, understanding and expertise) 
must be included. These competency levels 
are now included in all courses taught by 
the JCFU, the FCoE Noncommissioned 
Officers Academy and in other leadership 
courses attended by officers and warrant 
officers to overcome cultural ignorance (See 
figure 1.2 Cultural Competency Levels). 

The Basic Officer Leader Course, the 
NCO Warrior Leader Course, the NCO 
Advanced Leader Course, the Captain’s 
Career Course, the Warrant Officer Basic 
Course, the Warrant Officer Advanced 
Course and the NCO Senior Leader Course 
have all been revised to contain specific 
approaches appropriate to each level in order 
for leaders to attain specific knowledge on 
culture and foreign language expectations. It 
is important to note, as designed the training 
places more emphasis on attaining cultural 
knowledge (big C), with some emphasis on 
learning foreign languages (little L). 

“Our Soldiers and leaders really need 

24 September-October 2010 • Fires 


Figure 1.1 Cultural Awareness Objectives 


• Learning Objective 1 (Character): Demonstrate interaction and cross-cultural communications 
skills in order to effectively engage and understand people and their environment 

• Demonstrate a level of cultural awareness that includes a positive, openness to other people, 
an understanding of prevailing values, beliefs, behaviors and customs, and a desire to 

learn more about cultures and language. This includes an introduction to a language that 
supports current military operations with the intent to promote additional study through self¬ 
development at the institution, at home station or at an academic university. 

• Learning Objective 2 (Presence): Demonstrate communication, influence and negotiation skills 
essential for leaders to effectively operate in a JIIM environment. 

• Leverage the knowledge gained by challenging students to employ skills to deal with 
ambiguous and complex situations, to regulate one’s own behavior and to use the 
interpersonal abilities to deal with people from one’s own or other cultures. This includes an 
understanding and ability to engage other joint and allied military personnel, and host country 
indigenous leaders with a moderate level of confidence. 

• Learning Objective 3 (Intellect): Demonstrate a familiarization in a geographic region of current 
operational significance. 

• Leverage critical thinking and cognitive skills through organizing information that supports 
cultural self-awareness. Depending on level of leader development professional military 
education, expand cross-cultural competence skills by gaining an awareness or understanding 
of a geographic area that highlights the implications of a region’s economic, religious, legal, 
governmental, political and infrastructural features, and of sensitivities regarding gender, race, 
ethnicity, local observances and local perception of the U.S. and its allies. 

• Apply relevant planning to considerations, terms, factors, concepts and geographic 
information to mission planning and in the conduct of operations. This includes leveraging 
other TRADOC and DoD schools, partnerships with universities and academia, gaming 
technology and opportunities that stress students’ ability to concisely and persuasively speak 
and write, to engage in discussions, and employ cognitive reasoning and thinking skills. 


Figure 1.2 Cultural Competency Levels 


• Cultural expertise 

• Advanced level of cross-cultural competence in a specific geographic area. Generally 
entails some degree of proficiency in a language; skills that enable effective cross-cultural 
persuasion, negotiation, conflict resolution, influence or leadership; and an understanding of 
the most salient historic and present-day regional structural and cultural factors of a specific 
geographic area. 

• Cultural understanding 

• Well developed cross-cultural competence in a specific region. Able to anticipate the 
implications of culture and apply relevant terms, factors, concepts and regional information to 
tasks and missions. Familiar with a specific region’s economic, religious, legal, governmental, 
political and infrastructural features, and aware of regional sensitivities regarding gender, race, 
ethnicity, local observances and local perception of the U.S. and its allies. 

• Cultural awareness 

• Minimal level of regional competence necessary to perform assigned tasks in a specific 
geographic area; able to describe key culture terms, factors and concepts. Basic 
understanding of how foreign culture might affect the planning and conduct of operations. 


to understand the cultural nuances of other 
countries,” Ibrahimov said. “The decisions 
our younger Soldiers and leaders are making 
often have strategic importance.” Cultural 
knowledge and understanding can open 
eyes so Soldiers can be more effective when 
dealing with a local populace. Having a 
rudimentary knowledge of a native language 
can be helpful in a variety situations, he 
added. 

artnerships and cooperation. 

Ibrahimov also designed the CFLP 
program to have ongoing partnerships and 
cooperation with local universities and other 
military institutions. Cameron University, 
Oklahoma University and Oklahoma 
State University faculties conduct regular 
seminars for Fires professionals on topics 


of operational importance. 

Past topics have included: Central Asia: 
Modernity and Geopolitics in the Stans , 
The Cultural and Linguistic Patterns in 
the Middle East and Projections for Iraq, 
Who Will Lead? The United States, the 
European Union, China, and the Global 
Diffusion of Power, The Strategic Logic of 
Suicide Terrorism, U.S. Strategic Options in 
Afghanistan, Iran and U.S. Strategy, Russia: 
A Declining Superpower Reclaiming its 
Throne? Future strategic topics are related 
to Russia, Iran and the Middle East. 

“These seminars have led to an increased 
understanding by our students of cultural 
aspects and geopolitical trends, their 
impacts on the contemporary operational 
environment,” said Ibrahimov. “We are 








working on attracting more academic 
support to enhance ongoing education and 
training so they can be better prepared 
to operate in the joint, interagency, 
intergovernmental and multinational 
environments that they might be deployed 
in the future.” 

Partnerships to enhance training have 
also been formed with TRADOC Culture 
Center and Military Intelligence Center, 
both located at Fort Huachuca, Ariz., the 
Marine Corps University at Quantico, 
Va., the Defense Language Institute 
Foreign Language Center at the Presidio 
in Monterey, Calif., and the East and South 
Asia Center for Strategic Studies at the 
National Defense University. 

Ibrahimov himself also regularly 
conducts seminars with students attending 
the Fires Support Coordinator Course, 
Warrant Officer Instructional Branch, Field 
Artillery and Air Defense Artillery Captains 
Career Course. He also conducts specific or 
generalized predeployment training upon 
request. He has also been conducting train 
the trainer sessions for small group leaders, 
new cultural awareness instructors and new 
TRADOC cultural advisors. He has also 
made arrangements for allied international 
students and FCoE liaison officers to 
conduct regular briefs on their respective 
countries for additional knowledge. 

C ultural simulation. Items in FCoE 
Cultural & Foreign Language 
Program’s arsenal include a ‘Cultural 
Awareness and Language Training 
Package,’ which is a portable training 
option for Soldiers that includes several 
foreign language CDs, a cultural awareness 
scenario-based game called “Army 360,” 
language flash cards and field-expedient 
smart books allocated from the Defense 
Language Institute for troops’ use (See 
figure 1.3 Cultural Awareness and 


Figure 1.3: Cultural Awareness and 
Language Training Package 

• Iraqi Basic Language Survival Guide 

• Tactical Dari Language and Culture 

• Multi-Platform Tactical Language Kit - 
Dari 

• Pashto Headstart & LSK 

• Tactical Pashto: Language and Culture 

• Multi-Platform Tactical Language Kit 
Iraqi Arabic 

• Pocket cards - for use in the field 

• Army 360 

• Defense Language Institute Foreign 
Language Center (Presidio of 
Monterey, Calif.) 

• Flipbooks on Iraqi Basic - 
Language Survival Guide & Korean 
Basic - Language Survival Guide 


Language Training Package). 

“Army 360” is a virtual simulation 
application that enables students to immerse 
themselves in true-to-life scenarios in order 
to broaden their experience in dealing 
with other cultures. They get to practice 
intuitive decisionmaking abilities in a mock 
environment before facing the real - life 
culture dilemmas. 

Ibrahimov also established a Culture 
and Foreign Language Resource Center in 
the Morris Swett Technical library, where 
students have access to computers for self- 
paced training, various cultural awareness 
books and numerous other applicable digital 
(to include Rosetta Stone) and traditional 
learning resources. These resources are 
available to captains, BOLC B attendees, 
NCOES and warrant officer students to 
prepare cultural research papers which 
are now a mandatory 


requirement in each of their respective 
training. BOLC B students are now eligible 
to receive certificates after completing four 
to eight hours of language training. The 
FCoE CFLP identified five operationally 
important languages for training: Dari, 
Pashto (Afghanistan), Iraqi Arabic, Korean 
and Russan. Not sure where to start? A 
comprehensive reading list is also available 
at the resource center that includes books 
on areas that are currently strategically/ 
operationally important to Army operations. 

A dedicated FCoE Cultural and Foreign 
Language Program resource page is also 
available by logging onto FKN. The 
site contains an abundance of cultural 
awareness and foreign language knowledge, 
information on past seminars, information 
on the program, media coverage of the 
events, foreign languages guides, links to 
the Defense Language Institute, Foreign 
Language Center resources, as well as 
CIA Fact Book. The list and site are 





‘*0330 OHM? Coap©© 


that by providing evolutional training, 
it^/ill'lmake^all Fires professionals successful - no 
matter what corne'r of the globe they happen to deploy.” 


CPT Kevin McClure, 1-178th Field Artillery Battalion, South Carolina Army National Guard, meets in Kabul, Afghanistan, with Nawabad village elder 
Abdul Wali to compile a list of priority reconstruction projects, July 3. (Photo by CPT Chris Neeley, U.S. Army) 


constantly being updated and upgraded. 

The FCoE CFLP has also just launched 
an all-volunteer language and cultural 
awareness orientation class/pilot program 
that started in July. It’s a 12-week language 
course that is conducted by a native Arabic 
speaker. 

“Sometimes troops have more success 
learning a foreign language by listening 
and practicing with a person rather than just 
listening to a CD,” Ibrahimov said. 


Figure 1.4 Speaking Language Proficiency 
Levels 

• Speaking 0: No proficiency 

• Speaking 0+: Memorized proficiency 

• Speaking 1: Elementary proficiency 

• Speaking 1 +: Elementary proficiency, 
plus 

• Speaking 2/2+: Limited working 
proficiency 

• Speaking 3/3+: General professional 
proficiency 

• Speaking 4/4+: Advanced professional 
proficiency 

• Speaking 5: Functionally native 
proficiency 


The first session was attended by 46 
volunteer students from FA/ADA CCC and 
WOES. 

FCoE CFLP is currently in the process 
of identifying a Dari or Pashto instructor 
(Afghanistan) to launch a similar 12-week 
program in the future. 

oin the Army, see the world. 
Deployments are not going to be 
stopping any time soon. According to DA 
Pam 525-3-0, The Army Capstone Concept 
Operational Adaptability-Operation under 
Conditions of Uncertainty and Complexity 
in an Era of Persistent Conflict , the Army 
is going to continue to send large numbers 
of Soldiers into a region about which they 
have little knowledge and almost no cultural 
connection. We then ask them to interact 
safely and efficiently with military and 
civilian natives. 

These interactions require varying levels 
of linguistic, cultural, and interpersonal 
backgrounds. Providing Soldiers with these 
backgrounds is critical. The FCoE CFLP in 
on target in providing an avenue of learning 
for leaders and Soldiers to achieve at least 
an elemental language proficiency (Level 
0+ /I - See figure 1.4 Speaking Language 
Proficiency Levels) prior to deployment. 


FCoE CFLP hopes that by providing 
evolutional training, it will make all Fires 
professionals successful - no matter what 
corner of the globe they happen to deploy. 

For more information on the FCoE 
CFLP, log onto FKN at https://www. 
us. army, mil/suite/doc/21617522. 


Dr. Mahir J. Ibrahimov completed his Ph.D. at 
the Academy of Social Sciences in Moscow in 
1991 and has attended several post graduate 
programs at Johns Hopkins University and 
other U.S. institutions. He also served in the 
Soviet Army and witnessed the break-up of 
the Soviet Union. As a former high-ranking 
diplomat, he helped open the first embassy of 
Azerbaijan in Washington, D.C. While working 
for the U.S. Department of State, he instructed 
U.S. diplomats in languages and cultures. He 
also provided vital assistance as a multi-lingual 
cultural adviser to U.S. forces during OIF II and 
became the subject of a Defense Department 
newsreel, “Jack of All Languages.” Dr. 
Ibrahimov specializes in the cultural issues of 
the former Soviet Republics and the Middle 
East. He is the author of “Invitation to Rain: 
a Story of the Road Taken Toward Freedom” 
and numerous publications on the Middle East 
and the former Soviet Union. 



26 September-October 2010 • Fires 














aj uM© [pP3g][?0DD[l B© ©DOSaag] ®°$3nuu 

W® Goa!© MarCaa^ ©a maE© 

("tKMl a© [Hmlfea© 6© [^©©©SMten® 



“Danger Close” allows users to become the lead character, either 2LT Oakes, a new platoon leader, 
or SFC Shaw, a combat veteran and seasoned noncommissioned officer, in an interactive movie 
and see the consequences of their decisions. 




By Jennifer McFadden 

Managing Editor 


I magine you are a new lieutenant 
assigned to a battery. You want to 
make a good first impression but 
are not sure where and what are you are 
supposed to be doing. To whom do you 
turn? Now imagine you are a seasoned 
staff sergeant or sergeantfirst class, doing 
the job of the platoon sergeant and the 
platoon leader when you get a fresh second 
lieutenant who has little or no operational 
experience. How do you interact? How do 
you, as a platoon sergeant or platoon leader 
find your place and your role in your unit 
without overstepping or disrespecting your 
counterparts or the chain of command? 

There are many challenges that come 
from developing a noncommissioned 
officer-officer relationship making getting 
off to good start imperative. Finding a 
balance between teaching and respect is 
a challenge many leaders face. Showing 
strength, knowledge and unity can be 
difficult but is necessary to create a 
functioning, precise and cohesive unit and 
developing a good officer/NCO command 
team. 

Often tough leadership lessons are 
taught in the school of life and sometimes 
the outcomes are good but detrimental. 
This is where a new virtual experience 
immersive learning simulation program 
called “Danger Close,” can give NCOs 
and officers an opportunity to practice 
reacting to real-world challenges, from 
garrison to combat missions, in a mock 
reality before they happen in real life. In this 
new gaming application leaders can make 
mistakes and learn in a safe environment 
without risking lives, a mission outcome 
or breaking down the chain of command. 
Reminiscent of old chapter books where you 
choose your path for the story, this program 
allows the user to see the outcome of their 
choices and decisions. The game, however, 
when choices end up having detrimental 
consequences will allow the user to go back 
and review the scenario again and choose 
a better answer. 

Contrary to prior learning tools of the 
Army this is no ordinary point-and-click 
program. “Danger Close” has graphics and 
a realism that rivals civilian games such as 
“Soldier of Fortune” or “Halo.” It has also 
won the 2010 Software and Information 
Industry Association CODiE award for best 


workforce training application. 

There were many man hours involved in 
the making of “Danger Close” to make it a 
reality. With the help of the entire Fort Sill 
community and the support of the Training 
and Doctrine Command, “Danger Close” 
has become a template for other virtual 
training programs. Filming for it only took 
three weeks but it took months of team effort 
from Fort Sill and the Lawton community 
to pull it all together. Organizations such as 
the Fort Sill Moral Welfare and Recreation 
Program, the Fires Center of Excellence 
NCO Academy and the Department of 
Public Works were instrumental in making 


it happen. 

“We were so lucky. The crew filmed at 
the NCO Academy, the Impact Zone and 
out in the (Lawton) community,” said CSM 
Dean J. Keveles, commandant of the FCoE 
NCO Academy. “We even had one of the 
community hospitals shut down for us to 
create a more realistic scenario.” 

NCO/officer relationship challenges are 
a fact in the Army. That is why the Fort Sill 
Directorate of Training and Doctrine and 
the FCoE NCO Academy came together to 
create this new and state-of-the-art training 
tool for use by troops here at Fort Sill. 

“This program is cutting edge,” 

27 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 



develop 























jr | ^ 



□ □□l 


SwfttWEUff’) 


W S ' W ' BVO-BOM dnv#« « tte 

'““" r»»“ “ »■•«•>*»>»• “«'" 

?7*>«* rxploro* (itua*«» * Flf,llct 


3Co© gain]© @0©® aDOoffl© 
pOa^ep© 3® \y70p3mal% 
<Mqpofl©oD@© DeatotePsCD^ 
ft ©GoaOQsoDgj®© ©oasGo 
a© a ©QO 0 @ 0 d]© 0 a gDd© 
[paDofeo flfe(3©(ffflfea[a®m D 
aad] M0oaG 3® <°]® 
afe®DD3 (3B©F©©[°)©©3 3® 
am ®(?ff0@©[p ®p Kfl©®^ 


2*»«w 


said Sandra Velasquez 
Pokorny, branch chief of design and 
evaluation at DoTD. “We have worked to 
make every detail as realistic as possible.” 

Pokorny also spearheaded the campaign 
for a better training tool along with W. Joe 
Kirby, chief of the Enlisted Development 
Branch, DoTD. Former commanding 
general of the FCoE and Fort Sill, MG 
Peter M. Vangjel, and now with the 
support of MG David D. Halverson, the 
current commanding general of the FCoE 
and Fort Sill and GEN Martin Dempsey, 
the commander of U.S. Army TRADOC, 
“Danger Close” is now being used as a part 
of the curriculum taught at the FCoE NCO 
Academy. 

It has become a valuable training tool 
for both NCOs of the Field Artillery and 
Air Defense Artillery branches, as well as 
for all officers. 

“The program is not one sided,” said 
Keveles, “You can play the role of a senior 
NCO or a new lieutenant.” 

Besides covering the nuances of the 
NCO/officer relationship, the game also 
allows players to virtually experience 
leadership challenges such as a suicide 
in the ranks, fraternization, and what to 
do about disrespect to an officer or NCO. 
Each scenario carries the role players from 
first interactions, garrison operations, pre¬ 
deploymenttraining, combat situations and 
through redeployment. 

“We strived for realism with this 
program,” said Pokorny. “We (the DoTD 
staff, the NCO Academy staff) combed over 
every detail of the script to make it as real 

28 September-October 2010 • Fires 


and believable as we could. We 
talked to young lieutenants and we 
talked to senior NCOs across the Army 
asking for the reality of these situations.” 

Small group leaders and instructors from 
the NCO Academy have seen good results 
and many requests for additional copies of 
the game. 

“Using this has created a multitude of 
discussion in our classes,” said SFC Michael 
Canedo, an instructor at the FCoE NCO 
Academy. “We continually get requests 
from NCOs to take this back to their units. 
This is not re-teaching our senior leaders, 
this is just polishing what they already 
know.” 

“Danger Close” has become very 
popular for its effect on the Soldier, the 
overall learning experience and provoking 


out of the box thinking it generates, he said. 

“’Danger Close’ has a real emotional 
impact. When the Soldiers participate in 
this program they are completely in control 
and invested in what is happening,” Keveles 
said. “We want to get their attention and 
get them to really think and experience and 
know how to react to something besides the 
norm.” 

Further development of this new 
interactive software is in the works to build 
and improve upon the “Danger Close,” 
experience. 

To get more information on obtaining 
a copy of “Danger Close” contact Sandra 
Velasquez Pokorny, branch chief of Design 
and Evaluation DoTD, Fort Sill, Okla., at 
580-558-0355, or e-mail her at pokomys@ 
conus.army.mil. 



Screen shot of 2LT Oakes (left) and SFC Shaw following their introduction to each other in “Danger 
Close.” 












h 


if-iitfcCiriQ i^nroHarG^ wruisirHs) dig ruiUmfi^ 

- 

By CW3 Bruce E. DeFeyter y* 




r ou can’t always get what you want, but if you try 
sometime, you just might find you get what 
you need,” states the 1969 song by the 
Rolling Stones. 

Today policy-makers, law-enforcement 
officials and military leaders struggle to come 
up with innovative ideas for neutralizing 
terrorist organizations and their 
activities. One such idea, not 
given much thought until after 
9/11, is attacking terrorist 
financing structures, 
methods and sources, 
according to Jeanne K. 

Giraldo and Harold A. Trinkunas 
editors of “Terrorism Financing and State 
Responses: A Comparative Perspective.’ 

Attempting to destroy terrorists by denying them 
financing or interrupting their money stream is unlikely to 
succeed as a sole point of effort for at least three reasons. First, 
organizationally, terrorists are structured to slip behind, around and 
underneath centralized organizations, rules and bureaucracies. 

Second, terrorist organizations can conduct operations for 
literally pennies on the dollar, and any serious effort to interrupt 
these financially insignificant activities will have serious second and 
third-order effects on the larger financial community. Third, even 
with the thousands of laws enacted and the historically unprecedented 
cooperation between partner nations, terrorism continues to escalate 
by nearly every conceivable measure, according to a 2008 report by 
the U.S. State Department. Bluntly put, counterterrorism financing 
reform simply doesn’t work. 

This is not to say that the United States and the larger worldwide 
community should ignore terrorist financing — instead, it should 
take a different approach, using the lion, the African predator, as 
a model. In order to understand the predator model, we need to 
define who our enemy actually is and understand the three reasons 
given above for the failure of financing reform. Only then will we 
be able to structure a more effective mechanism for interdicting 
terrorist organizations through their financing rather than by trying 
to starve them out of existence. 

D efine the enemy. In any conflict, it is imperative to 
understand exactly who the enemy is. It is generally 
understood that terrorism is a tactic and not an organization or 
group. Consequently, if we do not further define the enemy beyond 
a tactic, we risk fighting this war alongside other ill-defined wars 
declared on poverty, drugs, cancer and obesity. 

Therefore, for the purpose of this paper, a terrorist is better 
defined as a nonstate actor, someone who acts on the international 
stage outside the knowledge or permission of the state to which he 
or she owes allegiance. 


O' 


The 
quintes¬ 
sential non¬ 
state actors are 
Osama bin Laden 
and al Qaeda. The 
nonstate actor is the ul¬ 
timate persona non grata, 
operating across country lines 
and boundaries, restricted by noth¬ 
ing but conscience. 

By definition, nonstate actors do not 
have a state (or legitimate authority) to report 
to and can be involved in criminal activities, such 
as selling drugs, smuggling weapons or, of course, 
terrorism. Primarily, nonstate actors remain behind 
the scenes and out of sight of the state, emerging only to 
make demands, threats or attacks. 

Ori Brafman and Rod Beckstrom, authors of the book, “The 
Starfish and the Spider,” also define and classify most nonstate actors 
as decentralized organizations. It is this organizational definition 
that will illuminate a significant difficulty in attempting to attack 
a nonstate actor. 

Current game. Brafman and Beckstrom note several 
interesting “rules” about decentralized organizations, 
which they call “starfish.” First, “When attacked, a decentralized 
organization tends to become even more open and decentralized.” 
In plain language, an already dark and secretive organization, 
when attacked, becomes more dispersed and darker; meaning that 
it becomes exponentially harder to find. 

Furthermore, the increased decentralization does not affect the 
organization’s performance — in some scenarios, performance 
actually improves. 

Granted, there might be some “trophies” captured in the 
attack, but the larger organization continues to exist in a more 
nebulous fashion. Furthermore, the starfish, operating in a more 
open environment, are more capable of mutating, state Brafman 
and Beckstrom. That mutation allows starfish to adapt and change 
more quickly than centralized organizations can react by passing 
laws or effective legislation. Finally, and more ominously, smaller, 
autonomous, decentralized organizations have a habit of sneaking 
up on centralized organizations, or spiders. 

That effect has been noted separately by Jeanne K. Giraldo and 
Harold A. Trinkunas, who observe, “A decentralized, networked 
al-Qaida composed of self-funded cells is more flexible and less 
vulnerable to attack.” 

The second major reason that financing reform will not work 
is that there has never been a single case of a terrorist organization 
that ceased to exist as a direct result of financing problems. This 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 29 


develop 







is due, in no small part, to the 
fact that nonstate actors conduct 
operations for literally pennies 
on the dollar. 

Thomas J. Biersteker and 
Sue E. Eckert note several high- 
profile terrorist operations and 
their associated costs, such as the 
2002 Bali bombings ($20,000- 
$35,000); the 1998 U.S. Embassy 
bombing in Africa ($50,000); 
the 1993 World Trade Center 
bombing ($18,000); and more 
recently, the 2004 Madrid attack, 
estimated to have cost less than 
$10,000 (See figure 1 Cost in 
dollars to fund terror attacks). 

Simply put, the cost of any 
single one of these operations 
could have been bankrolled by 
an average middleclass American 
family. Imagine the difficulty, 
complexity and absurdity of 
attempting to pass legislative 
and financial laws that can distinguish between a nonstate actor bent 
on terrorism and an American family taking out a loan to purchase 
a recreational vehicle or a home. Giraldo and Trinkunas deal with 
the issue squarely: “The truth is that such small amounts cannot be 
stopped,” no matter how badly we wish otherwise. 

Finally, the third reason for change is obvious — the 2007 report 
from the National Counterterrorism Center noted a steady increase in 
terrorist events, even excluding operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
This increase is in stark contrast to the decrease in the number of 
terrorists’ assets being frozen. “In the 16 weeks after the 9/11 attacks, 
157 suspected terrorism fundraisers were identified, and assets valued 
at $68 million were frozen. The numbers fell after the initial rush by 
authorities. The totals for 2005 — $4.9 million frozen in the accounts 
of 32 suspects or organizations—suggest the effort is losing intensity,” 
according to a 2006 US AToday article by Kevin Johnson “U.S. Freezes 
Fewer Terror Assets.” 

As stated above, counterterrorism financial reform has been and 
is failing. These statements are consistent with the theory described 
and articulated by Brafman and Beckstrom. Therefore, armed with 
theory and facts, why do we insist on pursuing a method that is clearly 
failing? 

redator mode. Since it is difficult, if not impossible, to pass 
financial or legislative laws that will starve nonstate actors 
into inactivity is there another way? 

As stated earlier in the paper, the African predator model might 
be a better choice and strategy for dealing with terrorists and their 
money. The African male lion, with his pride, patrols an area of more 
than 100 square miles. Often, the pride will stake out a watering hole 
in the knowledge that sooner or later, dinner will have to come for a 
drink. As the prey drinks water, the lions position themselves along 
the exit route and “cherry pick” dinner off the trail. Could we not use 
money the same way to lure nonstate actors into our sights? 

The predator model would have several advantages. First, it would 
use money to our advantage by illuminating and possibly destroying a 
dark network, without disrupting average American families. Second, 
money can serve as a means of centralizing starfish and thus making 
them more vulnerable to attack by traditional law-enforcement 
mechanisms. Third, it would overcome the problems noted earlier 
with attempting to “starve” nonstate actors into nonexistence. 

30 September-October 2010 • Fires 


Fess than two weeks after 9/11, President George W. Bush 
noted, “Money is the lifeblood of terrorist operations,” and a 
few days later, Gordon Brown, then-finance minister for Great 
Britain, echoed that sentiment: “If fanaticism is the heart of 
modern terrorism, then finance is its lifeblood.” 

So if money acts as the lifeblood of terrorists, why can’t we 
use that to our advantage by taking the analogy further? 

Imagine that a terrorist organization is like a human body, 
with its different elements acting as the heart, brains, legs and 
arms. Most dark networks will employ a series of cutouts and 
security measures to isolate and protect the organization from 
penetration. The only common thread throughout the organization 
is money. 

It flows from the collectors to the brains and outward to the 
limbs and it identifies people associated with the organization by 
their very contact with it. Instead of automatically shutting down 
financial ties when they reach arbitrary thresholds of $ 10,000, why 
not monitor, investigate and infiltrate the organization through 
its money stream? Instead of making modem banking methods 
risky for terrorists, we should make the banking systems of the 
U.S. and partner nations attractive and encourage terrorists to 
come to our “watering hole.” 

That technique would have several advantages. First and 
foremost, we would control the playing field and mles, as 
opposed to Third World hawallas (debt transfers) and other 
traditional financial methods. The mles that we control do not 
have to be made public, and we could institute random measures 
that would vary on a daily or weekly basis, requiring banks to 
submit names, accounts and activities to a central database for 
further investigation. 

Second, we should not dismpt terrorist financial networks 
when we discover them. Instead, we should use our system of 
banking to trace the money as it comes into accounts and to see 
where it is transferred and who is accessing it, thus using money 
to illuminate a potentially dark network. This illumination would 
then give military and police forces the surgical precision to 
remove “cancerous lesions” instead of randomly seizing property 
and accounts by arbitrary activity and associations. 

Third, this illumination would generally provide intelligence 

















agents with access points for penetrating the organization through 
distributors, suppliers and trainers in order to gain access to the 
network’s plans and intentions. 

Another significant reason for encouraging nonstate actors to 
use our financial networks would be that it would give us the ability 
not only to monitor financial activity but also to set up financial 
deception operations designed to degrade terrorist networks. Joel 
Garreau, author of the article “Disconnect the Dots,” suggests that 
there are different ways of fighting terrorist networks. 

Garreau makes the first point by recognizing that networks are 
not built along the lines of physical infrastructure. Instead, “they 
are political and emotional connections among people who must 
trust each other in order to function.” 

Trust is the key point of attack in a network—not the leadership, 
and certainly not the finances. “There’s no reason organizational 
glitches, screw-ups, jealousies and distrust that slow and degrade 
performance can’t be intentionally introduced,” states Garreau. 

Money might be one of the easiest ways to do just that. Accounts 
that are suddenly flush with money—or conversely, empty—could 
and will cause friction, as individuals attempt to explain unusual 
activity. Tensions would gradually build until the unity that was 
previously taken for granted would be ineffectual, as the group 
would have to sort out issues of trust and betrayal, thus turning the 
network in on itself. 

O aveats. Clearly, there would be some stipulations with 
regard to encouraging nonstate actors to use our financial 
networks. First, if the organization we are investigating knows that 
it is being monitored through its financing, the game is up, and we 
will need to send in police, lawyers and bankers to arrest, collect 
and seize what they can before the terrorists disappear. Secondly, 
and more challenging, the network would have to be exposed when 
it is ready to commit catastrophic operations that would result in the 
loss of life and or property. The trick would be to determine what 
thresholds need to be established in order to safeguard lives. Will 
the U.S. need to intercept the nonstate actor before it detonates a 
small bomb with no expected loss of life? These are the questions 
policymakers and law-enforcement agencies will need to grapple 
with early on in the investigation in order to deal with them as 
they occur. 

n isks. The current practice of freezing assets is virtually 
without real peril. Freezing assets, as well as legal and 
financial reforms, reward politicians and law-enforcement officials 
with the illusion of success—it provides headlines, figures and what 
appear to be results. Yet, as noted earlier, the very organizations 
that are supposedly the target of the reforms continue to exist and 
even flourish. The predator model is not without risks. It would 
be an extraordinary politician who would publically admit that a 
terrorist group that was being monitored had committed an act of 
violence on their watch. 

The public backlash could unseat all but the most stable or 
successful politicians. Next, much of what goes on would be done 
in secret, and accolades would have to be given anonymously as 
“tips” that brought down the terrorists. Again, very few political 
establishments are willing to take on that kind of risk without some 
political recognition for their actions when things go right. Finally, 
if money was introduced into terrorists’ accounts in the attempt 
to destabilize the network, as Joel Garreau suggests, the average 
citizen might not be so understanding, especially if the terrorists 
were able to carry out a successful operation under the eyes of 
the very people who put it there. However, it might be prudent to 
remember the adage, “With great risk comes a great reward,” and 
realize that the current game, with little to no risk, carries no reward 
at all. 


C onclusion. According to a National Counterterrorism 
Center 2007 report, terrorism is increasing. In spite of a 
plethora of legal and financial efforts enacted to control it, states a 
2008 Washington Post article, “Al-Qaida Masters Terrorism on the 
Cheap.” This is due, in no small part, to the relatively tiny amounts 
of money it takes to launch spectacular attacks. 

According to the authors of The Starfish and the Spider, our 
very efforts to attack decentralized networks might be contributing 
to their proliferation and success. Because current methods are 
failing, it is only prudent that we change strategies in an attempt 
to thwart nonstate actors and their intentions. Because terrorists 
seem to have a preference for using our financial networks, why 
can’t we use that weakness to our advantage by centralizing them 
through the predator model outlined here? 

The predator model allows terrorists to use our financial systems, 
like prey at a watering hole. The only difference is that we need to 
enact a series of random checks and triggers to identify suspicious 
movement. Once that movement has been identified, it can be turned 
over to investigative services who will try to trace the organization 
rather than arrest individuals for prosecution. Since we control 
the banking rules and methods, we might even be able to insert a 
question of trust into the network by inserting funds into various 
accounts or deleting them. That course of action would carry some 
caveats and some risks. In the end, it would be better to take that 
new course of action than to continue spending disproportionate 
sums of money on a method that has been proven to fail. 


Chief Warrant Officer 3 Bruce E. DeFeyter is assigned to the 3rd 
Special Forces Group, Fort Bragg, N.C. He has served six years as 
the assistant detachment commander, detachment commander and 
company operations warrant during three rotations to Afghanistan in 
support of Operation Enduring Freedom. He has also served at the 
JFK Special Warfare Center and School as a doctrine writer assigned 
to the Directorate of Training and Doctrine. He also holds a bachelor’s 
in management and administration from Excelsior College in Albany, 
N.Y., and a master’s in defense analysis from the Naval Postgraduate 
School, Monterey, Calif. 



About the book... 

If you cut off a spider’s head, it dies; if 
you cut off a starfish’s leg it grows a 
new one, and that leg can grow into 
an entirely new starfish. Traditional 
top-down organizations are like spi¬ 
ders, but now starfish organizations 
are changing the face of business 
and the world. What’s the hidden 
power behind the success of Wiki¬ 
pedia, craigslist and Skype? What 
do eBay and General Electric have 
in common with the abolitionist 
and women’s rights movements? 

What fundamental choice put 
General Motors and Toyota on 
vastly different paths? Ori Braf- 
man and Rod Beckstrom have 
discovered some unexpected 
answers, gripping stories 
and a tapestry of unlikely 
connections. The Starfish 
and the Spider explores 
what happens when starfish take on 
spiders and reveals how established companies 
and institutions, from IBM to Intuit to the U.S. government, are 
also learning how to incorporate starfish principles to achieve success. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 31 







nevelop 




spotted simulated aircraft in the digital 
terrain of the Joint Fires Multipurpose 
Dome. The rumble of the plane was heard 
and felt on July 15, as Soldiers from 
Avenger class number 10-10 stepped onto 
the platform with a Stinger missile in hand. 

In Building 2765, the new training 
equipment sits like a giant bubble of 
simulation. The $3.5 million dome was 
designed after the original simulator in Fort 
Bliss, Texas, but includes major upgrades 
like 84 projectors, seven computer units, 
three catwalks for maintenance, four 
subwoofers and a partridge in a pear tree. 
OK, not the last part, but the list is impressive 
and that fact is not lost on the Soldiers. 

’’When they walk in here they have a 
’wow' reaction. This age of Soldiers is used 
to computers so when they see this game 
room type of simulator they're excited. 
Once they pick up the Stinger weapon 
and see that they have to know their job to 
successfully engage aircraft reality sets in. 
So it's a great tool," said Alvin Kennedy, 
electronic technician. 

Jim Dawson, the director of Training 
Instruction, said it's the newest and largest 
target engagement trainer for gunners giving 
each Soldier 16 hours of training on the Man 
Portable Air Defense System. Fort Sill was 
lucky enough to house it as the Air Defense 


Artillery transitioned onto post. 

Two bunkers sit in the middle of the 
firing platform enabling up to four Soldiers 
to train simultaneously. With a few clicks of 
the mouse, the technician chooses a scenario 
from the operator station and the Soldiers 
stand ready and waiting. Rotating a full 3 60 
degrees, they searched the projected skies 
for the 100 possible simulated aircraft. 

Anything from cargo planes, helicopters 
and jets, friendly or otherwise, zoomed 
across the screens. Some aircraft appearing 
only as far away silhouettes, the Soldiers 
were expected to correctly perform the steps 
in their training: detect the target, identify 
friend or foe, activate, tone, uncage the 
seeker, super elevate and fire. 

With the proper technique and a squeeze 
of the trigger the Stinger missile shoots a 
virtual round onto the screen leaving a trail 
of smoke and hitting the aircraft. 

"It doesn't beat the real thing of actually 
going out and firing a live Stinger missile but 
this training device is the next best thing," 
commented Dawson. 

While the teams trained, eight Soldiers 
sat patiently waiting their turn. They 
watched on a television screen nearby 
which showed the gunner's view helping 
them learn from their peers victories and 
mistakes. 


"I think it's a great piece of equipment 
and it's nice to actually use it for training," 
said PFC Beau Pendleton. 

From desert terrain to the Arctic 
mountains, different sceneries and weather 
conditions keep the Soldiers on their toes. 
The technicians said they frequently change 
not only the scenario, but the visibility 
level to test Soldiers' skills and to make the 
training as realistic as possible. 

"Wherever Soldiers have a mission 
going on we can take a photo and incorporate 
it as the background. It gives the Soldiers 
a better sense of the environment," said 
Kennedy. 

He said if the Soldiers have a current 
mission in Afghanistan for example, the 
mountainous terrain helps them hit the 
ground running or rather standing and 
looking to the sky for possible enemy 
targets. The JFMD has been used to train 
the last three classes of Avenger Soldiers 
despite some minor glitches in the software 
which Dawson expected to have fixed 
by August. 

In the future, Kennedy also explained 
the dome will be used to train different jobs 
on the force. 

Editor’s note: This article was originally 
published in the Fort Sill (< Cannoneer. ” 


32 September-October 2010 • Fires 






CLOCKWISE: A large virtual aircraft plummets down the screen after a hit from Soldiers using a simulated Man Portable Air Defense System inside 
the Joint Fires Multipurpose Dome, July 15. Soldiers point toward simulated aircraft as they aim to shoot and hit enemy targets inside the Joint Fires 
Multipurpose Dome, July 15. Soldiers pair up to train inside the Joint Fires Multipurpose Dome July 15 using the Stinger weapon as they learn their 
future positions as air and missile defense crew members. (Photos by Marie Berberea, Fort Sill Cannoneer) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 33 










achieve 


2010 Fires Seminar 

From May 17 to May 21, members of the Fires community gathered at the 
Fires Center of Excellence, Fort Sill, Okla., for the 2010 Fires Seminar. The 
following article concludes our coverage of this year’s seminar. 



By Jason Kelly 

Art Director 



ale A. Ormond, deputy to the commanding general of the 
U.S. Army Combined Arms Center, Fort Leavenworth, 
Kan., echoed GEN Casey’s words during Ormond’s 
brief on leader development at this year’s Fires Seminar at the U.S. 
Army Fires Center of Excellence, Fort Sill, Okla., May 18. Leader 
development is a priority at the Combined Arms Center, according to 
Ormond. “It is leadership that closes the gap and provides us the edge,” 
said Ormond in regards to an uncertain future operational environment. 

That prediction of an uncertain future is emphasized in the Army 
Capstone Concept - Operational Adaptability: Operating under 
conditions ofuncertainty and complexity in an era of persistent conflict 
2016-2028 , which calls for leaders with a flexible mindset “at all levels 
who are comfortable with collaborative planning and decentralized 
execution, have a tolerance for ambiguity, and possess the ability and 
willingness to make rapid adjustments according to the situation.” The 
Army Capstone Concept is part of the framework for the Army Leader 
Development Strategy for a 21st Century Army , which was mostly 
drafted at the Combined Arms Center’s Center for Army Leadership. The 
strategy spells out imperatives in Army leaders as they advance through 
their careers and provides guidance for developing those leaders through 

34 September-October 2010 • Fires 


education, training and experience. Those 
imperatives include: Encourage an equal 
commitment by the institution, by leaders and 
by individual members of the profession to 
life-long learning and development; balance 
our commitment to the training, education 
and experience pillars of development; 
prepare leaders for hybrid threats and full- 
spectrum operations through outcomes-based 
training and education; achieve balance 
and predictability in personnel policies and 
professional military education in support of 
Army Force Generation; manage the Army’s 
military and civilian talent to benefit both the 
institution and the individual; prepare our 
leaders by replicating the complexity of the 
operational environment in the classroom 
and at home station; produce leaders who are 
mentors and who are committed to developing 
their subordinates; and prepare select leaders 
for responsibility at the national level. 

ea stories. Ormond, a 1985 graduate of 
theU.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, 
Md., and a former Navy submarine officer, used sea stories as 
metaphors as he discussed leader development. To start, he 
referred to the rapid expansion of America’s submarine force 
in the 1970s and 1980s during the Cold War. “We were building 
submarines in this country as fast as we could get them out of 
shipyards,” said Ormond. 

However, while the military was able to rapidly build those 
ships, it lacked the same ability to produce qualified leaders to 
man them, he added. Ormond pointed to the loss of the USS 
Thresher during deep-diving tests off the coast of Boston, 
Mass., in April 1963. The accident claimed all lives on board: 
16 officers, 96 enlisted men and 17 civilian technicians. An 
investigation determined the ship sunk due to engineering errors, 
which allowed water to flood the engineer room. The flooding, 
according to Navy records, likely caused electrical failures, 
which probably shut down the ship’s nuclear reactor and caused 
the ship’s subsequent loss. 

The accident prompted Admiral Hyman G. Rickover, the 
‘ father of the nuclear fleet, ’ to keep all nuclear power officers in the 


“...People accomplish the mission. It is 
this human dimension with moral , cognitive 
and physical components that enables land 
forces to deal with the situational complexity 
of tactical actions with strategic impacts 
and adapt to rapidly changing conditions. 
Leadership is of paramount importance, and 
land forces must continue to develop agile 
and adaptive leaders who can handle the 
challenges of full-spectrum operations. ” 




GEN GEORGE W. CASEY, JR. 
U.S. ARMY CHIEF OF STAFF 



















(FROM LEFT) Command and General Staff College Foundation CEO Bob Ulin, Command and 
General Staff College Commandant LTG Robert L. Caslen, Jr., Foundation Chairman LTG (Ret.) 
Robert Arter, Ross Perot, Foundation President Hyrum Smith and the Chief Operating Officer 
of the Simons Center MG (Ret.) Ray Barrett cut the ribbon for the opening of the COL Arthur 
D. Simons Center for the Study of Interagency Cooperation, April 21. (Photo by Don Middleton) 


nuclear power community. “So, as a result, you 
end up with a very technically competent force 
whose leadership skills were often somewhat 
suspect, whose broadening experiences were nil, 
and whose ability to operate at the Pentagon, 

Capitol Hill or in any sort of environment were 
fairly negligible,” Ormond explained. 

He warned the Army could be headed in the 
same direction if leaders continue to believe 
it is necessary to stay in the fight and avoid 
broadening experiences to get ahead. The 
Combined Arms Center is working to counter 
that mentality. It is incorporating interagency 
personnel into the U.S. Army Command and 
General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth 
to give its students insight into the culture at 
various agencies such as the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, State Department and Treasury 
Department. 

Interagency support also is the focus of a 
new facility at Fort Leavenworth. Entrepreneur, 
philanthropist and former presidential candidate Ross Perot donated 
$3.2 million dollars to fund the Colonel Arthur D. Simons Center for 
the Study of Interagency Cooperation, which celebrated its grand 
opening April 21. According to the Command and General Staff 
College Foundation’s website, part of the center’s mission is “to 
foster and develop an interagency body of knowledge to enhance 
education at the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College 
while facilitating broader and more effective cooperation within 
the United States Government at the operational and tactical levels 
through study, research, analysis, publication and outreach.” The 
center concentrates on four function areas: research, publications, 
public affairs and engagements. 

Engagements also are happening at combat training centers. 
Provincial reconstruction teams have been incorporated into the 
training to expose leaders to the teams. The end state is allowing 
leaders to develop relationships with the teams and learn how they 
work before they head downrange. 

On the international front, engagements are occurring through 
the Combined Arms Center’s international program, which, as of 
Ormond’s brief at the Fires Seminar, was up to 127 students from 
81 different countries. “The benefits of that program are frankly 
immeasurable. It is probably the greatest international outreach 
program in the United States Government,” Ormond said, 
elling our story. As technology 
advances, the rapid spread of 
information is blurring international 
borders. In the current operating 
environment, “communications is 
absolutely critical,” Ormond told the 
physical audience in Snow Hall at Fort 
Sill and the virtual audience, which 
participated in the brief internationally 
via Defense Connect Online. “We need to be able to tell our story. 
We need to be able to get our story out first. We need to be up front 
and admit mistakes. We need to be able to deal with the adversity 
that goes on with the press.” 

In Ormond’s opinion, the enemy had been more effectively 
exercising the communications process. Command and General 
Staff College students are being prepared to change that. They are 
required to post a blog, write an article for publication, engage the 
media and complete a public speaking event. “We’ve got to start 
getting them comfortable dealing with the press and dealing with 


mass communications,” said Ormond. 

While this information era is responsible for the rapid sharing 
of knowledge, it also has created challenges. According to Ormond, 
a significant portion of this information generation, Millennial, 
is comfortable with broad exposure to knowledge, but may lack 
the breadth of knowledge and discipline, which is necessary in the 
military. The former submariner used his own naval community 
as an example where subject matter expertise and discipline are 
not being sacrificed due to inherent risks and dangers. “One of the 
challenges that, I think, we will have as senior leaders is maintaining 
the standards. These are the expectations... Maintaining the standards 
is incredibly important and getting young people and motivating 
them to learn their profession is going to be a bit of a leadership 
challenge, which we’re going to have to take on,” he said. 

ecentralization. Ormond concluded his brief with 
decentralization and the risk involved. “We, as an Army, 
cannot afford to become risk adverse. If we become risk adverse, we 
will definitely lose the edge.” So, how do military leaders balance the 
challenges of a complex and uncertain future operating environment 
with the risks of confronting those challenges? According to Ormond, 
that balancing act needs to be part of a discussion about trust and 
risk between junior and senior leaders. Like previous topics, Ormond 
reflected upon his own experience in the submarine community, 

which he called “the best example of 
decentralized operations” for its heavy 
dependence on mission command. 
Communication amongst senior 
leaders facilitated those operations in 
mission command, said Ormond. He 
added, leaders need to be trained to 
acknowledge when they have reached 
the point where they can no longer 
make the necessary decision and they need to have the confidence 
to approach senior leaders for help, guidance and counseling. 
For additional coverage of the 2010 

Fires Seminar, visit http://sill-www.army. 

mil/firesbulletin/201 Oseminar. html for 

articles and links to Defense Connect 

Online videos of the seminar’s sessions. 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 35 



J For more information on the media 
and social media, see articles 
iJ beginning on page 38, page 40 and 
J page 46. 












achieve 






^Dc^cD 






critical tasl 
for MO S14J 
was too 


By Jennifer McFadden 

Managing Editor 


'or most Soldiers transformation 
=1 is not completely unexpected 
or unwelcomed but can be 
challenging. The evolution the Air Defense 
Artillery in specific is continuing and many 
of those challenges are being met. 

One example of this challenging 
overhaul is the changes associated with 
military occupational specialty 14J or 
Air Defense Tactical Operations Center 
Operator. As the name suggests this 
is a field requiring an abundance of 
technical know-how and managing 
its career path comes with a wealth 
of challenges. 

y^ochieving the ongoing mission 

Ij —\ The Army must ensure its 
Soldiers are trained properly to accomplish 
today’s missions, but hopefully without 
overstressing or inundating them 
with too many tasks. Lessons 


learned have shown that too many tasks 
equate to additional risk. 

By reviewing ADA documentation and 
making changes where needed, the staff 
and faculty of the U.S. Army Air Defense 
Artillery School are taking the first steps 
by identifying the current posture of their 
MOSs, 14Js in particular, and evaluating 




An Air Defense Artillery Soldier prepares the Sentinel Radar for daily field 
Operations. (Photo courtesy of Office, Chief of Air Defense Artillery) 


how they align with future systems in order 
to achieve balance. 

To do that more effectively, it was found 
that 14Js must be aligned to handle not only 
today’s systems more effectively, but also 
future capabilities and growth. Realigning 
the task loads by MOS today will help the 
leaders of tomorrow designate the right 
MOS for the right job. 

T he challenge. The overall concern 
for the 14 J program is the individual 
Soldier is over tasked. Today, 14J Soldiers 
are assigned to many different and unrelated 
types of systems, making it challenging for 
Soldiers to become proficient in all aspects 
of their extensive MOS. 

‘Use them or lose them,’ is a phrase 
tethered to the skills of the 14J. As the 
career field stands now, 14J Soldiers are 
responsible for more than seven different 
equipment systems, in many different unit 
assignment settings. In 2007, the Career 
Management Field Personnel Quarterly 
Report provided by the Human Resources 
Command, reflected an abov^ average 
attrition rate for the MOS 14J Soldiers. 
Senior leaders also reported Soldiers often 
arrived at their unit without the required 
training for that particular unit’s mission. 
An additional training and effectiveness 
analysis determined 
the number of 
tasks 



















high for Soldiers to execute competently 
wi thou t overtaxing them. 

growing pain. It was found the 14J 
MOS had grown well beyond its 


intended scope, and the load Soldiers are 
faced with had created a knowledge burden 
they could not carry with precision. An 
ADA school review team determined that 
the MOS 14J Soldier’s task load directly 
contributed to their low morale and high 
attrition. 

Currently, MOS 14J Soldiers are 
required to be proficient in 191 career- 
critical tasks; that number does not include 
those tasks associated with the Counter- 
Rocket, Artillery and Mortar System; 
Ground-Based Midcourse Defense System; 
or Forward-Based X-Band Transportable 
Radar System. It was found this overload 
of operator information is ‘stretching the 
li mit’ o f each Soldier’s proficiency. 

}ig changes. However, ADA school 
house personnel have been 
working a fix to these challenges and there 
are big changes in the works. The answer is 
to split MOS 14 J into two distinctly separate 
MOS career fields: MOS 14G, air defense 
battle management system operator, and the 
14H, air defense enhanced early warning 
operator. 

“The split will add focus to each career 
field,” said MSG Kevin M. Seeley, the 
chief of the ADA Personnel Development 
Division, and the CMF 14 series senior 
career manager. “This will give Soldiers the 
opportunity to build on their skills, and not 
try to play catch up when they reach a unit 
that has a system that they haven’t used or 
seen since AIT.” 

Although it will take time to create 
a complete split of the 14J MOS, the 
scheduled conversion date is set for October 
1, 2011. The transformation will generate 
two very distinct career paths, complete 
with promotion pyramids more in line with 
Army regulations, bringing the idea that 
Soldiers will arrive at their new assignments 
fully trained, thus alleviating the need for 
‘on-the-job’ training. Additionally, there 
will be a reduction in the number of critical 
tasks knowledge required of Soldiers. 
This detailed organization restructuring is 
designed to create senior noncommissioned 
officers who are subject matter experts and 
decrease the ‘bottle-neck’ effect at the staff 
sergeant level allowing for a smoother and 
more progressive path in the senior enlisted 
ranks. 

“With the fast pace and multiple 
deployments expected of our Soldiers in 
today’s operational environment there is 
less time to reset, retrain and catch up. It is 
imperative to create a technically-proficient 


Soldier in this field,” said Neal Hesse, an 
ADA senior human resource specialist. 

With every permanent change of 
duty station an MOS 14J Soldier can be 
moved from a PATRIOT assignment, to 
an Air Defense Airspace Management 
Cell, to a Sentinel section in a maneuver 
battalion, or to a Joint Tactical Ground 
Station assignment with the Space and 
Missile Defense Command. This extreme 
assignment diversity creates significant 
turbulence throughout a 14 J Soldier’s career. 
Therefore the MOS was split in order to 
reduce the types of unit assignments and 
various equipment sets encountered within 
those organizations. 

ir defense battle management 
O —\ system operator (14G). Of the 
two new MOSs, the 14G will have the 
largest population and will be assigned 
the active and reserve components. They 
will be assigned at levels from the Army 
Service Component Command all the way 
down to brigade combat teams. Within 
those assignments they will be responsible 
for ADAM cell operations and will be key 
to the combatant commander’s situational 
awareness. Soldiers assigned with the 14G 
MOS will also be assigned to air defense 
formations ranging from the Army air and 
missile defense commands, Air Defense 
Artillery brigades, maneuver battalions and 
all Sentinel sections. The equipment in these 
organizations will be reduced to the Air 
Defense System Integrators workstation, 
the Tactical Airspace Integration System, 
Forward Area Air Defense-Engagement 
Operations workstation, the Air and Missile 
Defense Work Station, communications and 
the Sentinel Radar. 

ir defense enhanced early warning 
1 /—\ operator(14H). The 14H Soldiers 
will be in the Active Component only and 
be assigned to PATRIOT battalions and 
batteries, Terminal High-Altitude Area 
Defense batteries, and the Space and 
Missile Defense Command. Soldiers 
assigned to the Space and Missile Defense 
Command can expect assignments with 
Joint Tactical Ground Station, Ground- 
base Midcourse Defense, and the Forward 
Based X Band Radar. The equipment in the 
air defense formations will be narrowed 
down to the PATRIOT Battery Command 
Post, PATRIOT Tactical Control Station, 
Forward Area Air Defense Command, 
Control, Communications and Intelligence 
-Engagement Operations Workstation, 
and the Air Defense Warning System. 
Soldiers who receive such assignments 
will have to undergo further training in 
Colorado Springs, Colo., where they 
prepare for their assignment and awarded an 


additional skill identifier. 

“This allows our senior enlisted leaders 
to build their skills, as well as coach, teach 
and mentor their subordinate Soldiers,” said 
Hess. “There will not be as much catch¬ 
up work and NCOs can grow into better 
leaders.” 


C oncerns about the restructure 

of 14J. Many questions have 
been asked by Soldiers who are affected by 
the 14J transformation; for example, will 
there be additional training? How will it be 
decided and which MOS will I fall under? 

There is a current phrase being repeated 
for these concerns ‘split where you sit.’ 
Using staffing needs and current skill sets, 
Soldiers will be assigned to their new MOS 
by the position they currently hold at the 
time of the transformation. For example, 
if a staff sergeant has been working with 
a FAAD-EO workstation in a PATRIOT 
battery and has not been reassigned, that 
Soldier will be awarded 14H. The current 
number of Soldiers being assigned to each 
of the new MOSs is still under review; 
however, the goal is to have 65 percent 
assigned to 14G and 35 percent to 14H. 

Although the training for the 14J 
program will continue for the next year, the 
last class to encompass the full 14J training 
will graduate in September 2011. The first 
14G class will begin June 13,2011, and the 
first 14H class will begin July 18,2011. Both 
these courses will graduate the first week 
of fiscal year 2012. 

Those Soldiers who hold MOS 14J and 
posses an additional skill identifier of Q3 
will not require any additional training. 
New Soldiers assigned to MOS 14G will 
attend a 16-week and three-day AIT course. 
This will allow them to learn and master 
the equipment they will be responsible for 
operating when assigned to a unit. Soldiers 
assigned to 14H will attend an 11 -week and 
three-day AIT course. 

In an attempt to keep Soldiers in the loop 
and to relieve their anxieties about the 14J 
split, some Soldiers are being offered the 
opportunity to PCS to their desired position; 
thereby, having some control over which 
MOS they are transitioned into. However, 
these movements will be dictated by staffing 
needs, deployment schedules and available 
positions. Over the next year career advisors 
and human resource specialists will be 
working hard not only to meet the needs of 
the Army, but also of the Soldiers affected. 

When the process is complete, units will 
be able to receive Soldiers who have both 
initial training and mission-oriented skills. 
The intent of producing a more highly- 
trained and competitive Soldier will have 
been achieved. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 37 







DevtifcpDng win© ©xngog 

i medte os 


m©iBw©pl!c f©Rjmi wiMi ineepooieobDloiB^ 


"The character of our senior leaders withstands 

PUBLIC SCRUTINY AND THE ENORMOUS PRESSURES 
BROUGHT TO BEAR BY THE SCOPE OF THEIR AUTHORITY 
AND THE IMPACT OF THEIR DECISIONS.” 


A LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY FORA 21ST CENTURY ARMY 


o doubt you’ve heard the 
expression, “Soldiers are the 
centerpiece of our Army.” 
It is an oft-stated assertion by our senior 
leaders in recognition of your importance 
to this nation in the global war on terrorism. 

You also are aware that the media 
and the general public see you as the best 
spokesperson for the best-trained, best- 
equipped and most powerful military in the 
world. 

Without the support of a well-informed 
American public, our military couldn’t 
accomplish its mission. We must all 
make every effort to inform the public — 
commanders and career field experts alike. 

That’s where you come in. You tell the 
Army story best. 

38 September-October 2010 • Fires 


Your success during an interview is tied 
to the quality of your preparation and the 
level of control you exercise. Although you 
will probably be asked about your job, don’t 
think an interview is a casual conversation 
you can just ‘wing.’ 

For the unprepared, being questioned by 
the media can be stressful and embarrassing. 
But if you’re prepared, the interview will 
be an opportunity to make a presentation 
reflecting professionalism, knowledge and 
enthusiasm. 

repare to succeed. Preparation is 
the key to any interview, especially 
one in front of a camera. You’ll have 
just seconds to professionally state your 
position while the cameras are rolling. 

It isn’t the time to formulate quick 




answers to serious questions. Public affairs 
can help you anticipate questions and 
develop messages. 

Before the interview, work with your 
PAO to know everything possible about the 
interview, what you want to say and how 
to say it. 

l^^now about the interview. Get the 

IV answer to the who, what, when, 
where, why and how from public affairs. 
Who will interview you? What is their 
background? Do they often interrupt? Do 
they have prior military service? Do they 
know much about the military? Who is the 
audience? Who are the other guests? Who 
is your point of contact? 

What is the subject of the interview? 
What type of program are you appearing 
on? What is expected of you? What should 
you do specifically? 

When is the interview? When will it air? 
When should you arrive? 

Where will the interview take place? 
Where will you sit? Where should you look? 
Where will the interview air? 

Why do they want you? Why are they 
interested in the subject? 

Flow will the interview be conducted? 
How will it end? How should you dress? 

l^^now what you want to say. You may 
know the subject well, the topic 

















An Iraqi reporter interviews LTC John Richardson, 2nd Brigade, 1st Infantry Division, in Ghazaliya, Iraq, Feb. 14,2009. (Photo by MC2 Robert j.wheian,u.s. Navy) 


may even be your job, but don’t assume 
every question you’re asked will be easy 
to answer. 

The public wants answers to the hard 
questions, so it’s the reporter’s job to 
ask them. With public affairs assistance, 
anticipate the hard questions and plan your 
answers. 

Make a list of all the questions you 
could possibly be asked. Then attempt to 
answer the questions using messages - short 
sound-bites of key information you feel the 
public needs to know. 

You need to practice. Have your public 
affairs office setup a mock interview or press 
conference. At least have someone play the 
role of interviewer so you can rehearse your 
delivery. 

K now how to say it. Never give 
^ simple yes or no answers. If you 
do, you’re missing your opportunity to 
deliver a positive message about the Army. 

Be personable. Answer questions and 
deliver messages with interest, passion and 
conviction. 

If you don’t sound interested, the 
audience won’t be, either. 

S et your message across. Once 
again, before doing any interview, 
you should know what you want to say. In 
addition to being knowledgeable about 
Army issues and messages, you should also 
be prepared with a few messages of your 
own. Public affairs can help you with both. 

Messages are your ‘commercials’ for 
use throughout an interview. They can be 
about the interview subject or other issues. 

K now the definitions. Here are the 
^ definitions of terms you’ll hear 
often when working with the media: 

On the record. The reporter can use 
everything you say and attribute it to you 
by name and title. 

Off the record. The reporter can’t use 
anything you say. Go ‘off the record’ only 
if the information is vital to the reporter’s 
full understanding of an issue. 

Understand that nothing is off the record 
unless both parties agree to it before the 
thing is said. If you are giving an interview 
and need to tell the reporter something off 
the record, stop and ask his permission to 
go off the record. If he agrees, proceed. 

There also has to be agreement as to 
when you are back on the record. If you 
encounter a problem during the interview, 
let the PAO stop it and ask both parties if 
they want to go off the record. 

Background. The reporter will use the 
information but won’t directly attribute it 


to you. 4 An Army spokesperson’ might be 
used - you and the reporter agree what is 
the best term. 

It’s best to always consider yourself 
4 on the record.’ Don’t say anything you 
wouldn’t want to see on the evening news. 
Make certain the reporter understands the 
information is ‘background’ or ‘off the 
record’ before you give him the information. 
In the presence of a reporter, it’s best to 
never say anything you don’t want on the 
air or in print. Use common sense. 

round rules. An interview with 
the news media can be polite and 
conversational if you follow a few basic 
rules of engagement. Set the ground rules. 

First, agree on the ground rules before the 
interview. Your public affairs adviser should 
talk to the reporter about the agenda and 
explain your area of expertise and interview 
parameters. If you can’t talk about an issue 
because it is classified (truly classified, not 
just embarrassing), tell the reporter. 

You may still be asked about the issue 
on the air, but at least now the reporter 
is prepared not to do an entire show on 
something you cannot discuss. 


If you’re asked a question on the air that 
you earlier told the reporter you couldn’t 
talk about, don’t get upset. Don’t say “You 
said you wouldn’t ask me about that.” You 
will sound like you’re hiding something. 
Instead, answer by saying “I’m not prepared 
to talk about details of the subject, because 
they’re classified (or whatever), but I can 
discuss...” 

peak their language. Avoid Army 
acronyms, jargon and technical 
terms. Use analogies to explain technical 
information in a way we can all understand. 
Your messages should be clear and 
understandable to every member of your 
audience. 

onesty is the best policy. Always 
answer honestly. If you don’t 
know the answer to a question, if the answer 
is classified, or would invade someone’s 
privacy, say so. Then, bridge to your 
message. Never say ‘no comment.’ To the 
public, ‘no comment’ means you are hiding 
something. 

Editor ’sNote: Information adaptedfrom U.S. Army 
Training and Doctrine Command s Pocket Guide to 
Meeting the Media. 





Do’s and don’ts. The following are the most important 
points to remember: 


Do: 

• Find out all you can about the 
interview 

• Anticipate questions you’ll be asked 

• Determine your audience 

• Write out messages you want to 
convey 

• Practice answering the questions 

• Establish ground rules 

• Ask for makeup if needed 

• Wear glasses if you can’t see 
without them 

• Use frequent but natural hand 
gestures 

• Sit up straight in the chair 

• Smile when appropriate 

• Convey enthusiasm 

• Talk about personal experiences 

• Use simple language your audience 
is sure to understand 

• Assume everything you say, even 
when off camera, will be broadcast 
or printed 

• Set the record straight 

• Stay calm 

• Always be honest 


Don’t: 

• Fail to prepare 

• Cover or gloss over the truth 

• Speculate 

• Smile or grin at inappropriate times 

• Make nervous gestures 

• Roll or shift your eyes 

• Say anything you don’t want on the 
air or in print 

• Use acronyms or technical jargon 

• Answer hypothetical questions 

• Use no comment 

• Argue 

• Let the reporter put words in your 
mouth 

• Just answer yes or no 

• Assume you won’t be asked about 
important issues 

• Assume the reporter knows nothing 
about the military 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 39 








By LTG William B. Caldwell IV, Dennis M. Murphy and Antopn Menning 


T he contemporary media environment continues to 

CETANGE AT AN EVER-ACCELERATING PACE, FASTER TEiAN MOST 
COULD ELAVE IMAGINED JUST 10 YEARS AGO. THIS ACCELERATION 
ELAS SIGNIFICANT IMPLICATIONS FOR TODAY'S MEDIA OUTLETS 
AND THE MILITARY NEW MEDIA IS A CASE IN POINT IT EiAS BEEN DESCRIBED 
ASA"COMBUSTIBLEMIXOF 24/7 CABLE NEWS, CALL-IN RADIO AND TELEVISION 
PROGRAMS, INTERNET BLOGGERS AND ONLINE WEBSITES, CELL PHONES AND 

iPods, "according to Marvin Kalb and Carol Saivetz, in 'The Israeli- 

HEZBOLLAH WAR OF 2006: THE MEDIA AS A WEAPON IN ASYMMETRICAL 

Conflict," New media's meteoric rise and increasing pervasiveness 

DICTATE FRESH TERMS FOR THE CULTURE OF MEDIA ENGAGEMENT. 


40 September-October 2010 • Fires 
















With easy access, enormous reach, and breadth, this upstart has 
flexed sufficient muscle during recent conflicts to alter or transform 
our traditional view of information and its impact on populations and 
military operations. Simple to use, new media leapfrogs ordinary 
rules and conventions. At the same time, its very user-friendliness 
encourages unconventional adversaries to manipulate a growing 
number of related technologies to generate favorable publicity and 
recruit supporters. For these reasons and more, civilian and military 
leaders can ill-afford to ignore it. Perhaps more importantly, they 
must not fail to understand and use the new form of information 
dissemination, as it possesses serious implications for military 
operations. 

Focusing on the current litany of new media capabilities can 
inhibit understanding because present developments may fail to 
account for anticipated technological advances. A more enduring 
description of new media would recognize its embrace of any 
emergent technological capability. Such emergent capabilities can 
empower a broad range of actors—individuals through nation¬ 
states—to create and spread timely information that can unify a 
vast audience via global standardized communications. Impact and 
urgency assume such a sufficiently high profile that the currently 
“new” media might better be referred to as the “now” media. At the 
same time, there is an overarching dynamism that springs from the 
exponential increases in capability that seem to occur weekly.“Now 
media” is attributed to Matt Armstrong. Armstrong is a strategist on 
public diplomacy and strategic communication and developed and 
runs the blog “mountainrunner.us.” Indeed, a key enabler for new 
media is “digital multi-modality”: content produced in one form 
can be easily and rapidly edited and repackaged, then transmitted 
in real time across many different forms of media 

The potential for engagement is staggering—with the ability 
of new media to mimic comparable—albeit much slower— 
developments in the television industry. Thirty years ago, cable 
television was in its infancy, with three networks ruling the airwaves. 
Today, cable channels offer multitudes of options, and scores 
of satellite channels vie for viewers, fragmenting the broadcast 
audience. Similarly, over the last decade, the rise of the Internet and 
easy-to-use technology has fueled an explosion of the blogosphere. 
By August 2008, some 184 million blogs had proliferated worldwide, 
according to a Technorati report, State of the Blogosphere. Three 
of the top five most visited sites in the United States were social 
networking or video sharing sites, including Facebook, My Space, 
and YouTube. According to The State of the News Media 2009 
report from the Pew Project for Excellence in Journalism, the 50 
most popular news sites registered a 27 percent increase in traffic 
over 2008. 

Proliferation and accessibility have played havoc with old rules 
of the media game in at least two important areas, gate keeping 
and agenda-setting. Before the widespread advent of the new 
media, traditional editors and producers served as “gatekeepers,” 
determining what stories and features to publish in accordance 
with varied criteria. In effect, key individuals and organizations 
controlled access to information.(D.M. White, “The Gate Keeper: A 
case study in the selection of news, Journalism Quarterly, 27, 383- 
90.) Their decisions consciously or unconsciously set the agenda 
for coverage of news stories. Some issues received attention over 
others, and the media told the public not what to think but what 
to think about. Selection processes enabled media custodians to 
frame issues of importance for public consciousness. According 
to a 1977 pioneering study by Max McCombs and Donald Shaw, 
“complex social processes determine not only how to report but, 
even more important, what to report,” in “Structuring the Unseen 
Environment,” Journal of Communication. The conclusion was that 


gatekeeping and agenda-setting went hand-in-hand. However, this 
dynamic is changing. 

Arguably, for the first time in history, new media has abolished 
traditional gatekeeper and agenda-setting roles. With the invention 
of Blogger in 1999, Pyra Labs created an easy-to-use method for 
anyone to publish his or her own thoughts in blog form. Google’s 
purchase of Blogger in 2003 helped ignite a blogging explosion. 
Since that time, blogs have demonstrated the ability to thrust issues 
from obscurity into the national spotlight, while demonstrating the 
ability to become agenda-setters for the 21st century according to 
Daniel Drezner and Henry Farrell, in the “Web of Influence.” In 
similar fashion, new media has also seized an important role in 
gatekeeping. YouTube, for example, has become its own gatekeeper 
by deciding which videos to host on its site and which to erase. 

During conflict, the same dynamism plays havoc with traditional 
notions of the media’s role in informing, shaping, and swaying 
public opinion. In 2003, Frank Webster argued in War and the 
Media that “the public are no longer mobilized to fight wars as 
combatants, they are mobilized as spectators—and the character 
of this mobilization is of the utmost consequence.” 

Although military historians might argue that this process is at 
least as old as the nation-state, new media has injected an equation- 
altering sense of scale and speed into the traditional calculus. In 
2006, Howard Tumbler joined Webster in Journalists Under Fire 
to identify a “new” type of conflict the two commentators termed 
“Information War.” Like many other contemporary observers, 
they concluded that the familiar industrial model of warfare was 
giving way to an informational model. The struggle for public 
opinion retained central importance, but the sheer pervasiveness 
and responsiveness of new media recast the terms and content of 
the struggle. There were at least two clear implications. The first 
was that “the military has a commensurately more complex task in 
winning the information war,” according to Kenneth Payne, in “The 
Media as an Instrument of War.” The second was that there remains 
little choice but to engage new media as part of the larger media 
explosion. Failure to do so would leave a vacuum—the adversary’s 
version of reality would become the dominant perception. 

Even a brief survey of new media’s nature and impact leaves 
military leaders with some powerful points worthy of consideration 
by senior civilian leaders (See figure below.). 


New media considerations 


• New media has the capacity to be nearly ubiquitous. With only a few notable 
exceptions (e.g., Chechnya and Western China), there is little escape from its 
span and grip. 

• Like the old media, new media can also be enlisted to serve specific masters, 
though perhaps with greater difficulty. 

• Properly understood, new media can be a source of great power and influence. 

• New media holds a tremendous upside for education and for broadcasting the 
military’s message. 

• New media forces us to modify habits and to think consciously about the 
practical and constitutional obligations inherent in becoming our own version 
of gatekeepers and agenda-setters. 

• New media is affecting modern conflict in significant ways not yet fully 
understood. 

• Whatever the full implications might be, the military must embrace the new 
media; there is really no choice. Its power and dynamism dictate that military 
estimates accord it the attention and focus it deserves. 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 41 








As the new media story continues to unfold, combat experience 
produces a stream of implications for theory and practice in pursuing 
doctrinal development. Two case studies recount the role of new media 
in recent conflicts waged by Israel. There are marked differences in 
the way the Israeli Defense Forces handled the media in the Hezbollah 
conflict during the summer of 2006 and in the Gaza incursion at the 
end of 2008 and beginning of 2009. The two instances suggest “best 
practices” that the U.S. military could adopt when dealing with new 
media and its role on the battlefield. A discussion of each follows. 

he Second Lebanon War: Information as a warfighting 
function? On 12 July 2006, Hezbollah kidnapped two Israeli 
soldiers just inside Israel across the Lebanese border. After a botched 
rescue attempt in which eight Israeli Defense Force soldiers were killed, 
Israel launched a massive air campaign, targeting both Hezbollah and 
much of Lebanon. There ensued an Israeli ground invasion of southern 
Lebanon and a kinetic fight that the Israelis subsequently dubbed the 
“Second Lebanon War” according to “Hizballah at War, A Military 
Assessment, by Andrew Exum.” Although various militaries have sifted 
the resulting combat experience for lessons learned, little attention has 
been devoted to Hezbollah’s exploitation of information as a kind of 
“warfighting function,” with new media as the weapon of choice. Among 
the many reports available, Anthony Cordesman’s 2006 “Preliminary 
“Lessons” of the Israeli-Hezbollah War,” Alastair Crooke’s and Mark 
Perry’s October 2006 
three-part series “How 
Hezbollah Defeated 
Israel” in the Asia Times 
and Matt Matthews 
interview with Brigadier 
General (retired). 

Hezbollah has 
characteristics that, in the 
view of some observers, 
make the organization 
a paradigm for future 
U.S. adversaries in a 
Quadrennial Defense 
Review Report by the 
U.S. Department of 
Defense. Hezbollah is 
neither a regular armed force nor a guerilla force in the traditional 
sense. It is a hybrid—something in between. As a political entity with a 
military wing, Hezbollah plays an important role in providing services 
to broad segments of the Lebanese population found in the “Hezbollah 
as a Case Study for the Battle of Hearts and Minds,” by Reuven Erlich 
and Youram Kahati, Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center. 

During the summer of 2006, the military wing demonstrated an 
impressive warfighting capability with an important information 
dimension: its fighters expertly leveraged new media capabilities 
while defending against their employment by the Israelis and while 
maintaining excellent operations security. 

The conflict itself revealed many of the characteristics to which 
Webster and Tumbler had earlier referred. In a Harvard study on the 
media aspects of the 2006 war, the veteran journalist Marvin Kalb 
noted: 

To do their jobs, journalists employed both the camera and the 
computer, and, with the help of portable satellite dishes and video phones 
“streamed” or broadcast their reports..., as they covered the movement 
of troops and the rocketing of villages—often, (unintentionally, one 
assumes) revealing sensitive information to the enemy. Once upon a 
time, such information was the stuff of military intelligence acquired 
with considerable effort and risk; now it has become the stuff of 
everyday journalism. The camera and the computer have become 

42 September-October 2010 • Fires 


weapons of war. 

Kalb’s observations emphasized a new transparency for war 
and military operations inherent in the ubiquity and power of 
new media. New technology and techniques—including digital 
photography, videos, cellular networks, and the Internet—were 
used by all parties: the press, Israeli and Lebanese civilians, the 
Israeli Defense Forces, and Hezbollah. The ease and speed of 
data transmission, coupled with the manipulation of images, 
affected the way participants and spectators viewed the war. 
Israeli soldiers sent cell phone text messages home, both sides 
actively used videos of the fighting, and civilians posted still and 
video imagery on blogs and websites, most notably YouTube. 
The author, along with Dr. Rafal Rohozinski developed, planned 
and executed a workshop on the topic of “new media and the 
warfighter” at the U.S. Army War College. The workshop used 
the Second Lebanon War as a case study and the comments here 
reflect both the case study research and attendee input. 

Still, Hezbollah emerged as the master of the new media 
message. Playing David to Israel’s Goliath, Hezbollah 
manipulated and controlled information within the operational 
environment to its advantage, using (at times staged and altered) 
photographs and videos to garner regional and worldwide support 
as shown in Sarah E. Kreps’ “The 2006 Lebanon War: Lessons 

Learned.” Additionally, 
Hezbollah maintained 
absolute control over 
where journalists went 
and what they saw, thus 
framing the story on 
Hezbollah’s terms and 
affecting agendas for 
the international media. 
The widely reported 
use of Katushya rockets 
against Israel became 
both a tactical kinetic 
weapon and a strategic 
psychological one. But 
less is written about 
the fact that Hezbollah 
employed near-real-time Internet press accounts as open-source 
intelligence to determine where the rockets landed. Post-conflict 
reporting indicates that non-affiliated organizations used Google 
Earth to plot the location of the rocket attacks. 

While there is no firm evidence that Hezbollah used this 
capability to attain greater accuracy of fire, the fact remains 
that this new media capability could have been used to increase 
accuracy and multiply the strategic information effect, according 
to a case study on Leveraging New Media, for the “New Media 
and the Warfighter” workshop by Rafal Rohozinski. 

Meanwhile, Hezbollah used its own satellite television station, 
A1 Manar, to extend its information reach to some 200 million 
viewers within the region. 

As a direct link between Hezbollah’s military activities 
and these viewers, A1 Manar timed coverage of spectacular 
tactical actions for maximum strategic effect, according to 
Andrew Exum’s “Illegal Attack or Legitimate Target? A1 Manar, 
International Law, and the Israeli War in Lebanon. ” For example, 
within minutes of the Israeli naval destroyer Hanit being hit 
by missiles, Hezbollah’s secretary general, Hassan Nasrallah, 
called in “live” to A1 Manar to announce the strike, and A1 Manar 
obligingly provided footage of the missile launch for distribution 
by other regional media and subsequently by YouTube. It took 



“uBd© ©as© gm°] ©t°©®3 e G (3eOa 
®P@m©Offl0©©0©DD B @®QO[»)0©(i] raMo 
GGo© Oko©!P © 0 

gGq© 

©dd(°] ©p©©s©G©[?© SCO© 

G©©@®DD(°] t©[b©[jQ®0Q Wsi\?j\n w 











Israel 24 hours to respond with its own account of the incident. 

The use of information as a strategic weapon did not end with 
the kinetic fight. Hezbollah continued to use self-justifying and 
self-congratulatory information to affect perceptions of blame, 
responsibility, and victory. Hezbollah leaders even went so far as 
to place billboards on the rubble of buildings in southern Lebanon 
that said “Made in the USA” (in English) immediately following 
the cease fire, taken from Kevin Peraino’s, “Winning Hearts and 
Minds.” 

Interestingly and importantly, Nasrallah did not appear to 
expect the full onslaught that characterized the Israeli response to 
the Second Lebanon War’s triggering events as shown in Alastair 
Crooke and Mark Perry’s, “How Hezbollah Defeated Israel, Part 
1 .” 

Nevertheless, the way Hezbollah extensively enlisted information 
as a weapon of choice implies that this penchant is second-nature. 
That is, the emphasis on information is embedded in planning 
at all levels and inculcated in the culture of the military arm of 
Hezbollah. In strategic perspective, Hezbollah used information 
to reduce Israel’s strategic options (and therefore its depth) in 
terms of time. An important focus was on proportionality, with 
Hezbollah exploiting the new media for information effects. Thus, 
Hezbollah portrayed Israeli Defense Forces military operations 
as a disproportionate use of force against the Lebanese civilian 
population, especially in light of the initial kidnapping incident that 
had spurred Israel to action. Not surprisingly, only 33 days after 
the onset of hostilities, a ceasefire was declared. And, again not 
surprisingly, after a David-and-Goliath struggle in which winning 
meant not losing, Hezbollah unilaterally declared victory according 
to “Nasrallah Declares Victory for Hezbollah,” by Lauren Thayer. 

All this is not to say that Israel neglected various forms of 
information, including the new media, to support its war aims, 
but Tel Aviv’s focus was on the traditional use of information in 
support of psychological operations against the enemy. Leaflets 
were dropped, A1 Manar broadcasts were jammed, and cell phone 
text messages were pushed to Hezbollah combatants and Lebanese 
noncombatants. These activities amounted to traditional attempts 
at turning the public against the adversary and instilling fear in the 
adversary himself. However, attempts at all levels to garner popular 
support from broader audiences through trust and sympathy were 
lacking. 


A screen shot of the Israeli Defense Forces YouTube channel, the “IDF 
Spokesperson’s Unit.” The video is called “Israel Air Force Precision 
Strike on Qassam Rocket Launcher 30 Dec. 2008.” 



In contrast, Hezbollah information efforts focused directly on 
gaining trust and sympathy for its cause at all levels. Israel provided 
no countervailing view, allowing Hezbollah to drive perceptions 
that could become universally accepted as truth. Consequently, 
as Dr. Pierre Pahlavi of the Canadian Forces College notes, “the 
Jewish state forfeited the psychological upper hand on all fronts: 
domestic, regional, and international.” Thus, Hezbollah was able to 
create a “perception of failure” for the Israelis, with consequences 
more important than the actual kinetic outcome, according to Pierre 
Pahlavi’s “The 3 3-Day War: An Example of Psychological Warfare 
in the Information Age.” 

The Hezbollah experience presents lessons for potential 
adversaries of the United States. At the same time, the United States 
and its military must consider whether the strategy and tactics of 
Hezbollah might represent those of the next adversary and prepare 
accordingly. Meanwhile, Israel, only two and a half years after the 
events in Lebanon, appears to have taken the experience to heart 
in conducting recent operations against Hamas in Gaza. 

C Operation Cast Lead. During lunchtime on 27 December 
U 2008, Israel unleashed a furious air attack that in mere 
minutes struck 50 targets in the Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip. The 
daylight raid took Gazans by surprise and marked the beginning of a 
24-day offensive designed to stop Gaza-based missiles from raining 
down on southern Israel. A fragile ceasefire between Hamas and 
Israel had ended just eight days earlier. Israel, determined to avoid 
mistakes from the “Second Lebanon War,” embarked on a massive 
public relations campaign that employed new media extensively. 
In fact, one newspaper featured the headline: “On the front line of 
Gaza’s war 2.0,” by Mary Fitzgerald A war in cyberspace unfolded 
simultaneously with ground and air operations, and both sides 
employed various web 2.0 applications—including blogs, YouTube, 
and Facebook—to tell their differing versions of events. 

To learn from the Second Lebanon War, the Israelis created 
a special study group, the “Winograd Commission.” The 
recommendation that followed was to organize an information 
and propaganda unit to coordinate public relations across a wide 
spectrum of activities, including traditional media, new media, 
and diplomacy, as reported in Rachel Shabi’s, “Winning the media 
war.” The function of the resulting body, the National Information 
Directorate, was to deal with hasbara, or “explanation.” One 
news source held that, “The hasbara directive also liaises over 
core messages with bodies such as friendship leagues, Jewish 
communities, bloggers and backers using online networks,” shown 
in an article in the Guardian. By Shabi, “Special spin body gets 
Israel on message, says Israel.” According to a press release from 
the Israeli Prime Minister’s office, 

The information directorate will not replace the activity of 
any Government information body. Its role will be to direct and 
coordinate in the information sphere so that the relevant bodies 
present a unified, clear, and consistent message and so that the 
various government spokespersons speak with a single voice. The 
directorate will initiate information campaigns and programs, host 
events, etc. 

With the National Information Directorate providing unity of 
message from the Prime Minister’s office, the Israeli version of a 
strategic communication machine was ready to engage multiple 
media channels to win the war of ideas. 

Two days after the airstrikes commenced, the Israeli Defense 
Forces launched its own YouTube channel, the “IDF Spokesperson’s 
Unit.” Within days, the channel became a sensation around the world. 
During early January 2009, the channel became the second most 
subscribed channel and ninth most watched worldwide, gamering 
more than two million channel views. The 46 videos posted to the 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 43 























“£\© 0m @®@©e, 0©p©©0 


Dasmiffl Bs 


mas 


a 


m ap dd®s 0do©S a@a0DD©S 

□afTinae D 

BHjLitaRMfePSD D©pa©0 qo©©”] ©00 

QCd© 0ffifcoffi]a30aEaO tBs®0© 53 


[»)®©©©©©3i] Os \°wy tSmaj® 

channel have attracted more than 6.5 million views. These numbers 
are based on research conducted in early February and may have since 
changed. The videos depicted precision airstrikes on Hamas rocket¬ 
launching facilities, humanitarian assistance, video logs (“vlogs”) by 
IDF spokespeople, and Israeli tanks moving into position to attack. 
Hamas, not to be outdone, joined in the cyber-fracas with its own 
YouTube channels. 

What was Israel’s strategy for the use of new media during the 
Gaza incursion? The answer to this question lies partly in a study 
of contrasts. During the 2006 Lebanon War, Israeli Prime Minister 
Ehud Olmert said: “My government is determined to continue doing 
whatever is necessary in order to achieve our goals. Nothing will deter 
us, whatever far-reaching ramifications regarding our relations on the 
northern border and in the region there may be.” 

He had also spoken about “destroying” Hezbollah. 

In contrast, during the Gaza incursion, the Israeli leadership was far 
less definitive in its aims. It refused to place a timeline on operations 
and made no statements about completely neutralizing Hamas. 
Emanuel Sakai, former head of Israeli Defense ground forces, said, 
“Nobody declared that there will never be any rockets anymore, and 
nobody said that in five, six, or seven days we will destroy Hamas. 
They have learned a lot from Lebanon in 2006,” as described in an 
article by Nathan Jeffay, “Learning from Lebanon, Israel Sets Up 
Press Operation.” As in 2006, Israel knew it was fighting a war not 
just against Hamas, but against time. In virtually every conflict since 
1948, the United Nations has passed resolutions to stop various Arab- 
Israeli conflicts. This military action was no exception. On January 8 
2009, UN Security Council Resolution 1860 called for an immediate 
cease fire in Gaza. In addition, Israel had less than a month to complete 
operations in order to confront a new U.S. presidential administration 
with a fait accompli. Therefore, Israel used all the informational tools 
it possessed to buy time. The longer the incursion might be framed in a 
positive or neutral light, the longer the IDF could continue its actions 
without undue concern for world opinion. In contrast with 2006, 
the Israelis would use the media to provide the strategic depth their 
country lacks. In fact, Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni admitted 
as much in an e-mail: “Intensive diplomatic activity in recent days is 
aimed at deflecting the pressure for a cease-fire to allow enough time 
for the operation to achieve its goals, ” according to Gwen Ackerman 
and Saud Abu, Ramadan, in the “Israel Seeks Heavier Blow to Hamas 
Armed Wing in Gaza.” 

Many of the YouTube channels supporting Hamas are no longer 
viewable. They appear to have fallen casualty to an information war 
in which both Palestinians and Israelis mobilized fellow countrymen 
to engage in a cyber battle for control of the social media sphere. 
Because new media abrogates the traditional gatekeeper’s role, those 
who generate content in new media are their own gatekeepers. As 


44 September-October 2010 • Fires 


•Second most subscribed Israeli YouTube 
channel 

•Eleventh most viewed Israeli YouTube 
channel 

•Channel views: 4,181,230 
•Total upload views: 19,077,098 
•Joined YouTube: Dec. 29, 2008 
•YouTube subscribers: 32,487 

—— 

IDF Spokesperson’s Unit YouTube statistics as of Aug. 10, 2010. 


information is added to new media, the process itself snowballs 
to become an agenda-setter. Both the Israelis and Palestinians 
understood this dynamic; therefore, both parties sought to control 
new media through coordinated efforts at creating supportive 
online communities that might act as force multipliers in 
cyberspace. The Christian Science Monitor reports— 

The online war over Gaza was relentless. Hackers on both 
sides worked to deface websites with one attack successfully 
redirecting traffic from several high-profile Israeli websites to a 
page featuring anti-Israel messages. Facebook groups supporting 
the opposing sides were quickly created and soon had hundreds 
of thousands of members, according to Yigal Schliefer’s, “Blogs, 
YouTube: the new battleground of Gaza conflict,” Christian 
Science Monitor. 

The Jewish Internet Defense Force rallied to the cause. On 
its web site, the defense force has guides to Facebook, YouTube, 
Wikipedia, Blogger, and WordPress. This organization boasts 
that it has helped shut down dozens of extremist YouTube sites, 
taken from the Jewish Internet Defense Force. The Palestinians 
have retaliated by posting pro-Palestinian and pro-Hamas videos 
on Palutube.com, a site that is generally supportive of Hamas 
and its military wing, Al-Qassam. The Jerusalem Post even ran 
an article by David Shamah, “Digital World: How to beat anti- 
Israel hackers at their own game,” that described the exact steps 
necessary to safeguard web sites from hacker attacks. 

In the midst of the electronic war for public opinion, traditional 
media were denied access to the battlefield. The Israeli Defense 
Forces began limiting access to the potential battlefield several 
months before combat operations actually commenced in an 
effort to control the flow of information, according to Mary 
Fitzgerald’s, “On the front line of Gaza’s war 2.0.” 

The Israelis also sought to limit the images of civilian 
casualties that had so eroded support during the Gaza dominated 
by a context-free stream of images of the wounded, disseminated 
by people with unknown agendas. Claims from Palestinian 
officials of more than 900 people killed and a humanitarian crisis 
underway have been left to stand unverified, as have Israeli reports 
that Hamas militants are deliberately drawing fire to hospitals 
and schools shown in Jonathan Finer’s, “Israel’s losing media 
strategy.” 

Even as Israel generated its own content on YouTube and 
Twitter, and even as Israel catered to influential bloggers, Gazans 
sent out tweets, updated blogs, and used cell phones to transmit 































photos of carnage to the outside world. A1 Jazeera reporters, who 
were stationed in Gaza prior to the restrictions levied on entering 
j oumalists, provided riveting accounts of the war to the Arab world. 

Despite reports that the National Information Directorate began 
planning the information element of Operation Cast Lead nearly 
six months prior to execution, IDF spokesperson Major Avital 
Leibovich admitted that the YouTube channel was the “brainchild 
of a couple of soldiers,” according to Jim Michaels’, “Cellphones 
Put to ‘Unnerving’Use in Gaza.” Wired blogger Noah Schachtman 
likewise reports that “the online piece was no strategy either. I met 
the kid who ran Israel’s YouTube site.. .He thought it’d be kinda 
cool to share some videos online. So up went the site.” Schachtman 
goes on to assert that Israel’s new media strategy collapsed as soon 
as mass casualty stories began to emerge from Gaza. However, 
Israel had bought the time it needed to conclude the operation. 

L ooking forward as the media-scape continues to 
i fragment. Israel’s experiences as gleaned from these 
two recent military actions illustrate the complex manner in 
which traditional and new media interact on the battlefield. In a 
2006 Military Review article, Donald Shaw termed traditional 
media as “vertical” and alternate media (including new media) as 
“horizontal.” Vertical media does indeed have a top-down agenda¬ 
setting power. However, “vertical media’s reach has declined while 
that of the alternative media-horizontal media that primarily interpret 
details-has increased,” according to Bradley J. Hamm, Donald L. 
Shaw, and Thomas C. Terry’s, “Vertical Versus Horizontal Media.” 
The upshot is that the military is forced to understand the complex 
interaction between traditional and new media, while appreciating 
the limits of each. 

By limiting the access of international media to the battlefield 
during Operation Cast Lead, the Israelis ensured no voice would 
refute Palestinian claims of atrocities and civilian targeting. 
Conversely, in 2006 the presence of outside media contributed 
to possible tactical and operational successes by Hezbollah. This 
observation gains more significance when one considers media 
reports in combination with the capabilities of Google Earth and 
other spatial applications. 


As the media environment continues to fragment in the future, 
engaging ever-diversifying platforms and channels will become 
more difficult for the military. But, as General Creighton Abrams 
reputedly once said, “If you don’t blow your own horn, someone 
will turn it into a funnel.” Under conditions of the current new media 
blitz, his possibly apocryphal words might be paraphrased to say, “If 
you don’t engage, someone else will fill the void.” Surrendering the 
information environment to the adversary is not a practical option. 
Therefore, the military must seriously consider where information 
and the new media lie in relationship to conventional warfighting 
functions. One thing seems sure: we must elevate information in 
doctrinal importance, and adequately fund and staff organizations 
dealing with information. 

The “era of persistent conflict” that characterizes today’s 
operational environment is likely to endure for the foreseeable 
future, “with threats and opportunities ranging from regular and 
irregular wars in remote lands, to relief and reconstruction in crisis 
zones to sustained engagement in the global commons.” We must 
prepare thoroughly for the roles that new and traditional media are 
so certain to play in a less-than-stable future. Only by fostering a 
culture of engagement where the military proactively tells its own 
story in an open, transparent manner can we successfully navigate 
the many challenges of the media environment now and in the 
future. 


Lieutenant General William B. Caldwell, IV, serves as the 
commander, NATO Training Mission - Afghanistan and Commander, 
Combined Security Transition Command - Afghanistan. 

Dennis M. Murphy is a professor of information operations and 
information in warfare at the U.S. Army War College. He served in a variety 
of command and staff positions during his 27 years of U.S. Army service. 

Mr. Anton Menning is the media strategist at the U.S. Army Combined 
Arms Center. He holds a B.A. from the University of Kansas and an 
M.S. from the William Allen White School of Journalism and Mass 
Communications also at KU. 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 45 





























46 September-October 2010 • Fires 



























communicate. Increasingly, individuals are 
_l looking to the web as their primary source 
of news and information. As an Army, we have an 

obligation to tell our story in the spaces and 
places where our community is already engaging. 




guidelines to consider when choosing to implement 
social media strategies and represent information 
from various Department of the Army publications. 




On February 26, the Department of Defense released Directive Type Memorandum 09-026. It was the result of a several month social 
media review conducted by the Department of Defense, and stated that access to social media must be provided across the military’s non- 
classified network. Restrictions to social media sites can still be put in place, due to bandwidth or security issues, but must be temporary 
and commensurate with the risk. 


Notably, it also stated that official social media presences should be brought to the awareness of public affairs offices, but noted that 


other organizations and entities may use social media in an official capacity (spouse’s clubs, family readiness groups, etc). 


It is important for Soldiers as well as public affairs professionals to remember the two guiding documents that apply to all public 


communication: Operations Security and the Uniform Code of Military Justice. As regulation is written, Soldiers must maintain professional 
conduct and good order and discipline in the virtual world in the same ways they would in the real world. Special care should be taken 
to ensure that public facing profiles, to include Facebook pages and sites, present an appropriate picture of Army life. 

AR 530-1 (Operations Security) states that Soldiers who blog and identify their affiliation with the Army must let their commanders 
know they’re blogging. 


\Y^jLlg]B (H® 0 DDO©Ci] QSI GsraiEDOT [fco[teCF© 0 g)OB ©BSIFQ©(£I 1 6 > 


Planning/strategy: Have a plan, and think strategically. Think about each platform before you decide to establish a profile and ensure 


it meets the needs of your organization. Just because the sites are out there doesn’t mean your organization needs to be on all of them. 


Manpower: Will you have the resources to manage and maintain the sites? If you can’t commit to updating your social media sites 


at least once per week, or providing enough new content to keep users coming back, that platform is probably not a good idea for your 
organization. 

Messaging: Social media is all about taking your identity or messaging and turning over control to your community. A Facebook 
wall and a Flickr comments stream are places for negative comments, as well as positive ones. If you’re not willing to lose control of 
the message, and give some of the power to your community, social media is not for you. 



Engage your community through posts and content that solicits feedback. A blog without a comments section isn’t a blog: it’s a message 
board. A YouTube channel without any views isn’t an effective outreach platform. Once you begin engaging, evaluate what works and 
what doesn’t, and don’t hesitate to adjust fire and change course. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • September-October 2010 47 

















Information adapted from U.S. 
Army, Online and Social Media’s 
“Social Media Best Practices” 


A paratrooper with 1st Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division (Advise and Assist Brigade), uses an 
online video-chat program to talk with his wife and children back at Fort Bragg, N.C., during his 
deployment in Iraq, Dec. 28, 2009. (Photo by SPC Michael J. MacLeod, U.S. Army) 


S ocial networks sites such as 
Facebook, Blogger and Twitter 
are an ever increasing way to 
communicate. The military is not exempt 
from their impact. Soldiers, Army civilians 
and contractors are using social media to 
connect with each other during work and 
during combat deployments. While their 
reach is great, they do present an increased 
risk that sensitive information will be 
released that puts our Soldiers in danger. 
These risks are not unique to social media, 
but they do require that users remember 
certain ‘rules of engagement’ before they 
decide to become a part of the social media 
culture. 

[□personal decision. It is an individual’s 
personal decision whether he or she 
wants to participate in social computing; 
Soldiers maintain their First Amendment 
rights and do have the right to express 
themselves in a public forum. However, 
Soldiers must remember that rules apply on 
the Internet - just like the physical world. 
If a Soldier uses a social networking site 
where he or she is or may be identified or 
associated with the U.S. Army, they must 
remember how they appear to represent 
their organization and the United States of 
America. UCMJ and other guidelines and 
regulations still apply. 


that may compromise OPSEC should not 
be discussed. If in doubt, consult with your 
immediate supervisor or operations officer. 

T ink first, then post. Be aware 
of how you represent yourself in 
personal social networking sites such as 
Facebook and Twitter. If you are posting 
information on those sites that would reflect 
poorly on the U.S. Army, reconsider. Even 
information posted to personal profiles lives 
in the public domain. You never know who 
might see it. It is often said that nothing 
truly disappears from the Internet. 

If you refer to the U.S. Army in your 
personal social network profile, you 
are identifying yourself as a part of a 
large network that includes both your 
colleagues and your chain of command. 
The information you post there should be 
consistent with your role as a Soldier and 
representative of the U.S. Army. 

S ecurity risks. Some security concerns 
such as OPSEC, propriety, firewall 
breaches and social engineering are 
legitimate issues, but we mitigate those risks 
through education. Most risks are not unique 
to social media. Some level of risk must be 
taken if we want to engage the battlespace. 


[chules and regulations. Soldiers 
1 1 must be aware of all pertinent 
rules and regulations including UCMJ, AR 
25-1 (Army Knowledge Management and 
Information Technology) and AR 530-1 
(Operations Security). 

T ansparency. Anyone making 
statements on a public forum 
should identify himself or herself and 
their affiliation with the U.S. Army if they 
are commenting on the U.S. Army. Be 
transparent. If you are not a public affairs 
officer speaking on behalf of the U.S. 
Army, you should make it clear that your 
statements are your own and do not represent 
an official U.S. Army position (Example: 
This statement is my own and does not 
constitute an endorsement or opinion 
of the U.S. Army or Department of 
Defense.). 

e tay in your lane. It 

applies in public forums 
as much as it applies to inter¬ 
views with the media. If you are 
not the best person to comment 
on a subject, you should not do 
_so in an official capacity. 

*SEC. Operations security 
is critical. Any information 










































IK 


facebook 


Brad 


Password 


Lep 


Tires Center of Excellence fe on Facebook 

Sign up for Facebook to connect with Fires Center of Ex^e'ience, 



Fires Center of Excellence c Like 


Wal info FAQ* Photos DEscosskms 


Links :» 


a 



QjS Tdl&P 





FCoE Facebook s the s^fcjal fan 
pa^eof Jhe Lntod Ststen Antw Fre§ 
Cento< df E^Ocflcnce * Please are the 
notes Erepardkifl the RiJci df 
Er^a9err*iit for trtsjwjfle, 


Information 


(-O&s&on! 

MeNO* ksP, 3Udng 455 


Favorite Pages 

6of69Pfi<5ei S«Al 





E-s LSe1st Bolide 1st 
ngs. I-SPA Combat Enfantn 
Team, 10th Division 
Mountain 
DhnWn 


i 

ViJ 

Adsptnc 
the Army 


X / 


1st 5N 
l33dF^d 


m 

7»i AAmr 


Facebook (www.facebook.com) is a website, which allows individuals to post 
profiles (photos and information) about themselves and connect and share with 
friends and family. 

Facebook statistics 

According to Facebook’s website, there are more than 500 million active Facebook 
users; half of them access the website on a daily basis. The average user has 130 friends. 
Collectively, people spend over 700 billion minutes per month on Facebook. 

371,475 people were following the U.S. Army’s Facebook page as of August 11, 
according to the Army’s website. 3,047 users were following the U.S. Army Fires Center of 
Excellence’s Facebook page as of the same date. 

Signing up for Facebook 

When you decide your organization needs a Facebook page, understand the 
differences between a personal profile, a fan page and a group site. 

Personal profile: A personal profile serves as the individual user’s profile and is 
limited to certain capabilities. Do not use personal profiles for your unit, organization or as 
a commander operating in a professional capacity. A personal profile should be limited to 
connecting with family and friends and sharing personal information, and should not be 
used in an official capacity. All friends must be approved by you before they can see your 
profile. Individuals should host their own profile page in order to be familiar with the site. 

Fan page: Fan pages are for organizations and public figures. They are 
the preferred account for your organization. They are stand-alone pages where the 
administrator can post videos, photos and news updates. Fans who like the page can post 
on the wall, and the administrator cannot view the fan’s profile. Use fan pages for your unit, 
organization or as a commander. Fans can like the site or view it without an administrator’s 
approval. 

Groups: These are stand-alone pages that allow people with the same interests to 
join. They are created by pre-existing users and are generally narrower in scope. Groups 
are ideal for family readiness groups, students who attended the same schools or clubs. 
They also allow the administrator to approve all those who join the group, and are more 
secure than a fan page. 


Managing your page 

Comments: Be clear about your comment policy. It is alright to screen comments 
for profanity, abusive language and ‘spam;’ however, visitors are entitled to their own 
opinion. Don’t delete a comment simply because it is negative. 

OPSEC and UCMJ: Exercise the same caution as you would when writing a story 
or posting anything to your organization’s website. Ensure content posted is appropriate 
for good order and discipline in your Soldiers’ ranks. 

Posting content: Incorporate video, audio, images and print pieces into your 
content. A good Facebook page has a vibrant wall with frequent status updates, photos 
and video postings. 


Editor’s Note: Information adapted from U.S. Army, Online and Social Media Division’s “Social Media Best Practices.” 










lat is a blog? A blog is 
a conversational website, 
which typically offers news 
or opinion on a certain topic. It often invites 
interaction through comments. It can be 
more editorial than informative, and appeals 
to a targeted population. 

W o blogs? The government, 
military, companies, 
corporations and individuals all blog for 
various reasons. 

W at information should be 
posted to a blog? Existing 
information such as internal e-mails or 
messages which are useful for a larger 
audience (commander’s messages or 
safety updates) and press releases are 
good examples. Often, comments can 
occasionally generate their own posts. 


New content can include guest posts from 
other Army officials and Soldiers. Official 
commentary on a topic of interest is another 
example of relevant content. 

uidelines. Any content on your 
official blog should be just that, 
official. Remember UCMJ and OP SEC. 
Whenever possible, host your blog on a .mil 
domain. When not possible, look for ways 
to make your content stand-out as an official 
information source for your installation or 
unit. All blogs should include a comments 
policy, which outlines which comments 
will be removed. 

All official blogs should include a 
comments policy banning profanity, 
malicious comments and off-topic 
comments. It also is recommended that all 
comments be moderated and reviewed by an 


administrator before posting. Blogs should 
be written conversationally and should be 
short. Think op-ed length and e-mail tone. 
^)logging within your office. Engage 
S) your employees to interact; they are 
our best spokespersons. Make sure they are 
aware of the risks and benefits of blogging 
before they begin. Unofficial blogs written 
by Soldiers or representatives of your 
organization should include a disclaimer 
stating that the blog does not represent 
the official opinion of the Army. Per AR 
530-1, all blogs written by the individuals 
identifying themselves as employees of the 
U. S. Army must identify themselves to their 
commander. 

OPSEC still applies to personally written 
blog sites; the UCMJ applies to military 
personnel. 





lat is Twitter? Twitter is a 
r micro-blogging site. Micro¬ 
blogging is blogging in 140 
characters or less. You can also think of 
it as ‘hyper’ text-messaging. When you 
send a message on Twitter, it will go to all 
of the users who have decided to ‘follow’ 
you, enabling you to send messages to a 
large number of users at one time. Many 
people link Twitter to their cell phones in 
order to update on the go. 

W o users Twitter? Organizations, 
offices, commands and 
commanders all use Twitter. 

□Wore you join Twitter. Join Twitter 
for yourself. Find people you know 


and follow organizations. Update your 
Twitter. The best way to know what works 
is through personal experience. Have an 
idea of what you want to do with Twitter. 
What do you want to accomplish? 

/hat should you tweet about? 
If tweeting as a commander, 
keep your tone professional, but be 
personable. Be interesting and provide real 
updates. When posting as the organization, 
avoid using personal pronouns, but do 


engage in the conversations about your 
organization and be a value-added member 
of the comment. 

Content. New stories, changes to 
policy and links to multimedia are highly 
encouraged. Get creative; photos from the 
latest FRG meeting or the commander’s 
safety message can all go on your Twitter. 

OPSEC and UCMJ. Exercise the 
same caution as you would when writing 
a story or posting anything to your 
organization’s website. Ensure content 
posted is appropriate to good order and 
discipline in your Soldiers’ ranks. 

/hen to tweet? Spread out your 
tweets through the day. Posting 
several tweets in rapid succession clogs 
up your reader’s window. There isn’t a 
prescribed number of tweets you need 
to send per day or week. Simply post 
regularly enough that you retain the interest 
of your followers, and can keep up with 
the conversations taken place about your 
organization. 

H ow to treat followers? You can 

respond to followers who are 
asking generic questions, but direct 



messages are preferred for more specific 
matters. Follow people who are following 
you. Twitter is a conversation, and you can 
learn a lot about your audience by reading 
their posts. Ask for your followers’ input 
on an issue or suggestions on how you can 
make things better for your organization. If 
someone is abusing your Twitter site, you 
can block them. 

I ~| rVeeting about events. When you’re 
U tweeting about an event, it is easier 
to label those tweets using hashtags, a 
number sign (#) with your label without 
spaces. For example, #training. 

P romoting your site. The best way 
to promote your account is to 
follow key individuals and send value added 
information. In addition, cross-promote 
across your various social networking 
platforms. For example, advertise your 
Twitter account on your Facebook page, 
blog, etc. Some units add a plug for their 
social media sites at the end of the news 
stories they place online. 

Editor’s Note : Information for blogging and Twitter 
articles adapted from U.S. Army, Online and Social 
Media Division s “Social Media Best Practices. ” 


50 September-October 2010 • Fires 














































1 

The Fires community is online 24/7. I 



■ i r 


oint. 


Connect. 


Social media websites 



\ 


Fires Center of Excellence 

^ http ://www.facebook.com/FiresCenterOfExcellence 
^ http://twitter.com/FCoE_TeamSill 


Commanding general's blog 

V^http ://usacac.army.mil/blog/blogs/bloggers.aspx 


Fires Forum 

^ https://forums.bcks.army.mil/secure/CommunityBrowser. 
aspx?id=65687i&lang=en-US 


U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery School 

v^http ://www.facebook.com/AirDefenseArtillerySchool 


U.S. Army Field Artillery School 

y>http ://www.facebook.com/Field ArtilleryRedLegLive 

^ http://twitter.com/RedLegLive 

V^http ://www.fl ickr.com/photos/RedLegLive 


Fires Bulletin 












Periodicals Postage 

PAID 

San Bernardino, CA 


Fires Bulletin i - edition 


the new interactive edition online @ 
http://sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin 




























































