flectors. The radiator blades are ori- 
ented at an angle chosen to prevent in- 
frared loading from the Moon limb at 
the intended orbital altitude and atti- 
tude. The reflectors are shaped and ori- 
ented to position their foci outside the 
radiator surfaces. There are six radiator- 
blade/reflector pairs — two pairs for 
each stage of cooling. The radiator 
blades and reflectors are coated on their 
front and back surfaces with materials 
having various infrared emissivities, in- 
frared reflectivities, and solar reflectivi- 
ties so as to maximize infrared radiation 
to cold outer space and minimize inad- 
vertent solar heating. The radiator 
blades and reflectors are held in place 
by a lightweight support structure, the 
components of which are designed to 
satisfy a complex combination of ther- 
mal and mechanical requirements. 

This work was done by Jose I. Rodriguez of 
Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). 

NPO-44960 


ta GVIPS Models and Software 

Two reports discuss, respectively, (1) 
the generalized viscoplasticity with po- 
tential structure (GVIPS) class of 
mathematical models and (2) the Con- 
stitutive Material Parameter Estimator 
(COMPARE) computer program. 
GVIPS models are constructed within a 
thermodynamics- and potential-based 
theoretical framework, wherein one 
uses internal state variables and de- 


rives constitutive equations for both 
the reversible (elastic) and the irre- 
versible (viscoplastic) behaviors of ma- 
terials. Because of the underlying po- 
tential structure, GVIPS models not 
only capture a variety of material be- 
haviors but also are very computation- 
ally efficient. 

COMPARE comprises (1) an analysis 
core and (2) a C++-language subpro- 
gram that implements a Windows-based 
graphical user interface (GUI) for con- 
trolling the core. The GUI relieves the 
user of the sometimes tedious task of 
preparing data for the analysis core, 
freeing the user to concentrate on the 
task of Fitting experimental data and ul- 
timately obtaining a set of material pa- 
rameters. The analysis core consists of 
three modules: one for GVIPS material 
models, an analysis module containing a 
specialized finite-element solution algo- 
rithm, and an optimization module. 
COMPARE solves the problem of find- 
ing GVIPS material parameters in the 
manner of a design-optimization prob- 
lem in which the parameters are the de- 
sign variables. 

This work was done by Steven M. Arnold of 
Glenn Research Center and Atef Gendy, AtefF. 
Saleeb, John Mark, and Thomas E. Wilt of the 
University of Akron. Further information is 
contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Innovative 
Partnerships Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleve- 
land, Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-17999- 
1/8000-1 


$ Stowable Energy-Absorbing 
Rocker-Bogie Suspensions 

A report discusses the design of the 
rocker-bogie suspensions of the Mars Ex- 
ploration Rover vehicles, which were 
landed on Mars in January 2004. Going 
beyond the basic requirements regard- 
ing mobility on uneven terrain, the de- 
sign had to satisfy requirements (1) to 
enable each suspension to contort so 
that the rover could be stowed within 
limited space in a tetrahedral lander 
prior to deployment and (2) that the sus- 
pension be able to absorb appreciable 
impact loads, with limited deflection, 
during egress from the lander and tra- 
versal of terrain. 

For stowability, six joints (three on the 
right, three on the left) were added to 
the basic rocker-bogie mechanism. One 
of the joints on each side was a yoke-and- 
clevis joint at the suspension/differen- 
tial interface, one was a motorized twist 
joint in the forward portion of the 
rocker, and one was a linear joint cre- 
ated by modifying a fixed-length bogie 
member into a telescoping member. For 
absorption of impact, the structural 
members were in the form of box beams 
made by electron-beam welding of ma- 
chined, thin-walled, C-channel, titanium 
components. The box beams were very 
lightweight and could withstand high 
bending and torsional loads. 

This work was done by Brian Harrington 
and Christopher Voorhees of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. For more 
information, contact iaoffice@jpl. nasa.gov. 
NPO-40967 


34 


NASA Tech Briefs, December 2007 


