MAGIC can handle models of nearly 
limitless complexity (millions of polygons 
with complex scene structures) and save 
die information into a single DTS file to be 
used within a DON simulation. MAGIC 
also handles every other aspect of simula- 
tion conversion (texture map conver- 
sion/creation, support file generation, 


mission folder, and hierarchy creation, 
etc.) and can create all the files needed for 
DON to successfully recreate simulations. 

MAGIC is a freely distributable, stand- 
alone executable that runs on Windows 
XP (or later) operating systems. All that 
is required is to provide MAGIC with the 
simulation data (models, images, 


telemetry, etc.) and a configuration file 
instructing MAGIC what it needs to do, 
then press “Go!”. 

This work was done by W.C. Herbert of 
Kennedy Space Center. For further informa- 
tion, contact the Kennedy Innovative Part- 
nerships Program Office at (321) 861-7158. 
KSC-13201 


Data Management Applications for the Service Preparation 
Subsystem 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


These software applications provide 
intuitive User Interfaces (UIs) with a 
consistent look and feel for interaction 
with, and control of, the Service Prepa- 
ration Subsystem (SPS). The elements of 
the UIs described here are the File Man- 
ager, Mission Manager, and Log Monitor 
applications. All UIs provide access to 
add/delete/update data entities in a 
complex database schema without re- 
quiring technical expertise on the part 
of the end users. These applications 
allow for safe, validated, catalogued 
input of data. Also, the software has 
been designed in multiple, coherent lay- 
ers to promote ease of code mainte- 
nance and reuse in addition to reducing 
testing and accelerating maturity. 

The File Manager provides an inter- 
face for interactively publishing data 


input files to a relational SQL-compliant 
database. It extracts/captures metadata 
automatically for use in building and 
maintaining the catalog of available 
data. Also, File Manager visualizes the 
data catalog in a tree format for easy use. 

Mission Manager provides a single in- 
terface to define critical parameters de- 
scribing both flight-and ground-based 
projects. Log Monitor provides access to 
system events recorded in execution of 
automatic generation of support data. 
This interface is critical in identifying 
events requiring attention/intervention 
to meet mission requirements. 

The applications comprising the SPS 
User Interface Portal run on any platform 
that supports Java Runtime Environment 
1.4.2. The UIs can interact with any suit- 
ably configured, SQL-compliant database, 


and the content-driven nature of the UIs 
allows them to be easily adapted to pres- 
ent custom data. These applications are 
highly portable, and were designed for au- 
tomatic deployment as WebStart applica- 
tions, which reduces the effort involved in 
installing and updating these programs 
across dozens of user workstations at vari- 
ous physical locations. 

This work was done by Ivy P. Luong, 
George W. Chang, Tung Bui, Christopher 
Allen, Shantanu Malhotra, Fannie C. Chen, 
Bach X. Bui, Sandy C. Gutheinz, Rachel Y. 
Kim, Silvino C. Zendejas, Dan Yu, Richard 
M. Kim, and Syed Sadaqathulla of Caltech 
for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-45021. ' 


Policy-Based Management Natural Language Parser 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


The Policy-Based Management Natu- 
ral Language Parser (PBEM) is a rules- 
based approach to enterprise manage- 
ment that can be used to automate 
certain management tasks. This parser 
simplifies the management of a given 
endeavor by establishing policies to 
deal with situations that are likely to 
occur. Policies are operating rules that 
can be referred to as a means of main- 
taining order, security, consistency, or 
other ways of successfully furthering a 
goal or mission. PBEM provides a way 
of managing configuration of network 
elements, applications, and processes 
via a set of high-level rules or business 


policies rather than managing individ- 
ual elements, thus switching the control 
to a higher level. This software allows 
unique management rules (or com- 
mands) to be specified and applied to a 
cross-section of the Global Information 
Grid (GIG). 

This software embodies a parser that 
is capable of recognizing and under- 
standing conversational English. Be- 
cause all possible dialect variants cannot 
be anticipated, a unique capability was 
developed that parses passed on conver- 
sation intent rather than the exact way 
the words are used. This software can in- 
crease productivity by enabling a user to 


converse with the system in conversa- 
tional English to define network poli- 
cies. PBEM can be used in both manned 
and unmanned science-gathering pro- 
grams. Because policy statements can be 
domain-independent, this software can 
be applied equally to a wide variety of 
applications. 

This work was done by Mark James of Cal- 
tech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
(see page 1). 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-45816. ' 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2009 


57 


