NASA Technical Memorandum 104823 




Guide for Oxygen Hazards Analyses 
on Components and Systems 



Joel M. Stoltzfus 
Jesse Dees 
Robert F. Poe 



October 1996 



NASA Technical Memorandum 104823 



Guide for Oxygen Hazards Analyses 
on Components and Systems 



Joel M. Stoltzfus 

Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center 

Houston, Texas 

Jesse Dees and Robert F. Foe 

Lockheed Martin Engineering & Science Services 

Las Cruces, New Mexico 



October 1996 



This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 
800 Elkridge Landing Road, Linthicum Heights, MD 21090-2934 (301) 621-0390. 



Contents 



Abstract 
1. 



Page 



Vll 



Introduction 



Objective 
Approach 



4. 


Procedures 


4.1 


Oxygen Application and Investigation Scope 


4.2 


Oxygen Hazards Analysis Team 


4.3 


Component/System Information 


4.4 


Worst-Case Operating Conditions 


4.5 


Material Flammability 


4.6 


Ignition Mechanisms 


4.6.1 


Frictional Heating 


4.6.2 


Adiabatic Compression 


4.6.3 


Mechanical Impact 


4.6.4 


Particle Impact 


4.6.5 


Mechanical Stress or Vibration 


4.6.6 


Static Discharge 


4.6.7 


Electric Arc 


4.6.8 


Chemical Reaction 


4.6.9 


Resonance 


4.7 


Secondary Effects Analysis 


4.8 


Reaction Effects Assessment 


5. 


References 


Appendix 


High-Risk Components 



3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
6 

6 

7 



Figures 

Page 

1 Approach to oxygen hazards analysis (Christianson and 

Stoltzfus, 1993) 2 

2 Oxygen Hazards Analysis Chart 3 



VI 



Abstract 

Because most materials, including metals, will burn in an oxygen-enriched environment, 
hazards are always present when using oxygen. Most materials will ignite at lower 
temperatures in an oxygen-enriched environment than in air, and once ignited, combustion 
rates are greater in the oxygen-enriched environment. Many metals burn violently in an 
oxygen-enriched environment when ignited. Lubricants, tapes, gaskets, fuels, and solvents 
can increase the possibility of ignition in oxygen systems. However, these hazards do not 
preclude the use of oxygen. Oxygen may be safely used if all the materials in a system are 
not flammable in the end-use environment or if ignition sources are identified and 
controlled. These ignition and combustion hazards necessitate a proper oxygen hazards 
analysis before introducing a material or component into oxygen service. 

The objective of this test plan is to describe the White Sands Test Facility oxygen hazards 
analysis to be performed on components and systems before oxygen is introduced and is 
recommended before implementing the oxygen component qualification procedure. The 
plan describes the NASA Johnson Space Center White Sands Test Facility method 
consistent with the ASTM documents for analyzing the hazards of components and systems 
exposed to an oxygen-enriched environment. The oxygen hazards analysis is a useful tool 
for oxygen-system designers, system engineers, and facility managers. Problem areas can 
be pinpointed before oxygen is introduced into the system, preventing damage to hardware 
and possible injury or loss of life. 



VII 



1. Introduction 

Because most materials, including metals, will burn in an oxygen-enriched environment, 
hazards are always present when using oxygen. Most materials will ignite at considerably 
lower temperatures in an oxygen-enriched environment than in air, and once ignited, 
combustion rates are greater in the oxygen-enriched environment. Many metals burn 
violently in an oxygen-enriched environment when ignited. Lubricants, tapes, gaskets, 
fuels, and solvents can increase the possibility of ignition in oxygen systems. However, 
these hazards do not preclude the use of oxygen. Oxygen may be safely used if all the 
materials in a system are not flammable in the end-use environment or if ignition sources 
are identified and controlled. Ignition and combustion hazards necessitate a proper oxygen 
hazards analysis before introducing a material or component into oxygen service. 

This test plan describes the NASA Johnson Space Center White Sands Test Facility 
(WSTF) method (consistent with the most current versions of ASTMs G 63, G 88, and G 
94) for analyzing the hazards of components and systems exposed to oxygen-enriched 
environments. The oxygen hazards analysis is a useful tool for oxygen-system designers, 
system engineers, and facility managers. Problem areas can be pinpointed before oxygen is 
introduced into the system, preventing damage to hardware and possible injury or loss of 
life. Further information on the safe design of oxygen systems can be found in the most 
current versions of ASTMs G 63, G 88, and G 94; NHB 8060.1C (1991); NFPAs 50 
(1990) and 53M (1990); and CGAs G-4.0 (1987), G-4.1 (1984), and G-4.4 (1984). 

2. Objective 

The objective of this test plan is to describe the WSTF oxygen hazards analysis to be 
performed on components and systems before oxygen is introduced. The analysis should 
be performed before implementing the oxygen component qualification procedure 
(Bamford and Rucker, 1992). 

3. Approach 

An oxygen hazards analysis of an oxygen component or system is usually approached as 
shown in Figure 1 (Christianson and Stoltzfus, 1993). The oxygen application and the 
scope of the investigation are first determined, and then a team is assembled to conduct the 
analysis. Information is collected on the components and the worst-case operating 
conditions. 

Usually, a fire will not occur in any environment unless the construction materials of the 
system or component are flammable and a credible ignition mechanism is present. The 
flammability of the material is first reviewed to determine if any fire hazards exist at the 
worst-case operating conditions. If the material is flammable, then the possible ignition 
mechanisms are surveyed to determine which are credible. If data for the particular ignition 
mechanism and the material(s) under consideration are not available, appropriate materials 
tests are conducted. Finally, the secondary and reaction effects are evaluated to determine 
what effect an ignition and possible combustion would have on the system and the facility 
(Christianson and Stoltzfus, 1993). 



Define Oxygen Application 
and Investigation Scope 



Assemble Hazards 
Analysis Team 



Compile Information on 
Components 

• Configurations 

• Technical Specifications 

• Operational Procedures 

• Operational Conditions 



Determine Realistic Worst-Case 
Operating Conditions 



Determine if Materials 
Are Flammable 



Determine if Ignition 
Mechanisms Are Present 



Determine the Likelihood of 
Secondary Ignition Hazards 



Consult Promoted Combustion and 
Oxygen Index Databases 



I 



Perform Materials Tests. If Necessary 



Consult Materials Ignition Databases 
for Various Ignition Mechanisms 



Perform Materials, Configuration, 
and Component Tests, If Necessary 



Perform Materials, Configuration, 
and Component Tests, If Necessary 



Perform a Reaction 
Effects Assessment 



Report Oxygen Hazards Analysis 
Results ana Recommendations 



Figure 1 Approach to oxygen hazards analysis (Christianson and Stoltzfus, 1993). 



To use an oxygen hazards analysis as a tool, it should be properly documented from the 
beginning. A typical oxygen hazards analysis chart (Figure 2) contains the component 
designation (which indicates the materials of construction including soft goods), the 
possible ignition mechanisms, the probability of each ignition mechanism, and the results 
of the secondary effects analysis and the reaction effects assessment. The documentation 
also includes any recommendations or limitations from the oxygen hazards analysis team, 
including recommendations of further testing if needed, stipulations of use, and any 
additional safety precautions. If component tests are required, they may be performed 
according to the Guide for Oxygen Component Qualification Tests (Bamford and Rucker, 
1992). 




f = Flannafole 
N = Nonflannable 



Ignition Hazards 



= Inpossible 3 = Possible 

1 = Renote 4 = Probable 

2 = Unlikely 



Reaction Effect 
A = Negligible 

Marginal 
C = Critical 
D = Catastrophic 

Secondary Effect 



+ = Analysis of affected 
__ conponents needed 
= No further analysis 
needed 



Figure 2 Oxygen Hazards Analysis Chart. 



4. Procedures 

The procedures for performing an oxygen hazards analysis on a component or a system are 
shown in Figure 1 and discussed in the following paragraphs. 

4.1 Oxygen Application and Investigation Scope 

The oxygen application and investigation scope should first be determined to provide the 
basis for choosing the oxygen hazards analysis team and for conducting the analysis. 

4.2 Oxygen Hazards Analysis Team 

An oxygen hazards analysis team is assembled including, at a minimum, personnel with 
expertise in mechanical design, metals ignition and combustion, nonmetals ignition and 
combustion, and component testing (with emphasis on oxygen systems). Depending on the 
system, personnel may also be included with expertise in electrical design, cryogenic 
fluids, materials, and chemistry. 



4.3 Component/System Information 

Information is obtained on each component in the system: materials of construction 
(including soft goods and lubricants), drawings showing the cross-sectional view of each 
component (particularly fluid flow paths and the location of the soft goods), and a system 



fluid schematic. The cross section of the component is used to locate and identify all the 
soft goods. If the cross-sectional view of a component is poor quality or unclear, a 
disassembled component complete with soft goods is sometimes useful. All materials of 
construction are identified. The flow path is also identified, along with all oxygen- wetted 
materials. A list of some common high-risk components is in the appendix. 

4.4 Worst-Case Operating Conditions 

The worst-case operating conditions that the component may undergo are now determined. 
This information includes maximum use pressures, temperatures, and flow rates and is 
used to evaluate the materials of construction for resistance to ignition and combustion. 
Pressures and temperatures are important because material flammability is often a function 
of these two parameters. Flow rates are important because they affect the particle impact 
and adiabatic compression ignition mechanisms. 

4.5 Material Flammability 

The materials are evaluated to determine if they are flammable at the worst-case operating 
conditions. A large material flammability database at WSTF contains flammability data 
from previous and ongoing tests of both metals and polymers. If information on a material 
for the worst-case operating conditions cannot be located in the database, tests may be 
conducted to obtain this information. The oxygen hazards analysis chart is updated with the 
results, using N (nonflammable) or F (flammable). If the materials of a component are 
determined nonflammable, the ignition mechanisms need not be analyzed for that 
component. 

4.6 Ignition Mechanisms 

Next, an ignition mechanism survey is performed. For each component found to have 
flammable materials, nine ignition mechanisms must be evaluated: adiabatic compression 
(pneumatic impact), frictional heating, mechanical impact, particle impact, mechanical 
stress or vibration, static discharge, electric arc, chemical reaction, and resonance. Each 
ignition mechanism must be evaluated to determine if it exists in the component and the 
likelihood that it will cause an ignition. The results of the analysis for each ignition 
mechanism are documented on the oxygen hazards analysis chart. Ratings for the ignition 
mechanisms are (impossible), 1 (remote), 2 (unlikely), 3 (possible), and 4 (probable). 

4.6.1 Frictional Heating 

Parts of a component or system can rub against each other with enough force or velocity to 
raise any one part to its ignition temperature at the given oxygen pressure and concentration 
(examples: rotating or oscillating equipment and chattering relief valves). 

4.6.2 Adiabatic Compression 

A quantity of any gas can generate a considerable amount of heat if rapidly compressed. 
This heat can readily ignite polymers or flammable contaminants (examples: a downstream 
valve or flexible hose with a polymer liner in a dead-ended high-pressure oxygen 
manifold). 



4.6.3 Mechanical Impact 

An object with a relatively large mass or momentum striking a material can cause 
mechanical deformation and expose fresh surfaces (example: a poppet of a solenoid- 
operated valve impacting the polymer seat). 

4.6.4 Particle Impact 

Combustible particles impinging on materials at velocities greater than 50 m/s in oxygen- 
enriched environments can cause ignition (example: high-velocity particles from a dirty 
pipeline striking a valve plunger). 

4.6.5 Mechanical Stress or Vibration 

Materials that are poor heat conductors (such as plastics) can reach their ignition 
temperatures when stressed or vibrated (example: unanchored joints that protrude inside 
piping). 

4.6.6 Static Discharge 

Discharges of static electricity can produce high temperatures, sometimes high enough to 
cause a material to reach its ignition temperature (example: the accumulation of electrostatic 
charges created by the friction of dry oxygen flowing over nonmetals). 

4.6.7 Electric Arc 

Electric arcs can provide the energy to ignite materials in the presence of oxygen (example: 
an insulated electrical heater short-circuiting and arcing through its sheath to the oxygen). 

4.6.8 Chemical Reaction 

An unrelated chemical reaction can produce sufficient heat to ignite materials in the presence 
of oxygen (example: a chemical process that generates elevated temperatures). 

4.6.9 Resonance 

Acoustic oscillations within resonant cavities can cause a rapid gas temperature rise. The 
rise is more rapid and achieves higher values when particles are present. Ignition can result 
if the heat generated is not rapidly dissipated (example: gas flow into a tee and out of a 
branch port so that the remaining closed port forms a resonant chamber). 

4.7 Secondary Effects Analysis 

After the ignition mechanisms have been surveyed, the secondary effects are analyzed. This 
analysis addresses the effects of failures that are not ignition-related, but may create an 
ignition hazard in a nearby component, such as an external leak caused by normal seal 
wear. The leaking oxygen could build up and allow an ignition by the static discharge 
ignition mechanism in some nearby component. Ratings for the secondary effects analysis 
are + (further analysis of affected components necessary) and - (no further analysis 
needed). 



4.8 Reaction Effects Assessment 

Finally, a reaction effects assessment is performed and documented. This is an assessment 
of the effect if a component fails or is ignited and is useful for making judgments on the 
safe use of a component. The reaction effects assessment would then help determine if the 
component may be used safely. The ratings are A (negligible, no loss of equipment or life), 
B (marginal, equipment is damaged, but no lives are lost), C (critical, loss of test data and 
damage to equipment, but no loss of life), andZ) (catastrophic, loss of equipment and life). 

5. References 

ASTM G 63, "Guide for Evaluating Nonmetallic Materials for Oxygen Service," American 
Society of Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (most current version). 

ASTM G 88, "Guide for Designing Systems for Oxygen Service, American Society of 
Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (most current version). 

ASTM G 94, "Guide for Evaluating Metals for Oxygen Service," American Society of 
Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (most current version). 

Bamford, L. B. and M. A. Rucker, "Guide for Oxygen Component Qualification Tests," 
TP-WSTF-712, NASA Johnson Space Center White Sands Test Facility, Las Cruces, 
New Mexico (1992). 

CGA G-4.0, Oxygen, Compressed Gas Association, Eighth edition, Arlington, Virginia 
(1987). 

CGA G-4.1, Cleaning Equipment for Oxygen Service, Compressed Gas Association, 
Eighth edition, Arlington, Virginia (1987). 

CGA G-4.4, Industrial Practices for Gaseous Oxygen Transmission and Distribution 
Piping Systems, Compressed Gas Association, Second edition, Arlington, Virginia 
(1984). 

Christianson, R. and J. M. Stoltzfus, "Oxygen Hazards Analysis of Composite Liquid 
Oxygen Tanks," WSTF-IR-93-0024, NASA Johnson Space Center White Sands Test 
Facility, Las Cruces, New Mexico (1993). 

NHB 8060. 1C, "Flammability, Odor, Offgassing, and Compatibility Requirements and 
Test Procedures for Materials in Environments That Support Combustion," NASA Office 
of Safety and Mission Quality (1991). 

NFPA 50, Standard for Bulk Oxygen Systems at Consumer Sites, National Fire Protection 
Association, Quincy, Massachusetts (1990). 

NFPA 53M, Fire Hazards in Oxygen-Enriched Atmospheres: 1990 Edition, National Fire 
Protection Association, Quincy, Massachusetts (1990). 



Appendix 

High-Risk Components 

Many of the typical components found in oxygen systems are particularly susceptible to 
one or more of the 10 possible ignition mechanisms. The following is a list of some of 
these components and the associated ignition mechanisms. 



Ball Valve: 

Relief Valve: 
Globe Valve: 
Butterfly Valve: 
Flex Hose: 
Regulator: 
Check valve: 
Filter: 

Fittings: 

Soft goods: 



Particulate generation (particle impact) and quick-opening (adiabatic 
compression) 

Chattering (mechanical impact orfrictional heating) 

Impingement even when fully open (particle impact) 

Impingement even when fully open (particle impact) 

Susceptible to adiabatic compression when dead-ended 

Mechanical impact and high velocities generated (particle impact) 

Chattering (mechanical impact/frictional heating) 

Pneumatic impact of contaminants on the filter element and possible 
particle impact if poorly located within the system 

Particulate introduced into the system during assembly (particle 
impact) 

Impingement on polymers in gas stream (pneumatic impact, 
mechanical impact, and particle impact) 



Most ignition mechanisms for the above components can be eliminated or minimized by 
proper material selection, system design, and operating constraints. 



