k \ , SPE OGA 

W ^aV?5S?OLOGIES Final Report 




| MARflQKC^ Re v - Basic 

July 1995 



FINAL REPORT 

FOR THE 

SPE® OXYGEN GENERATOR ASSEMBLY (OGA) 

CONTRACT NAS8-38250-23 



BY 



UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORPORATION 

HAMILTON STANDARD DIVISION 

SPACE & SEA SYSTEMS 

WINDSOR LOCKS, CT 06096 




^SW Program Manag 



SPE» - Registered Trademark of United Technologies Corporation, Hamilton 
Standard Division 












X 






: S S 






!»ssjss;s 







:ss-*--=-i i 5» r= - I-lilSSISsii 

■■ si at at at at at at at - £ 35 






s: = ^_ w« — — — — *»»***•««•■» _ ^ a *^ <s 

e» gj X s t *r t •? — *• -• «r — » «. 5s" t t 

»5 5£= IS si || =|g||| 



A-43 



UNITED . ^ Mwm ^ 
TECHNOLOGIES 

KLSfiflOQ.'iJ'tSr 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



FINAL REPORT 
REVISION SUMMARY 



REVISION 



Basic 



PAGE 



All 



DESCRIPTION 



Initial release 



DATE 



7/14/95 



m 




UNITED _„„ n „ A 

TECHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

K^flfflLmK! Pinal Renort 

STO\MBVRj?ifrh r uiai report 



^O&MMHIB) 



Rev. Basic 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Sgcliojl 



Page 

1.0 INTRODUCTION 2 

2.0 BACKGROUND x 

3.0 BASELINE TEST PROGRAM 4 

4.0 SYSTEM REFURBISHMENT 5 

4.1 Hydrogen Phase Separator Refurbishment 5 

4.2 Electrolysis Cell Stack Refurbishment 6 

4.3 Recirculating Water Loop Refurbishment H 

4.4 3-way Solenoid Valve Refurbishment 14 

4.5 Oxygen Phase Separator Refurbishment 15 

4.6 Hydrogen Sense Cell Alarms 15 

4.7 4-way Ball Valve Mechanical Contactor 17 

4.8 Current Control Isolation Board 17 

4.9 Cyclic & Variable Oxygen Generation 18 

4.10 Nitrogen Interface Pressure 19 

4.11 System Description 20 

4.12 System Operation 29 
5.0 SYSTEM TESTING 35 

5.1 Electrolysis Cell Stack Performance 35 

5.2 Recirculating Water Loop Performance 40 

5.3 Hydrogen Phase Separator Performance 56 

5.4 Feed Water Management qq 

5.5 Electronic Test Data 
6.0 FIELD SUPPORT 
7.0 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 69 

APPENDIX A BASELINE TEST PLAN & TEST RESULTS A-1 

APPENDDCB MASTER TEST PLAN & TEST RESULTS B-2 



66 
69 



IV 




UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

HARflDIL'u'QM i>p V Basic 

g ra ^ KE|jaisE) itev. Basic 

LIST OF FIGURES 

Figm *■» 

4.1-1 HYDROGEN PHASE SEPARATOR 7 

4.11-1 SPE OXYGEN GENERATOR ASSEMBLY FLUID 21 

SCHEMATIC 

4.11-2 LIQUID ANODE FEED SPE WATER 22 

ELECTROLYSIS CELL 

4.11-3 OXYGEN PHASE SEPARATOR 24 

4.11-4 NITROGEN-HYDROGEN PRESSURE CONTROL 28 

BANDS 

5.1-1 18-CELL ELECTROLYSIS CELL STACK 37 

PERFORMANCE COMPARISON 

5.1-2 SPE OGA AVERAGE CELL POTENTIAL 38 

5.1-3 SPE OGA OXYGEN PRODUCTION RATE 41 

5.1-4 SPE OGA HYDROGEN PRODUCTION RATE 43 

5.1-5 SPE OGA ELECTROLYSIS CELL STACK 45 

CURRENT 

5.2-1 OXYGEN PHASE SEPARATOR 49 

ASSEMBLY ORIENTATION 

5.2-2 SPE OGA OXYGEN PHASE SEPARATOR 52 

PERFORMANCE 

5.2-3 SPE OGA CELL STACK OUTLET PRESSURE 54 

5.3-1 SPE OGA HYDROGEN PHASE SEPARATOR 57 

PERFORMANCE 

5.3-2 SPE OGA HYDROGEN PUMP VOLTAGE 60 

5.3-3 SPE OGA HYDROGEN PUMP CURRENT 62 

5.3-4 SPE OGA HYDROGEN PRESSURE 64 

5.4-1 SPE OGA FEED WATER MANAGEMENT 67 
PERFORMANCE 



TECHNOLOGIES ^PE ,°5* A 

|^»flOK?^M Final Report 

""^~ " Rev. Basic 



LIST OF TABLES 

Tahk 
4.2-1 1990 LFSPE OXYGEN GENERATION SUBSYSTEM 10 

FEED WATER ANALYSES 
4.11-1 SPE OXYGEN GENERATOR ASSEMBLY 30 

PARTS LIST 



'~> 



VI 




n SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

IKLSJftflDtL'utSM Rev. Basic 

1.0 INTRODUCTION 

The SPE Oxygen Generator Assembly (OGA) has been modified to correct 
operational deficiencies present in the original system, and to effect changes 
to the system hardware and software such that its operating conditions are 
consistent with the latest configuration requirements for the International 
Space Station Alpha (ISSA). The effectiveness of these changes has recently 
been verified through a comprehensive test program which saw the SPE OGA 
operate for over 740 hours at various test conditions, including over 690 
hours, or approximately 460 cycles, simulating the orbit of the space station. 

This report documents the changes made to the SPE OGA, presents and 
discusses the test results from the acceptance test program, and provides 
recommendations for additional development activities pertinent to evolution 
of the SPE OGA to a flight configuration. Copies of the test data from the 
acceptance test program are provided with this report on 3.5" diskettes m 
self-extracting archive files. 

2.0 BACKGROUND 

The SPE OGA, originally designated the LFSPE Oxygen Generation 
Subsystem, was delivered to Boeing Aerospace and NASA/MSFC in 
April 1990 as part of the Space Station Freedom Environmental Control and 
Life Support Systems (ECLSS) Technology Demonstration Program. The 
system was designed to safely and efficiently generate oxygen and hydrogen 
gas using a 12-cell liquid feed SPE water electrolyzer. Two distinct 
generation levels were specified and designed into the system: NORMAL and 
EMERGENCY. With the system in the NORMAL oonfiguration, the oxygen 
generation rate was set for 11.12 lb m /day, and for the EMERGENCY 
configuration, the rate was set for 14.72 ll^day. Oxygen and hydrogen gas 
were maintained at 200 and 160 psia, respectively, using a nitrogen reference 
system operating at a pressure of approximately 230 psia. The oxygen could 
be delivered to either a low pressure storage system or distribution bus, or 
delivered directly to the cabin atmosphere, while the delivery of hydrogen 
could be diverted to either a C0 2 reduction system or a waste gas vent. The 




TECHNOLOGIES ¥? E PJ? A 

— "SyroK) Pinal Report 

»smm Rev. Basic 

system was designed to use product water from the hygiene water processor ~^ 

as feed stock for the electrolysis process. ^-" 

Performance testing of the LFSPE commenced in June 1990 in Building 4755 
at NASA/MSFC. However, due to operational difficulties experienced by the 
system, and due to a reallocation of funding, the LFSPE only accumulated 
approximately 37 hours of test time. A second test program initiated in 
November 1990 saw the system operate for 529 hours: 169 hours with DI 
water; 270 hours with product water from a reverse osmosis system 
processing shower water; and 90 hours with DI water at the conclusion of the 
test program. The system operated for approximately 515 hours at the 
EMERGENCY oxygen generation rate, exhausting product gases at ambient 
pressure. 

During the conduct of the two test programs at NASA/MSFC, the LFSPE 
experienced operational deficiencies that occasionally resulted in improper 
operation of the system and, in some cases, unscheduled test shutdowns. The 
issues identified as either problems or areas for concern were: 

• Water carry-over from the hydrogen phase separator during start-up 
transient conditions 

• Rising cell potentials while operating the system with water from the 
RO water processor 

• Inadequate priming of the recirculation water loop pump 

• Inaccurate flow sensor readings of the recirculating water loop 

• Inadequate heat rejection from the recirculating water loop heat 
exchanger due to higher than expected cell potentials 

• Failure of the three-way solenoid valves which divert the flow of 
generated gas to either a delivery or vent interface 

• Blistering of hydrophobic membrane material in the oxygen phase 
separator, inhibiting gas transport 

• Frequent alarm conditions triggered by the hydrogen sense cell of the 
hydrogen phase separator assembly 

• Failed electrical contactor for the 4-way ball valve, resulting in 
incomplete valve travel 




SPE OGA 
TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

KUaBfltESTOM Rev. Basic 

. Failed current control isolation board, resulting in reduced current to 
the electrolysis module and hence reduced gas output 

During 1994, NASA/MSFC contacted Hamilton Standard to discuss a 
refurbishment program for the LFSPE that would address and correct the 
above listed deficiencies, and would incorporate design changes to fee system 
hardware and software to address the most recent ISSA configuration. 
Specifically, the requirements changes that bore the largest impact on the 
system design were: 

. Generation of oxygen while on the light side of the space station orbit 
. Variable oxygen generation rates (7.4 lb m /day nominal; rate to be 

variable ± 10%) 
. Space station nitrogen interface reduced to 100 psia, maximum 

Hamilton Standard proposed a refurbishment program to ION Electronics in 
April 1994. The goals of the program were to develop an SPE oxygen 
generator assembly that incorporated the design changes necessary to reflect 
the requirements for the ISSA, and to demonstrate flawless performance of 
the system during all aspects of operation. A contract to perform actmties 
pursuant to the stated goals was awarded by ION in May 1994. The major 
elements of the program included: 

• Conduct a baseline test of the as-received system to determine the 
status of key system components 

. Refurbish the system to incorporate design changes necessary to 
correct system deficiencies, and provide variable oxygen generation 
rates and cyclic system operation 

• Test the effectiveness of the design changes 

. Provide field support of the unit once returned to NASA/MSFC 




I TECHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 

3.0 BASELINE TEST PROGRAM 

A baseline test program of the returned LFSPE Oxygen Generation 
Subsystem was completed in September 1994. The objective of the baseline 
test was to note the performance of key system components, in particular the 
electrolysis cell stack, the oxygen and hydrogen phase separator assemblies, 
and the fan/heat exchanger assembly prior to system refurbishment. A copy 
of the master test plan for baseline testing of the unit is included as 
Appendix A. A copy of the test data from the baseline test is also included in 
the referenced appendix. 

The system operated for 56.9 hours in the Process state, with 39 hours at the 
NORMAL rate (11.12 lbm/day oxygen), and 17.9 hours at the EMERGENCY 
rate (14.72 llVday oxygen). In general, the results from the baseline test 
program were comparable to those observed during the last test program 
conducted by NASA/MSFC in December 1990. Specifically: 

• Water carry-over in the hydrogen phase separator was observed 
during start-up transient conditions. The typical volume of water 
observed during start-up was 30 - 50 ml. 

• The recirculating water loop experienced pump priming problems 
during system start-up and shutdown depressurization transient 
conditions. In addition, the recirculating water loop bellows tank 
would occasionally expand to the first shutdown switch once gas 
generation had begun. 

• The average cell potential for the 12-cell electrolysis stack operating 
at a current of 79 amps (Emergency oxygen generation rate) and a 
water exit temperature of 120°F was approximately 1.87-1.88 Vdc for 
both this and the previous test program. In addition, the 
performance of the fan/heat exchanger assembly was satisfactory for 
the duration of this test program as it was for the NASA/MSFC test 
program once testing with product water from the RO water 
processor was discontinued. 

• The hydrogen sense cell alarm triggered a number of times during 
system start-up. Diagnostic testing of the stripper cells and sense 




I UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Renort 

S _^_ j^y g aS1C 

cell circuits revealed that the stripper cell power supply or its control 
circuit occasionally malfunctioned, resulting in the delivery of 
hydrogen-saturated water to the sense cell. A separate power supply 
was installed in the power supply cart for the duration of this test 
program, bypassing the original supply and control circuit. In 
addition, the shutdown associated with high sense cell currents was 
bypassed. 

A number of minor discrepancies were also observed during the conduct of 
the test program, including low water feed rates from the feed pump 
resulting in a system shutdown due to a low level in the recirculation water 
loop bellows accumulator and BITE shutdowns of the process controller while 
changing setpoints. The discrepancies were logged in the test plan for future 
action once the refurbishment activity was underway. 

4.0 SYSTEM REFURBISHMENT 

Refurbishment of the OGA began in September 1994 at the conclusion of the 
baseline test program. The entire system was disassembled to the component 
level, with each item separately bagged to preserve its cleanliness. A 
summary of the refurbishment activities is presented below. A detailed 
description of the refurbished system and a narrative describing system 
operation are included as sections 4.11 and 4.12, respectively. 

4.1 Hydrogen Phase Separator Refurbishment 

The original hydrogen phase separator assembly employed a single 
hydrophilic membrane to effect the bulk fluid separation. However, during 
system start-up, water would become entrained in the gas outlet stream and 
would subsequently be delivered to the downstream hydrogen system. As the 
hydrogen generation pressure increased, the amount of water being carried 
over decreased until no water was present. Since the system achieved full 
production output in only a few minutes, the carry-over was attributed to the 
high gas velocities present in the hydrogen phase separator during this 




I UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Fm«n?*n ft rt 

I STB&KJifgMa® Rev. Basic 

transient condition, resulting in inadequate contact time with the hydrophilic 
membrane. 

The hydrogen phase separator assembly was modified to incorporate dual 
hydrophilic-hydrophobic cavities, and successfully demonstrated proper fluid 
separation at all operating conditions of the revised system. A schematic of 
the refurbished hydrogen phase separator assembly is included as Figure 4.1- 
1. Water is transported across the hydrophilic membranes to the 
electrochemical hydrogen pumps, while the hydrogen gas flows through the 
hydrophobic membranes to the hydrogen pressure control system. A detailed 
description of the operation of this device is included in the System 
Description section of this report. 

4.2 Electrolysis Cell Stack Refurbishment 

During the November 1990 test program at NASA/MSFC, the LFSPE was 
tested for a total of 529 hours. The test was divided into three modules: 

• 169 hour test with DI water 

• 270 hour test with product water from a reverse osmosis system 
processing shower water 

• 90 hour test with DI water 

The first 169 hours of the test program saw a steady average cell potential for 
the 12-cell electrolyzer. However, during the 270 hour test with processed 
hygiene water, the average cell potential rose steadily. Eventually the 
average cell potential exceeded the design point of the heat rejection system 
of the LFSPE, and the recirculating water loop temperature began to increase 
above its 120°F operating point. An additional fan was located in the vicinity 
of the system fan/heat exchanger assembly to provide additional cooling 
capacity. Once the water feed was returned to DI water, the average cell 
potential began to decrease steadily, and continued to decrease for the 
remainder of the 90 hour DI water test. In addition, the recirculating water 
loop returned to its original design operating point of 115-120°F. 



|VgB&tOGIES 

HZ&ftflOtL'uW 




SPE OGA 
Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 




FIGURE 4.1-1 
HYDROGEN PHASE SEPARATOR 




] UNITED 

[TECHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

l^gg Final Report 

Rev. Basic 

At the conclusion of the test program, three theories were proposed to explain 
the increase in the average cell potential: 

i) Relaxation of the cell stack preload, resulting in higher screen to cell 
membrane contact resistance. 

ii) Heavy metal ion contamination of the solid polymer ion exchange 
membrane. 

iii) Organic contamination of the cell anode, resulting in a higher cell 
polarization. 



The first explanation was eliminated from consideration due to the fact the 
cell potentials began to recover during subsequent testing with DI water. 
The second explanation was also considered unlikely since: the water 
analyses of the feed water did not indicate any heavy metal ion 
contamination; the conductivity sensor in the subsystem did not detect any 
breakthrough in the deionizer bed, and; because heavy metal ion 
contamination is essentially irreversible, the cell potentials would not have 
recovered when the feed stock was changed to DI water. The latter 
explanation, organic contamination, was considered the most likely scenario. 
Organic contamination would result in a masking of the anode of the 
electrolysis cell, resulting in increasing cell operating potential as the 
contamination continued to build. The anode catalyst is capable of oxidizing 
smaller organic molecules, resulting in the evolution of C0 2 and H 2 0, but has 
a more difficult time with the larger organic molecules. Eventually, the 
entire anode surface will reach some equilibrium level of contamination. At 
that point, an equilibrium potential will be established, but at a higher level. 
This theory was supported by the fact that, when the feed stock was changed 
back to DI water, the cell potentials began to decrease, indicating oxidation of 
and a decrease in the amount of material on the anode surface of the cells. 



8 




nwiTPn SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

MAfifl01L'ir@M Rev. Basic 

During 1991, an IR&D program was initiated in an attempt to understand 
these test results. Electrolysis cells were challenged with a variety of 
different feed waters: 

i) An ersatz recipe that duplicated the product water from the Space 

Station Freedom hygiene water processor, 
ii) Actual product water from the Space Station Predevelopment 

hygiene water processor, processing shower and laundry water, 
iii) Water solutions containing the maximum concentrations of 

contaminant species from water analyses of the feed water used 

during the 270 hour test program (see Table 4.2-1). 

The test programs with the first two water feeds resulted in stable cell 
operating potentials. However, while testing electrolysis cells with water 
containing ammonia and Igepon TC-42 at the concentration levels listed m 
the table, the cell potential rose at a rate similar to what was observed during 
the 1990 test program. Testing of these cells continued until an equilibrium 
potential was reached. The feed water to these cells was then converted to DI 
water, and the cell potential began to decrease steadily as it had during the 
1990 test program. As a result, it was concluded that the cause for the 
steadily increasing cell potentials observed during the 1990 test program was 
contamination of the feed water with ammonia and Igepon TC-42. The 
TR&D program also indicated that the cells could operate with these 
contaminants present in the feed water, the penalty, however, would be a 
higher, but reversible, cell potential. 

A new 18-cell electrolysis cell stack was built as part of the SPE OGA 
refurbishment program. The number of cells increased to 18 in order for the 
new module operating at ambient temperature to maintain the same overall 
thermal efficiency as a 12-cell stack operating at 120°F. The cell stack was 
assembled using new hardware, including all frames, screen assemblies and 
end plates. Since the feed water for the OGA has been changed from hygiene 
quality water to potable water, it is anticipated that the performance of the 
electrolysis cells should be stable, resulting in essentially flat cell potential 
profiles as was witnessed during the 740 hour test program. 



/UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 




SPE OGA 
Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 



TABLE 4.2-1 

1990 LFSPE OXYGEN GENERATION SUBSYSTEM 

FEED WATER ANALYSES * 



^ 



COMPONENT | rnNrwrp ATTm fPPM1 





Zinc 


.003 


Sodium 


1.33 


Calcium 


.031 


Iron 


.391 


Chromium 


.268 


Cadmium 


.083 


Manganese 


.386 


Potassium 


24.3 


Chloride 


283 


— 


Sulfate 


288 


Fluoride 


9.7 


— 


Nitrate 


.53 


Ethanol 


1.56 




Toluene 


23 


Triiodomethane 


14 




Methanol 


1.19 


Ammonia 


12.9 


Detergent (Igepon TC-42) 


1.18 



Source: Boeing Test Laboratories 

Concentration level represents the highest recorded by the 
Boeing laboratory for the species indicated 



10 




UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

MAIM0IL'5r®M Rev. Basic 

4> 3 fl^ rf-nlating Water Loop Refurbishment 

The recirculating water loop was modified to: correct inadequate pump 
priming at system start-up; correct loss of pump prime during system 
shutdown; incorporate a thermal flow switch to monitor the water flow rate to 
the stack, and; install a liquid-to-liquid heat exchanger to reject waste heat 
from the water electrolysis process. 

4.3.1 Pr™P priming 

The initial configuration of the LFSPE Oxygen Generation Subsystem 
included a deionizing bed and a ten-inch cartridge filter in the recirculating 
water loop, and an in-stack oxygen phase separator assembly. However, 
since the system operated at 200 psia, during system depressunzation the 
amount of oxygen evolved from the water loop nearly exceeded the volume 
expansion capability of the metal bellows accumulator. In order to reduce the 
volume of the water loop, both the deionizer bed and the filter were removed 
and replaced with jumpers. In addition, since the in-stack oxygen phase 
separator had failed during in-process testing at Hamilton Standard, a 
separate unit had to be installed on the outside of the package. Hence, the 
packaging of components in the system was never optimized, resulting in 
pockets of gas trapped in various parts of the recirculating water loop. A 
separate purge routine was implemented to force gas out of the loop to allow 
the pump to prime, but its performance was marginal. 

In order to ensure adequate priming of the pump during all aspects of system 
operation, a number of changes to the recirculating water loop were 
implemented. First, the operating pressure of the loop was reduced from 
200 psia to near ambient in order to reduce the amount of oxygen dissolved in 
the water that would subsequently evolve during a system shutdown. 
Second, the components in the loop were packaged closely together to 
minimize loop volume and eliminate potential gas traps wherever practical. 
And finally, the recirculation water loop metal bellows accumulator was also 
modified to operate with a fixed nitrogen charge such that the pump inlet is 



11 



WGMJM UNITED „„„ _ _ . 

P13 TECHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

iSlSllii) Pinal Report 

m ^ JUi » i » iS) Rev. Basic 

always maintained above ambient pressure. Testing of the refurbished 

system demonstrated correct pump priming even after a loss of power 
shutdown. 



4.3.2 Flow sensing 

A flow sensor is included in the water recirculation loop to ensure power is 
not applied to the cell stack when there is no water flow. The system 
originally incorporated a Teflon turbine flowmeter; however, after 
approximately 100 hours of operation the Teflon bearing failed resulting in 
erratic readings from the sensor. The sensor was returned to the vendor and 
refurbished with a harder bearing and shaft material; however, the sensor 
continued to provide erratic readings. As a result, the flow sensor was 
removed from the system, and a pressure sensor was installed just upstream 
of the electrolysis module. This sensor, in conjunction with a pressure sensor 
already installed downstream of the electrolysis module, was used to 
calculate a pressure drop across the module. The pressure drop data was 
then used to correlate a water flow rate through the module. However, since 
the characteristics of the two-phase flow downstream of the module varied 
with pressure, temperature and gas generation rate, the measurement was 
somewhat crude and inaccurate. 

In order to improve the reliability of the recirculating water flow 
measurement, a thermal flow switch was installed upstream of the 
electrolysis module. The flow switch determines whether a fluid is flowing at 
the preset rate by sensing the temperature difference between two precision 
resistors mounted within the housing of the flow monitor. One resistor is 
located in the sensor tip, closest to the flowing fluid and heated to a 
temperature that is a few degrees higher than the temperature of the fluid. 
The second resistor is located such that it is affected only by the temperature 
of the fluid. Cooling of the heated resistor is a function of how fast heat is 
conducted away by the flowing medium. Therefore, the difference in 
temperature between the two resistors provides a measurement of fluid 
velocity past the sensor probe. 



12 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



The controller for the How sensor is located inside the Electrical Interface Bo, 
S^L. is mounted to the side of the system package. *"- ™ 
L controller allow the user to adjust the setpoint over a w.de range o tod 
velocities. For the refurbished OOA. ^^^T^l 
rate of approximately 30% of normal, or 0.2 GPM, for a penoa 
would trigger an automatic shutdown of the system and provide a low flow 
„.7„ the use- The flow switch performance was satisfactory 
message to the use.. iue -.w« r ^--i,™™* Tbe 

throughout the 743 hour test program following system refurmshment. The 
tas of recirculating water flow events recorded by the flow sw>tch dunng the 
test plTgl. w^not sensor related, but were in fact the result of reduced 
£3L caused by 1-g gas traps present in the system hardware (see 

section 5.2). 

4.3.3 T.i T iid-t.o-liq "^ *"> at prchanger 

With the oxygen operating pressure reduced to near-ambient «***£■£ 
oxygen/water mixture leaving the cell stack must be cooled to at or below 
amb^t temperature to assure that moisture condensation does not o«ur m 
the oxygen delivery plumbing. Heat rejection in the ongmal system was 
%£Z by an ambient air cooled heat exchanger in the recirculate* water 
Lp located upstream of the cell stack where there was no undissolved 
o^en flowing In order to cool the recirculating water loop at ,ms location 
Xretobished system, a heat sink much lower than the ambient, „ 
temperature must be used. This would also require that the cell stack 
operate at very low temperatures, reducing its efficiency or making it 
necessary to add more cells. 

The refurbished system employs a liquid-to-liquid heat exchanger located 
downstream of the cell stack where there is a mixture of gaseous oxygen and 
gating water. The heat exchanger uses the 65°F vehicle »** oop a 
the heat sink to reduce the delivered oxygen temperature to less than TOP at 
the maximum electrolysis rate during light side operation and witt all 18 
decisis cells operating at their maximum potential of 2.5 Vfc The new 
heat exchanger capacity is in excess of 800 watts, almost 3 times the capaaty 
of the original air-cooled heat exchanger assembly. At a coolant flow rate of 



13 




UNITED 

LIMNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

IMBHM Pinal Report 

Rev. Basic 

500 lWhr, the pressure drop on the shell side of the heat exchanger is less 
than 1 psid. Performance of the heat exchanger through the duration of the 
743 hour test program was satisfactory, with no condensation observed in the 
oxygen delivery line. 

4A 3-wav Solenoid v fl lv» fefiaJbighingDj 

The original system employed 3-way solenoid valves at the oxygen and 
hydrogen outlets to divert the flow of gas to either a storage system or vent 
interface. However, during testing at Hamilton Standard and NASA/MSFC 
these valves failed due to overheated coils. When the solenoids were' 
originally specified by the valve supplier, he neglected to inform the solenoid 
supplier that the coils would be enclosed in a stainless steel housing. As a 
result, the coils operated at a much higher temperature than their design 
point and eventually burned out. 

The valve supplier replaced the burned coils and provided a driver circuit for 
each of the valves to prevent overheating of the solenoid coils. The driver 
circuit allows full power to the solenoid for .375 to .750 seconds upon initial 
application of voltage at the input terminals. The voltage then automatically 
drops to approximately 50% of full voltage, resulting in a hold-in current of 
approximately 25% power until the input voltage is removed. Voltage (and 
consequently power) reduction is achieved by pulse width modulating the 
input signal. The driver circuit includes a full wave rectifier, AC line voltage 
transient protection, and solenoid transient suppression. With the 
refurbished system, only one valve is required, that being at the hydrogen 
outlet. The 3-way valve allows the user to divert hydrogen flow to a 
downstream C0 2 reduction system in the event the OGA is included in an air 
revitalization integrated test program, or to a laboratory vent where the 
nitrogen purge gas at system start-up and shutdown is also vented. During 
the recently completed test program at Hamilton Standard, the refurbished 
valve and driver circuit operated for approximately 600 hours without failure 
whereas the valve without a driver circuit typically failed after 50-100 hours' 
of operation. 



14 




UNITED SPE 0GA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

H^RflOQ.'irOM Rev Basic 

4.5 DvygrPTi Pha se Separator Refurbishment 

During in-process testing of the original Technology Demonstration Oxygen 
Generation Subsystem, the oxygen phase separator assembled as part of the 
electrolysis cell stack experienced a failure due to an inability to transport 
gas across the hydrophobic membrane. The results of a separate test 
program of hydrophobic membranes indicated that the material was 
susceptible to blistering under certain conditions. Once formed, the blisters 
hindered the transport of gas across the membrane. It was theorized and 
later confirmed by test that water vapor condensing within the microporous 
structure of the membrane caused the blisters to be formed. In order to 
alleviate this problem, the oxygen phase separator was redesigned so that the 
gas side of the hydrophobic membrane was kept warmer relative to the two- 
phase side, thereby preventing condensation. Rather than disassembling the 
failed oxygen phase separator from the cell stack-manifold assembly, an 
external phase separator was built and installed into the unit, with the failed 
unit bypassed with additional plumbing. 

During refurbishment of the OGA, both the external and the original in-stack 
oxygen phase separator were disassembled. As originally suspected, the in- 
stack phase separator, which had used what was later determined to be 
blister-prone "S" material, had evidence of blistering over approximately 50% 
of its surface. The external phase separator, which used the less susceptible 
"X" material coupled with favorable differential temperature characteristics, 
exhibited no signs of blistering. As a result, the phase separator hardware 
was rinsed with clean DI water and reassembled with new hydrophilic 
membranes. The hydrophobic membrane from the external phase separator 
assembly was also rinsed with clean DI water and returned to the assembly. 
Performance of the oxygen phase separator assembly was satisfactory during 
all aspects of system operation, including transitioning from standby to full 
production back to standby. 



15 




I TECHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

Final Report 
Rev. Basic 

4.6 Hydrogen Sense Cell Alarms 

During the 529 hour test program at NASA/MSFC and subsequent baseline 
testing at H amil ton Standard, the hydrogen sense cell triggered numerous 
shutdowns due to high cell currents. Two causes for the shutdowns were 
identified: 

1) A malfunctioning power supply and/or control circuit for the four 
stripper cells 

2) Formation of a hydrogen bubble in the water outlet header of the 
separator assembly and subsequent migration of this bubble to the 
sense cell compartment 

In the first case, if the four stripper cells failed to charge properly, then 
hydrogen-saturated water would be delivered to the sense cell, triggering an 
alarm condition. This condition appeared to occur on a number of occasions 
when it seemed the power supply was unable to adequately charge the four 
stripper cells. It was later determined that the circuit controlling the 
charging rate for the stripper cells had malfunctioned. The circuit was 
repaired, and correct operation of the power supply, control circuit and 
hydrogen pump cells was subsequently demonstrated as part of this 
refurbishment effort. 

The second case, that of bubble migration, occurred on several occasions 
when the four stripper cells appeared to be operating within normal 
parameters. However, this became a nonissue when, after completing a 
revision to the Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) it was determined 
that sufficient fault detection had already been incorporated into the system 
and therefore a sense cell was not required in the assembly. During the 
refurbishment of the hydrogen phase separator, the sense cell was removed 
from the assembly. 



16 




„_.__ SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

KLaftflDO.'utSM Rev. Basic 

4.7 A-^pv Ball V «1vp Mechanical Contactor, 

Early in the test program at NASA/MSFC the LFSPE experienced a number 
of shutdowns associated with improper hydrogen phase separator 
performance and improper feed water bellows fill rates. After performing a 
number of diagnostic tests it was determined that the mechanical contactor 
driving the 4-way ball valve had been seriously pitted due to current levels 
higher than the rating of the contacts. The contactor was subsequently 
replaced with a unit having contacts rated at 6 amps, the in-rush current 
rating of the valve. The valve performance was satisfactory throughout the 
remainder of the test program. 

Since the contactor rating was identical to the valve in-rush current, 
additional margin on the contact rating was required to prevent a 
reoccurrence of the previous failure. A contactor with a 10 amps rating was 
installed and performed satisfactorily throughout the 743 hour test program. 

4.8 Current Control Isolati on Board 

The current control isolation board failed to provide the correct signal to the 
electrolysis power supplies while the system was set at the EMERGENCY 
oxygen production level during the NASA/MSFC test program. As a result, 
the board had to be modified during the test program to include a 
potentiostat to fine tune the current level to the electrolysis cell stack. In 
addition, it was believed that the current control signal may have been 
drifting due to thermal variations within the power supply cabinet. However 
diagnostic testing of the circuit at the conclusion of the test program revealed 
that the board had been assembled incorrectly and was therefore clamping 
the control signal to a value lower than what was required to command the 
power supplies at the EMERGENCY generation level. The error in the 
control isolation board was corrected and the board reinstalled into the power 
supply cabinet. The board functioned properly during the recently completed 
test program. 



17 




UNITED 

TECHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

MAfifflOD.'U^ftO Final P onn ^ 

gmmtmt) I" 1 * 1 Ke P° rt 

Rev. Basic 

4 - 9 Cvdic & Variable Oyvgrpn, Generating 

Changes to the requirements for the OGA for the ISSA dictate that operation 
of the unit be limited to the daylight side of the orbit only and that the oxygen 
production rate be variable. Hamilton Standard revised the control software 
to allow the user to input light side/dark side time duration along with the 
total oxygen production requirement on a per day basis. The inputs to the 
control software can be made via the Modify/View Operation screen available 
on the Command and Display Unit (CDU) or host system via the RS-232 port 
and are described in detail in the Operations Manual. Based on these inputs 
the system software calculates the oxygen generation rate required during 
the system "on" times. During dark side operation, the system software 
reduces the current to the module to a trickle value of 1 amp, sufficient to 
maintain a charge on the electrolysis cells. The recirculating water pump, 
feed water management and system instrumentation remain active during 
this standby period. Full production resumes at the conclusion of the dark 
period. 

The SPE OGA control software allows the user to select a daily oxygen 
production rate of 6.66 to 8.14 lb m /day (7.40 lb m /day ± 10%), LIGHT side 
duration of 50 - 60 minutes, and DARK side duration of 40 - 30 minutes 
When transitioning from LIGHT to DARK, the current level to the 
electrolysis cell stack instantaneously drops from its generation level to the 
standby level of 1 amp. Once the duration of the DARK side has expired, the 
current to the electrolysis module begins to ramp up, increasing 5 amps every 
5 seconds until the required current for the requested production level is 
attained. Typically, the time to reach full output is on the order of 40 
seconds. The ramping rate is limited to the performance of the differential 
back pressure regulator controlling the hydrogen phase separator. Increasing 
the current ramping rate resulted in excessive differential pressures across 
the hydrophilic membranes in the phase separator. The high differential 
pressures can be attributed to the fact that, while the hydrogen pressure 
which provides the reference to the regulator returns to its fall production 
level in the manner of a few seconds, the water pressure typically lags 
thereby causing the high differential pressure. If faster ramping rates are 



18 




UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

§TK\ME>^© Kev - Basic 

required for the space station, the regulator can be replaced with a unit 
offering a faster response, the water volume on the hydrogen phase separator 
can he reduced, or a combination of both can be implemented. 

During the acceptance test program, the SPE OGA was operated at the 
tninimnm , nominal, and maximum daily oxygen production schedule and at 
various LIGHT/DARK configurations. Gas production rates were verified 
with a wet test meter. Detailed test results are included in the Master Test 
Plan included in Appendix B of this report. 

4.10 Nitroprpn Inte rfere Pressure 

The original oxygen generation subsystem was designed to safely generate 
oxygen at pressures up to 200 psia and hydrogen at pressures up to 160 psia. 
Careful control of the generated gas pressures was maintained by a nitrogen 
reference system operating approximately 20-30 psid above oxygen pressure 
such that a pressure hierarchy of nitrogen over oxygen over hydrogen was 
always maintained. With the electrolysis module operating at a maximum 
temperature of 120°F, expanding the product gases to the pressure levels 
originally specified for Space Station Freedom provided oxygen and hydrogen 
at their required dew points. However, with the reduction of the nitrogen 
interface to 100 psia maximum, the hardware and software for the pressure 
control system had to be modified to reflect lower operating pressures. 

The system hardware was modified to generate oxygen at near ambient 
pressure for delivery directly to the crew cabin of the space station. Humidity 
control of the oxygen is attained by incorporating a liquid-to-liquid heat 
exchanger immediately upstream of the oxygen- water phase separator, and 
the drop in gas pressure when exhausting oxygen from the phase separator to 
the cabin. The heat exchanger was sized to operate from the vehicle 65°F 
coolant loop. The nitrogen serves as a purge gas for the hydrogen circuit 
during start-up and shutdown transients, and as a reference system 
controlling hydrogen pressure to 25 psig minimum , Operating the cell stack 
at near ambient temperature, coupled with the slightly elevated operating 
pressure, maintains the hydrogen free of any condensate. 



19 




J UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES rf i^T _. 

I M^{MT@K] Final Report 

~-W3ki°) Rev. Basic 

The system software was extensively modified to incorporate lower pressure 
operation. Reference pressure measurements between nitrogen and oxygen 
were eliminated, and those between nitrogen and hydrogen were replaced 
with direct pressure readings. In addition, the redundancy required for 
nitrogen control of the oxygen system was eliminated with the drop in oxygen 
pressure to ambient. Control setpoints for nitrogen, as well as shutdown 
levels associated with fluid over and under pressure, were revised to reflect 
the decrease in nitrogen pressure. The hardware and software revisions to 
the nitrogen reference system performed satisfactorily during the conduct of 
the acceptance test program, demonstrating the capability of the refurbished 
SPE OGA to operate from the 100 psia ISSA nitrogen interface. 

4.11 System Description 

The refurbished SPE Oxygen Generator Assembly has been designed to 
safely produce oxygen and hydrogen gas from the electrolysis of water. The 
oxygen gas is generated and delivered at ambient pressure directly to the 
environment, while the hydrogen is generated at slightly elevated pressure 
for possible delivery to a CO2 reduction system. A schematic of the fluid 
system is presented in Figure 4.11-1. The SPE OGA includes all valves, 
regulators, sensors and other controls for safe operation of the system. 

The cell stack is a liquid anode feed water electrolyzer consisting of 18 SPE 
water electrolysis cells assembled in a bipolar arrangement between two 
compression end plates. A simplified schematic of a liquid anode feed cell is 
depicted in Figure 4.11-2. In the electrolysis process, liquid water is fed to 
the anode, or oxygen compartment, where it is electrolyzed to produce 
gaseous oxygen, hydrogen ions, and electrons. The hydrogen ions, or protons, 
are transported across the ion exchange membrane and the electrons travel 
through the external electrical circuit to the cathode. These protons are fully 
hydrated and deliver water to the cathode side of the membrane. The 
electrons combine with the protons to form gaseous hydrogen at the cathode. 
Excess water is pumped through the anode compartment to remove heat 
generated by the electrolysis process. 



20 




UNITED 
TECHNOL 

KlAftflOiWo 



J - £ 

1 H 5- + ' 



iiiB u. 2 

«§ Is f' 

n i« ^ 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



§1 t 



i ; 



» e E i 2 B £ 

II III 



2 3 

11 i I i i 8 8 

1BBBOSOO 



*s 



ft X o II ll ii 

5 I ii ii « 8 * 




'Ess 




FIGURE 4.11-1 

SPE OXYGEN GENERATOR ASSEMBLY 

FLUID SCHEMATIC 



21 



UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 

MAftflBURBT 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



Solid polymer electrolyte 



Hydrogen electrode 
(cathode) 



Hydrogen 



Protonic 
Water 



4H+4e 



Oxygen electrode 
(anode) 

Oxygen 




Process 
Water, heat 



4H + +4e+02 



Process 
Water 



DC Power 



FIGURE 4.11-2 

LIQUID ANODE FEED 

SPE WATER ELECTROLYSIS CELL 



22 




utirrro SPE 0GA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

MARfflOtL'u'QK) Rev. Basic 

Oxygen and hydrogen are generated at a stoichiometric ratio and at a rate 
proportional to the cell current. In order to satisfy the nominal daxly oxygen 
requirement of 7.4 lb m /day with a light side/dark side duty cycle of 
53 minutes on/37 minutes off, the SPE OGA will generate oxygen at an 
instantaneous rate of 12.57 Wday. Control of the daily oxygen production 
requirement, as well as the light side/dark side duty cycle, resides m the 
system controller and can be accessed through the Modify/View Operation 
screen of the Command & Display Unit. Additional control is also afforded to 
the host computer via the RS-232 data bus as denned in the Operations 
Manual. 

The oxygen-water stream exiting the electrolysis cell stack enters a shell and 
tube liquid-to-liquid heat exchanger (Item 554A) to reject waste heat from the 
electrolysis reaction and to reduce the dew point of the oxygen gas The : heat 
exchanger is designed to operate using 65°F water at a flow rate of 500 lb^hr 
as the coolant. Temperature sensors located at the inlet (Items 736-1 and 
736-2) and exit (Items 762-1 and 762-2) of the heat exchanger monitor its 
performance. 

The two-phase stream enters the oxygen/water phase separator (Item 907) to 
deliver water free oxygen to the oxygen delivery system while oxygen free 
water is returned to the water recirculation loop. Figure 4.11-3 depicts the 
components of the oxygen/water phase separator. The two-phase mixture is 
separated in two stages: in the first stage are located six hydroplane 
membranes that allow water to wick through but, because of their high 
bubble point, the membranes will not allow gas to flow through. The fluid 
exiting the two-phase cavity is mostly gas with a small amount of water 
carry-over The fluid is directed to the second stage, or "polishing" section of 
the separator. The polishing section contains a hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
membrane, where the remaining water is returned to the water recirculation 
loop The oxygen gas is delivered to the oxygen delivery system through the 
hydrophobic membrane. Because the hydrophobic membrane has a high 
water intrusion pressure (an attribute similar to the bubble point of a 
hydrophilic membrane), the oxygen gas is delivered free of any liquid water. 
A differential pressure sensor (Item 709) monitors the performance of the 



23 



[UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



SPE OGA 
Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 




IX. 

a 

< 

U 
I -3 



X 

o 



FIGURE 4.11-3 
OXYGEN PHASE SEPARATOR 



24 



[UNITED SPEOGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

toRflD^7@M Rev. Basic 




raAisE) 



hydrophilic elements of the phase separator, and initiates a shutdown should 
the pressure drop exceed a specified value (typically, less than half of the 
membrane bubble point). The operating pressure of the water recirculation 
loop is lower than the water intrusion pressure of the hydrophobic membrane 
under all operating conditions. Water exiting the oxygen-water phase 
separator is returned to the electrolysis cell stack by a gear pump driven by a 
brushless DC motor (Item 463). Water flow to the module is monitored by a 
flow switch (Item 745) located immediately upstream of the cell stack. The 
flow switch will remove current to the module and initiate a system shutdown 
should the water recirculation rate drop below a predetermined value. 

A metal bellows accumulator (Item 606) which serves as a feed tank for the 
electrolysis cell stack and an expansion volume for the water recirculation 
loop during the system start-up transient is located immediately downstream 
of the oxygen-water phase separator. As a feed tank, the metal bellows 
stroke is minimal, operating between approximately 10 and 15 cubic inches of 
volume. When the level in the tank falls below 10 cubic inches, the feed 
pump (Item 464) is activated until the tank attains a level of approximately 
15 cubic inches at which point the feed pump is turned off. As an expansion 
volume, again the stroke of the bellows is minimal, with typical expansion 
values of 10 cubic inches of less. When the system is started the water 
recirculation loop is devoid of all gas. However, as power is applied to the 
electrolysis cell stack, the oxygen gas bubbles generated within the cell 
cavities cause an expansion in the volume of the loop, resulting in an 
expansion of the bellows tank. The bellows tank expansion continues until 
the gas bubbles reach the oxygen phase separator, at which point the bellows 
begins to recollapse to its normal operating range. 

The oxygen gas produced in the SPE electrolyzer is free of hydrogen, with 
purities of 99.5% or greater typically measured. Since the SPE OGA has been 
designed to operate with hydrogen pressure always greater than oxygen 
pressure, redundant combustible gas sensors (Items 746-3 and 746-4) located 
at the oxygen outlet interface constantly monitor the oxygen for hydrogen and 
initiate a shutdown should the hydrogen level in the oxygen exceed 50% of 
the lower explosive limit (LED. A pressure sensor (Item 7061) initiates a 



25 




TECHNOLOGIES £PE PJf^ 

]K&smsrmi Final Report 

ls ^ aK1E ^® Rev. Basic 

shutdown should an obstruction occur in the delivery line, and a relief valve 
(Item 126A) provides redundancy in the event of a failed pressure sensor. 

The hydrogen- water exiting the cell stack is mostly hydrogen gas by volume 
with a small amount of liquid water present from protonic pumping in the ion 
exchange membrane. The hydrogen/water phase separator contains two 
cavities, each containing a hydrophilic and hydrophobic membrane, and is 
similar in design and operation to the polishing section of the oxygen/water 
phase separator. Figure 4.1-1 depicts the design of the hydrogen/water phase 
separator. The hydrogen gas passes through the hydrophobic membrane to 
the hydrogen valve manifold containing the pressure control system, and the 
water is delivered to the "stripper" section of the phase separator. The 
stripper section contains four electrochemical hydrogen pumps that remove 
dissolved hydrogen from the water before it is returned to the water 
recirculation loop. The electrochemical hydrogen pump uses an SPE 
membrane and electrode assembly similar to the electrolysis membrane and 
electrode assembly. The degassed water is subsequently delivered to one of 
two metal bellows accumulators (Items 605-1 and 605-2) after dropping in 
pressure through a negative bias back pressure regulator referenced to 
hydrogen (Item 130). A differential pressure sensor (Item 708) monitors the 
performance of the hydrophilic element of the phase separator and performs a 
similar function to its oxygen phase separator counterpart In addition, the 
performance of the electrochemical hydrogen pumps is monitored by 
individual voltage and current sensors and initiate a shutdown of the system 
should the values for these parameters fall outside predetermined limits. 

As stated previously, the water exiting from the separator is stored in one of 
two metal bellows accumulators (Items 605-1 and 605-2). Two tanks, in 
conjunction with the four-way ball valve (Item 003), are provided for fault 
isolation in the event of a failure of the hydrogen phase separator that is 
undetected by either the differential pressure sensor or the stripper cell 
voltage and current monitors. While water is being fed to one tank from the 
phase separator the second tank is providing water, as required, to the water 
recirculation loop via the feed water pump (Item 464). Employing two tanks 
in this manner ensures that hydrogen gas is not introduced into the system 



26 




UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

MfiML'OtaM] Rev. Basic 

anode loop, where it would subsequently flow into the oxygen delivery 
system. As an additional back-up, redundant combustible gas sensors in the 
delivery system would detect hydrogen carry-over into the anode loop and 
initiate a system shutdown. 

Hydrogen pressure control is maintained by a differential back pressure 
regulator referenced to nitrogen. Figure 4.11-4 shows the differential 
pressure control band. The primary hydrogen regulator (Item 120) maintains 
hydrogen operating pressure 25 psid below nitrogen. Hydrogen pressure 
control is monitored by a pressure sensor (Item 749); shutdown of the 
SPE OGA will occur if hydrogen pressure drifts above or below the normal 
band of the primary regulator. Mechanical backup for both high and low 
differential pressure is provided by the redundant differential back pressure 
regulator (Item 127) and relief valve (Item 125), respectively. If the primary 
regulator fails closed and either the hydrogen pressure sensor or controller 
fails to detect it, the redundant back pressure regulator will open to ensure 
nitrogen pressure is maintained above hydrogen. Conversely, should the 
primary regulator fail open and either the system instrumentation or 
controller fails to detect it, the nitrogen-hydrogen relief valve opens to 
introduce nitrogen into the hydrogen circuit to ensure hydrogen pressure is 
always maintained above oxygen pressure. A three-way solenoid valve (Item 
005) at the regulator outlet directs flow to either the hydrogen outlet 
interface during normal processing, or to the vent interface during shutdown 
of the system. 

As mentioned previously, nitrogen is used as a reference pressure for the 
hydrogen pressure control system. The nitrogen is also used as a purge gas 
during start-up and shutdown transient conditions: during start-up, the 
nitrogen purges any air from the hydrogen lines and, during shutdown, it 
purges hydrogen from the same lines. Nitrogen is introduced from the 
facility through a normally closed solenoid valve (Item 051A). A pressure 
sensor (Item 7062) monitors the nitrogen pressure and controls the operation 
of the solenoid valve. A nitrogen accumulator provides sufficient purge 
volume to safely and effectively purge the hydrogen circuit during start-up 
and shutdown. Purging of the hydrogen circuit is accomplished by removing 



27 



'UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 




SPEOGA 

Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



UJ 

O 

I- 



O 

LU 

> 

< 

-I 

UJ 



CO 

Q. 



10 _ 



20 _ 



30 _ 



40 _ 



50 _ 



60 J 



REDUNDANT H2 
REGULATOR 




LOW N2-H2 
SHUTDOWN 



HIGH N2-H2 
SHUTDOWN 



ASSUMPTION: PRESSURE SENSOR ACCURACY OF ±5% FSO 



FIGURE 4.11-4 

NITROGEN-HYDROGEN 

PRESSURE CONTROL BANDS 



28 




..urrcn SPE 0GA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

MARflD(L'ir®M Rev. Basic 

power to the normally open solenoid valve (Item 053) located between the 
hydrogen and nitrogen circuit. 

Feed water is provided to the SPE OGA from the facility through a normally 
closed solenoid valve (Item 081-1). Operation of this valve is controlled by the 
water level in the two feed water metal bellows accumulators (Items 605-1 
and 605-2) and the position of the four-way ball valve between the two tanks 
(Item 003). The feed water is polished with a deionizer bed (Item 295) to 
ensure the water is free of any ionic contamination (cation and anion) that 
would be detrimental to cell life. A conductivity sensor (Item 755) located 
immediately downstream of the deionizer bed monitors water quality and 
performance of the deionizer bed and initiates a shutdown should the water 
conductivity exceed a specified value. 

A listing of the parts used in the SPE Oxygen Generator Assembly processing 
package is included as Table 4.11-1. 

4.12 System Op eration 

The SPE OGA is designed to accept control commands via the CDU or other 
suitable device. The operating modes available for the system ^indude 
IMMEDIATE SHUTDOWN, OFF, ON, STANDBY, and MANUAL. 
Additional information concerning these modes of operation is provided in the 
Operations Manual. 

Prior to starting the unit, the user should enter the oxygen Production 
requirement and the LIGHT/DARK side duty cycle from the Modify/View 
Operation screen. If the OGA is to be operated in a cyclic manner then the 
user must also select PERIODIC oxygen delivery from the Assembly 
Configuration screen. Once these tasks are completed, the user can then 
access the Mode Select screen and select the ON mode. The system will then 
transition to the ON mode PURGE state. The water redrcmaUon pump 
(Item 463) is turned on, the nitrogen inlet solenoid valve (Item 051A) is 
opened and power is applied to the electrochemical hydrogen pumps in the 
hydrogen-water phase separator. 



29 



J UNITED 

I TECHNOLOGIES 




SPE OGA 

Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



TABLE 4.11-1 

SPE OXYGEN GENERATOR ASSEMBLY 

PARTS LIST 




30 




V^flVoGIES 

GflAMOtL'O'OK] 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



TABLE 4.11-1 

SPE OXYGEN GENERATOR ASSEMBLY 

PARTS LIST 




31 




UNITED 



SPE OGA 
Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 



TABLE 4.11-1 

SPE OXYGEN GENERATOR ASSEMBLY 

PARTS LIST 



ITEM 
NUMBER 


ITEM 
DESCRIPTION 


HSD 

PART 

NUMBER 


VENDOR 


VENDOR 
PART NUMBER 


755 


Conductivity sensor 


SVSK118458-1 


Sensor 
Development 


CS1042-0.1-HS-SAE-HP 


762-1 


Temperature sensor 


SVSK111142-3 


RdP 


21628 


762-2 


Temperature sensor 


SVSK111142-3 


RdP 


21628 


812A 


Plow restrictor 


None 


Lee Co. 


VDLA4326565H 


906 


Electrolysis module 


SVSK116112-1 


HSD 


SVSK116112-1 


907 


Oxygen phase separator 


SVSK116112- 
101 


HSD 


SVSK116112-101 


908 


Hydrogen phase separator 


SVSK116112- 
102 J 


HSD 


SVSK116112-102 



32 




UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

smMEdais© Kev - Basic 

After successfully completing a purge of the hydrogen circuit, the nitrogen 
purge valve, Item 053, is energized closed and the nitrogen reference system 
begins to pressurize. Once the nitrogen pressure reaches 50 psia, the system 
will transition from the PURGE state to the PROCESS-VENT state, where 
current to the electrolysis cell stack is ramped to approximately 26 amps, the 
current level required to produce oxygen on a continuous basis at the rate of 
7.4 lbm/day. Oxygen gas will be delivered to the oxygen outlet interface, 
while a mixture of nitrogen and hydrogen will be delivered to the hydrogen 
vent interface. At this time the bellows control laws are active; should the 
water level in the water recirculation loop metal bellows accumulator fall 
below a predetermined value, the feed pump (Item 464) will be energized to 
draw water from either of the two feed water bellows tanks. Feed water from 
the facility is introduced whenever the level in the feed tank falls below a 
preset level and the four-way ball valve is in a particular position. Detailed 
information regarding the operation of the metals bellows accumulators and 
associated hardware is available in the Process Controller Software 
Requirements Specification. 

Once the hydrogen circuit has been sufficiently purged of nitrogen, the 
system enters the PROCESS state. Once in the PROCESS state, the current 
to the electrolysis cell stack is set to a level based on the user inputs for 
oxygen production and LIGHT/DARK side requirements. In addition, the 
three-way solenoid valve (Item 005) switches the flow of hydrogen from the 
vent interface to the outlet interface provided the user has selected 
REDUCTION for hydrogen delivery (refer to the Operations Manual). The 
system will remain in the PROCESS state until either the user changes 
modes, or a system fault is detected. If PERIODIC oxygen delivery was 
selected, the current to the electrolysis cell stack is reduced to a trickle value 
of 1 amp once the LIGHT side of the simulated orbit has been completed. The 
current remains at 1 amp for the duration of the DARK side, and is 
sufficiently high enough to maintain polarization of the electrolysis cells and 
to prevent decay in the hydrogen pressure. During the DARK side, the water 
recirculation pump remains on, the bellows level control laws remain active, 
and all system instrumentation continues to monitor system health. Once 
the DARK side of the simulated orbit has been completed, the preset current 



33 




UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES ST i\T^ -*. 

KU^kWs&l Final Report 

STC&KlflfiKI® Rev. Basic 

level is restored to the electrolysis cell stack and full oxygen production 
returns. 



If the user had selected the STANDBY mode instead of the ON mode, the 
SPE OGA would transition at the end of the PROCESS-VENT state to the 
HOLD state rather than to the PROCESS state. The HOLD state places the 
OGA in a configuration identical to that of the DARK side of the simulated 
orbit; however, the system will remain in this state until either the user 
changes modes or a system fault is detected. 

Termination of the test can be accomplished during operation in any mode or 
state within a mode by selecting either the IMMEDIATE SHUTDOWN mode 
or the OFF mode. If the OFF mode is selected, the system transitions to the 
RECD3C state. In the RECIRC state, power to all actuated components 
within the system is removed with the exception of the recirculating water 
pump. The pump remains on for an additional two minutes to purge the 
recirculation loop of oxygen. With power removed from the remainder of the 
actuated components, a nitrogen purge and corresponding depressurization of 
the hydrogen circuit occurs. The IMMEDIATE SHUTDOWN mode removes 
power to all actuated components, including the recirculating water pump, 
and should therefore be used only in the event of an emergency shutdown. 

A nitrogen purge and subsequent depressurization of the hydrogen circuit is 
accomplished once power is removed from the purge valve, Item 053. Should 
the purge valve fail to open during the shutdown, the emergency 
depressurization valve (Item 051) is opened and, when the nitrogen-hydrogen 
differential pressure exceeds 45 psid, the nitrogen-hydrogen relief valve 
(Item 125) opens to purge and safely depressurize the hydrogen circuit. 



34 




SPEOGA 
VgSSoLOOIES Final Report 

H&ftfaoQ.TTOK) Rev. Basic 

5.0 SYSTEM TESTING 

The refurbished SPE Oxygen Generator Assembly was subjected to an 
acceptance test program as denned in the Master Test Plan centred in 
Appendix B. The purpose of the acceptance test program was to verify the 
effectiveness of the refurbishment by demonstrating elimination of 
operational deficiencies present in the original system, and operation of the 
system at various oxygen generation rates and in a cychcal manner. After 
successfully completing a thorough check-out test, including proof pressure 
and leakage testing, anomaly verification testing and mode/state transition 
testing the unit operated for 743 hours, including 693 hours m the cyclic 
mode of operation. With a simulated orbit of 90 minutes, the system 
completed approximately 460 cycles of light side/dark side operation. Power 
requirements of the different components in the system were recorded m 
Appendix A of the test plan, and flow measurements at different operating 
conditions were made and recorded in Appendix B of the test plan The gas 
quality of the product gases was also determined through standard laboratory 
analytical techniques, with the results indicating no cross contamination of 
one gas with the other at the detection level of the instrument (see 
Appendix C of the test plan). Specific test results and findings are detailed in 
the following sections. 

5.1 CT. ^rnlvsis C -" gt "-k P"-f™-mance 

The electrolysis module, consisting of 18 SPE electrolysis cells, was 
assembled and successfully completed its check-out tests in January 1995. 
The module was then placed in a separate test rig to conduct performance 
testing as defined in the test plan. However, the average cell potential for the 
module at 90°F was 1.884 Vdc, over 100 mV higher than expected. Chenucd 
analyses of the effluent from the module, in conjunction with other analytical 
techniques, revealed that the stack had been contaminated w,th a sodium 
salt from the test rig. The contamination of the rig likely occurred while 
moving the rig from the test facility in Building 20B to the new facility m 
Building 2. A decision was made to disassemble the module and replace the 
membrane and electrode assemblies. The cell mechanical hardware, as well 



35 




UNITED 

J^n^LOCIES SPE OGA 






g Final Report 

Rev. Basic 



as the test rig, were cleaned and subjected to numerous rinses with fresh DI 
water In addition, a single cell was assembled and placed on test to verify 
the cleanhness of the test rig. A new module was assembled and 
subsequently placad on test. The average cell potential was 1.751 Vdc for the 
100+ hour run, approximately 130 mV better than the initial build. Figure 
5.1-1 displays the average cell potential for electrolysis module build-up #1 

Performance of the 18-cell stack operating in complete SPE OGA is 
presented in Figure 5.1-2 as average cell potential versus OGA operating 
tune. Average cell potential is approximately 1.80 Vdc for the first 50 houre 
of operation, where the OGA was producing 7.4 lb m /day of oxygen on a 
continual bas,s. Cyclic testing of the system began at approximately the 50 

60% duty cycle (54 minutes on / 36 minutes offl. The average cell potential at 
70 F vanes between approximately 1.85 Vdc when the stack is at its required 
load, to approximately 1.55 Vdc when the stack is at its standby level of 1 
amp. At approximately the 120 hour mark, the oxygen requirement was 
increased to 8.14 lb„/day, decreased to 6.66HWday, increased to 8.14 
UWday, and finally returned to 7.4 UWday. The oxygen and hydrogen flow 
rates were measured and verified to be correct with a wet test meter as 
described m the master test plan. At approximately the 140 hour mark, the 
duty cycle was changed to 66% (60 minutes on / 30 minutes ofl) to verify 
proper generation rates at an off design duty cycle. The duty cycle wns 
changed to 53 minutes on / 37 minutes offjust prior to the 480 hour mark in 
the test program when it was realised the space station orbit of 54 minutes 
on / 36 minutes off was no longer valid. 

The average cell performance was stable throughout the entire test program 
In particular, when the deionizer bed was removed from the recirculating 
water loop due to flow anomalies to be discussed in a later section, there was 
no discernible difference in the average cell potential. 



36 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 

MAM]IL , i?®ftQ 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



3 T 



8 2.5 + 

> 



P 



2 • • 



2 ,.»+. 



1 -. 



u 
o 

Ul 

o 

< 

ec 

UJ 

> 0.5 •• 

< 



AVG CELL = 1.8M L_ 



AVG CELL B/U»2 



■ AVG CELL B/U#1 



9CCF OPERATION 
218 ASF (50 AMPS) 



AVG CELL = 1.751 



t 
20 



i I ' 

40 60 80 

CELL STACK OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



•-H 



100 



120 



FIGURE 5.1-1 

18-CELL ELECTROLYSIS CELL STACK 

PERFORMANCE COMPARISON 



37 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 




o 

< 

a. 

UJ -i 

> 0.5 • 



• ' 


I 


BE3N CYCUC 
SYSTEM OPERATION 


I 

i 
I 



I 



REMOVED 01 BED 
FROM RECJRC LOOP 



20 40 60 80 100 120 
OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



140 



160 



180 



200 



3 T 




200 



220 



240 



260 



280 



300 



320 



34 



360 



380 



400 



OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



FIGURE 5.1-2 

SPE OGA 

AVERAGE CELL POTENTIAL 



38 




VKJFnOLOGIES 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 




400 



420 



440 



460 



500 S20 
OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



600 




600 



620 



640 



660 



680 



700 



600 



OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



FIGURE 5.1-2 (CONTD) 

SPE OGA 

AVERAGE CELL POTENTIAL 



39 




UNITED 

TECHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

gAga Pinal Report 

Rev. Basic 

The oxygen and hydrogen production rates are plotted in Figures 5.1-3 and 
5.1-4, respectively, and are a measure of the instantaneous production rates 
of the OGA. For example, in order to provide the nominal daily requirement 
of 7.4 ltWday at a 60% duty cycle, the instantaneous oxygen production rate 
would have to be 12.33 ltWday, as depicted in the plots. As stated earlier, 
the oxygen and hydrogen flow rates were verified correct at the minimum,' 
no min al and maximum oxygen requirement. 

Current to the electrolysis cell stack is presented as Figure 5.1-5. The plot of 
current vs. time mimics those of the gas production rates since the latter are 
a direct function of the former. The standby current level for the system from 
hour mark 50 to 145 was 2 amps; however, this level was reduced to 1 amp 
when testing revealed the electrolysis power supplies could be adequately 
controlled at such a low current level. 

5.2 Recirculating Water L oop Performe r.™ 

One of the key reasons for refurbishing the LFSPE oxygen generation 
subsystem was its inability to adequately prime during system start-up. The 
original system employed a water purging technique at system start-up in 
order to purge the loop of oxygen that had come out of solution during system 
depressurization. However, the purge typically lasted 30 minutes or longer 
and was only about 50% effective in priming of the recirculation water pump 
The refurbished SPE OGA eliminated this pump priming problem by: 
reducing the loop operating pressure; maintaining the pump inlet above 
ambient pressure during all aspects of system operation; and, repackaging 
the system to minimize potential 1-g gas traps. As part of the acceptance test 
program, the SPE OGA was subjected to a number of powered and 
unpowered shutdowns to determine the effectiveness of the system changes 
to allow proper operation of the recirculation pump during system start-up. 
After each system shutdown and restart, the pump was able to prime and 
begin recirculating water through the system in only a matter of a few 
seconds. 



40 



IVgSflPoLOGIES 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 




80 100 120 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



200 




200 



220 



240 260 280 300 320 340 360 
OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



380 



400 



FIGURE 5.1-3 

SPE OGA 

OXYGEN PRODUCTION RATE 



41 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



SPE OGA 
Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 




400 420 440 460 480 500 520 

OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



540 



560 



580 



600 



20 > 




600 620 640 660 680 700 720 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



740 



760 



780 



800 



FIGURE 5.1-3 (CONTD) 

SPE OGA 

OXYGEN PRODUCTION RATE 



42 



[UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 

KlZ&MintL'uW" 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



2 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 

1 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 





BEGNCYOJC 

SYSTEM OPERATION 

S4/36 DUTY CYCLE 




120 
OCA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



200 




200 



•r- 
220 



240 



260 280 300 320 
OCA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



400 



FIGURE 5.1-4 

SPE OGA 

HYDROGEN PRODUCTION RATE 



43 




UNITED 

ram? c,Es 



SPEOGA 
Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 




520 
OGA OPERATING TIME (HBS) 




660 680 700 720 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



760 



780 



800 



FIGURE 5.1-4 (CONT'D) 

SPE OGA 

HYDROGEN PRODUCTION RATE 



44 



I UNITED . imMmm 
TECHNOLOGIES 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 




60 80 100 120 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 




200 



220 



240 



260 280 300 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



FIGURE 5.1-5 

SPE OGA 

ELECTROLYSIS CELL STACK CURRENT 



45 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



SPEOGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



{53/37 DUTY CYO.EJ 




460 480 500 S20 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



580 



600 




FIGURE 5.1-5 (CONTD) 

SPE OGA 

ELECTROLYSIS CELL STACK CURRENT 



46 




UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

H/aRflDQ.'UtSM Rev. Basic 

Additional changes to the recirculating water loop included modifying the 
bellows accumulator level sensor, incorporating a liquid to liquid heat 
exchanger, and replacing the pressure sensor used to calculate a water flow 
rate with a thermal flow switch. The bellows accumulator level sensor was 
modified from seven discrete switch points to an analog device, allowing the 
controller and the operator to know more accurately the level within the 
accumulator at all times. The liquid to liquid heat exchanger, as mentioned 
earlier, maintains the correct operating temperature of the recirculating 
water loop even with all 18 cells operating at a cell potential of 2.5 Vdc. The 
flow switch monitors the flow rate to the module, and initiates a system 
shutdown if a low flow condition occurs. 

During the first half of the test program the flow switch registered a number 
of low water flow conditions, sometimes resulting in a shutdown of the 
system. A low flow shutdown is triggered by the system controller if the 
recirculating water flow rate is below the flow switch setpoint for 10 seconds. 
The calibration of the flow switch was checked a number of times and was 
found to be correct on all occasions. The speed of the motor, and hence the 
water flow rate, was increased incrementally from 0.48 GPM to 0.60 GPM to 
determine if higher flow rates would prevent the shutdown from occurring. 
However, a number of low flow conditions were recorded after the pump 
speed was set at the 0.60 GPM setting. 

A number of actions were taken with respect to the recirculation water loop 
hardware in an attempt to resolve the low flow condition. At the 190 hour 
mark, the deionizer bed was removed from the recirculation loop. The bed 
was removed since, due to its high pressure drop, it was a source for dissolved 
oxygen to come out of solution and, because of its geometry, it acted as a 1-g 
gas trap. The theory was that the gas bubbles which collected in the bed 
housing would cause channeling in the resin bed, resulting in even higher 
pressure drops. Eventually, sufficient gas would collect in the bed housing to 
cause the pump to stall. Or, the bubbles would escape the bed and migrate to 
the flow switch, causing it to trigger a loss of flow condition. The system was 
returned to test; however, the occasional low flow condition persisted. 



47 




UNITED „__ _ _ . 

TECHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

M» Final Report 

'-»™ Mi »»-' Rev. Basic 

At the 215 hour mark, the oxygen phase separator was rotated 90° since, 
after further reviewing the package assembly, it was deemed to act as a 1-g 
gas trap. Figure 5.2-1 depicts the orientation of the phase separator before 
and after the rotation. As the oxygen-saturated water flows through the 
hydrophilic membrane of the phase separator assembly, some of the oxygen 
comes out of solution as tiny gas bubbles. The original orientation of the 
phase separator had the water outlets at the 3 and 9 o'clock positions, 
allowing the bubbles to coalesce and coUect in the top half of the water 
cavities of the assembly. Changes in the operating pressure or temperature 
of the phase separator assembly could cause the gas bubble at the top of these 
cavities to expand, resulting in a substantial quantity of gas becoming 
entrained in the water outlet ports. The gas would flow to the bellows 
accumulator and finally to the pump inlet, resulting in cavitation of the 
pump. Hence, the phase separator assembly was rotated 90° such that the 
water outlets were at the 6 and 12 o'clock positions. In this manner, oxygen 
bubbles evolving from solution would be swept out of the water cavity in a 
more uniform manner, rather than as potential slugs of gas. The system was 
returned to test, but still occasional low flow conditions occurred. 

At approximately the 265 hour mark, the OGA was shutdown, and the 
following actions were undertaken to determine the cause for the occasional 
low flow condition: 

• A strip chart recorder was installed to monitor the output signal from 
the flow sensor, and the input signals to the two motor controllers 
that drive the brushless DC motors on the recirculating water pump 
and the feed water pump. 

• A rotameter was installed at the pump outlet to visually monitor the 
flow rate of the recirculating water loop. The rotameter was installed 
in the loop using 3/8" O.D. PFA tubing. 

• The 3/8" O.D. stainless steel tubing connecting the water output from 
the phase separator to the bellows accumulator inlet, and that 
connecting the bellows accumulator outlet to the pump inlet were 



48 




VBSf&LOGIES 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



OXYGEN /WATER 
MIXTURE INLET 



OXYGEN OUTLET 




WATER OUTLET 



ORIGINAL PHASE SEPARATOR ORIENTATION 



WATER OUTLET 



OXYGEN/WATER 

MIXTURE INLET 




OXYGEN OUTLET 



FINAL PHASE SEPARATOR ORIENTATION 

FIGURE 5.2-1 

OXYGEN PHASE SEPARATOR 

ASSEMBLY ORIENTATION 



49 




TCCHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

BQ$SNH&L Final Report 

ts/u^^jL^-jin^ j^y Basic 

replaced with translucent PFA tubing. A video camera was installed 
in the test facility to monitor the water quality exiting the phase 
separator-entering the bellows accumulator and exiting the bellows 
accumulator-entering the pump inlet. 

The system was returned to test and, as expected, it was observed that the 
oxygen phase separator water outlet occasionally released a stream of small 
gas bubbles into the water outlet. However, it was also observed that the 
bubbles entering the bellows accumulator tended to coalesce, resulting in 
larger bubbles exiting the accumulator and entering the pump inlet. A 
review of the bellows accumulator geometry revealed that the port 
connections of the tank were below the dome of the accumulator such that it 
became a 1-g gas trap. 

On the morning of May 23, at the 322 hour mark, a low flow condition was 
registered on the strip chart recorder. The duration of the low flow condition 
was approximately 8 seconds, 2 seconds short of triggering an alarm 
condition. A review of the video tape revealed that a fairly large stream of 
bubbles exited the phase separator and were deposited into the bellows 
accumulator. A second stream of bubbles emerged from the separator and 
entered the accumulator, followed by a large stream exiting the accumulator. 
The pump immediately became gas bound and the flow of water ceased. A 
large bubble was trapped directly at the pump inlet and at the exit of the 
bellows accumulator. During the 8 second period, the pump was able to 
"consume" the bubble, and flow was reestablished. 

In order to prevent the bellows accumulator from behaving as a 1-g gas trap, 
the plumbing to it was modified such that the flow of water went directly 
from the phase separator outlet to the pump inlet, with the bellows 
accumulator connected to the recirculating water pump on the run of a union 
tee. In this manner the bellows still functions as an expansion volume during 
cell stack current changes and as a batch feed tank for the electrolysis 
process. The system was run for approximately 144 hours without indication 
of a loss of flow condition. At approximately the 475 hour mark, the PFA 
tubing was replaced with stainless steel tubing, and the rotameter was 



50 



W 



SPE OGA 



SSS^ Rev. Basic 

rem0 ved from the recirculating water lo op. The SPE OGA ? — ^° 
operate without a loss of flow condition during the remauung 270 hours of the 
test program. 

Pressure drop across the hydrophflic element of the oxygen phase separator is 
Pressure orop ^^ ^ ^ ^ ^^ m the 

SZS££££- in the « boxes on the graphs. The change *at 
ZZZi inLst, however, is shortly after the rotameter was removed fr^m 
L system and the PFA tubing was replaced wvth stainless stee at he 
*5h„r m ark. When testing was resumed, it was observed that > U» 

point of the hydrophihc membrane, it was a phenomenon that had not been 
observed before and therefore required investigation. 

While reviewing the test data, it was determined that most of the transient 
I^tiZ o^ed shortly after the feed pump completed introduong water 
Z7Z recirculation loop. Since the majority of the recirculation wa er loop 
SI- . downstream of the feed P— —' ^ ^S 

^ne normal flow/pressure regime is re-established. The transit was no 
"served when the rotameter and PFA tubing were in the loop » *e 
foil: of water introduced was a smaller percentage of the ^P -lum 
upstream of the phase separator. This additional loop -*™*»£££ 
pressure transient to essentially zero at the phase separator mlet In order to 
LoTe the spike of the transient, the feed pump outlet was relocated from 
Mediately upstream of the electrolysis cell stack to unmediate* 
d^steam of the recirculation pump outlet at the 670 hour mark. In 
action, the volume of water introduced by the feed pump was reduced^ 
^ese two events helped to reduce the frequency and amphtude of the 
£Si conditions. Overall, the performance of the oxygen phase separator 
was satisfactory through the duration of the test program. 



51 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 

SUE"" - 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



a 
o 

cr 

o 

111 

s 

3 
to 
•> 

Ul 

K 

z a 

2 » 10 

a o. 



20 

18 
16 

14 



a 
o 



Q 
> 
X 



8 -. 

6 

4 

2 






8EQNCYOJC 
SYSTEM OPERATION 


• 
• 
• 

■•••r— « 

i 
i 


■ 

* 

■ 
i 
i 









▼ *:t — r 

i ff 









removed oibed 

BCMHgaBCLOQP| 



20 



40 




60 



80 



100 



120 



140 



160 



OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



180 



200 



a 
o 
c 

Q 
Ul 

a? 

3 
CO 

n 
ui 

E 

a 
a a 



a. 
O 



::r 



16 > 



14 ■- 



12 >. 



ROTATE PHASE 
10 +-JSEPARATOR80* 



a 
*• 
x 




200 



220 



240 



260 280 300 320 
OGA OPERATING TUIE (HRS) 



340 



360 



380 



400 



FIGURE 5.2-2 

SPE OGA 

OXYGEN PHASE SEPARATOR PERFORMANCE 



52 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 




...... 

Iiiiini" I 



400 



420 



440 



460 



480 



500 



S20 



540 



560 



580 



600 



OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 




4 

2 • 




-I i ■■■■' ■ * ■■ ■ ' /- ■ ■ ■■■■ 8 ■ ■ / ■■ ■ * 



600 



620 



640 



660 680 700 720 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



740 



760 



780 



600 



FIGURE 5.2-2 (CONTD) 

SPE OGA 

OXYGEN PHASE SEPARATOR PERFORMANCE 



53 



J UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 




SPEOGA 
Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 



20 > 




120 
OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



140 



160 



180 



200 




280 300 320 
OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



400 



FIGURE 5.2-3 

SPE OGA 

CELL STACK OUTLET PRESSURE 



54 



UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



■ ■»■■ ■ ■■»! 

• —■ ■ II '-"f 

I. ■ ■ ■ 




400 



420 



440 



460 480 500 520 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



600 




u 

< 



Ul 

u 






FEB) PUMP 0SCHARQE BaOCATED:| 
FEHJWATCTVCLUCRHXCm 






..>.......••,• 



J ,,, \ i i" 1 ■■■■ ' " ■■ * 



600 



620 



640 



660 



680 700 720 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



740 



760 



780 



800 



FIGURE 5.2-3 (CONTD) 

SPE OGA 

CELL STACK OUTLET PRESSURE 



55 




UNITED 

TECHNOLOGIES SPE OGA 

ffl|» Piaal Report 

Rev. Basic 

5 ' 3 HYdrQgen Phase Separato r Perfnrm^ nr.0 

As stated earlier, the hydrogen phase separator was revised to include two 
hydrophilic-hydrophobic cavities rather than a single hydrophilic element, 
and to eliminate the hydrogen sense cell whose function had been essentially 
bypassed during the 1990 test program The performance of the hydrophilic- 
hydrophobic portion of the refurbished phase separator was satisfactory 
during the conduct of this test program. The pressure drop across the 
hydrophilic element is presented as Figure 5.3-1. This separator also 
experiences transients in hydrophilic membrane differential pressure; 
however, these transients occur when the system is transitioning from the 
dark side of the orbit to the light side. When the current to the electrolysis 
cell stack begins to increase, the hydrogen gas which serves as the reference 
pressure for the differential back pressure regulator increases in pressure 
more rapidly than the water at the inlet of the regulator. As a result, the 
differential pressure measured across the hydrophilic element climbs' and 
remains high until the water pressure can catch up. The length of the 
transient condition is typically less than 30 seconds, and the differential 
pressure never exceeds the 36 psid bubble pressure of the hydrophilic 
membrane. The data plots only show pressure transients centered about the 
60 hour mark and the 440 hour mark due to the fact the data is logged to disk 
only once every 5 minutes, and the duration of the transition is only 
approximately 30 seconds for each 90 minute cycle. 

The electrochemical hydrogen pump performance was satisfactory throughout 
the duration of the program However, the circuit which controls current to 
the cells experienced some problems. Since the electrochemical hydrogen 
pump cells behave as large capacitors, a special circuit had been designed to 
control the current to the cells. However, the circuit frequently 
malfunctioned, resulting in the cells either not charging at all or charging too 
rapidly. If the cells tried to charge too rapidly, the power supply would go 
into current limit mode by reducing the voltage to the load. The problem was 
later traced to an electrical contactor that was in the process of burning out 
and finally failed closed, resulting in damage to the components in the control 
circuit. An analysis of the circuit revealed that the power supply sense line 



56 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 

M/afiflO(L'ff®Kl 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



20 T 



18 ■" 



16 ■•■ 



14 



12 






■••••••«•••< 



1 


r— i 













































....;.. .-..-•■,• 



80 100 120 
OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



140 



160 



180 



200 




200 



220 



240 



260 



280 



300 



320 



340 



360 



380 



400 



OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



FIGURE 5.3-1 

SPE OGA 

HYDROGEN PHASE SEPARATOR PERFORMANCE 



57 



UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



20 > 




480 500 520 

OGA OPERATING TIME <HRS) 



600 



a 
o 

s 

a 

ui 

a 

3 
01 

a> 

Ui 

cc 
a 



20 
18 +• 

1 6 ■ — 



14 •- 



a 



x 

o. 
O 

K 
O 

> 
X 



12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 




-! 1.. 



.,.—.....,. 









• • • 

iiitflfiiiiiMi yumiiuiii 



I ! I 1 • i 



i 
i 



600 



620 



640 



660 



680 



700 



720 



740 



I 

760 



780 



800 



OGA OPERATING TtUE (HRS) 



FIGURE 5.3-1 (CONTD) 
SPE OGA 

HYDROGEN PHASE SEPARATOR PERFORMANCE 



58 




11M -_ SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

MZ&li«aOQ,'5r®K) Rev. Basic 

connected to the positive terminal of the electrochemical hydrogen pump cells 
provided a current path from the charged cells back to the power supply once 
power was removed from the supply. With voltage present at the contacts of 
the electrical contactor while the relay was switched, significant arang 
occurred resulting in the contactor ultimately failing closed. The arcmt was 
rewired to connect the power supply positive sense line directly to the power 
supply output line rather than the positive terminal of the hydrogen pump 
cells, thereby eliminating the current path back to the power supply 
Corrections to the power supply control circuit were completed at the 265 
hour mark, with satisfactory performance for the remainder of the test 
program. The average hydrogen pump cell potential and total cell current 
are presented in Figures 5.3-2 and 5.3-3, respectively. The cell potential ,s 
maintained at approximately 1 Vdc by the power supply; the total current 
typically varies between 0.25 amps for the standby level, and 0.50 amps for 
fuU production. Occasional spikes in the current are attributed to the m-rush 
current associated with charging completely discharged pump cells. 

The hydrogen generation pressure is presented in Figure 5.3-4. The 
hydrogen pressure varies as a function of the generation rate due to the 
pressure drop across the Item 104-1 check valve, and the error assorted 
with the Item 120 back pressure regulator. At approximately the 265 hour 
mark, the Item 053 purge valve experienced a shorted coil, resulting in a 
system shutdown and depressurization. The valve was removed and 
returned to the vendor to replace the coil and to add a heat sink to the valve 
housing to reduce the coil operating temperature. While the valve was being 
repaired, a spare valve was installed in its place and connected to the system 
plumbing with Teflon hoses. During this time period, the nitrogen iriet valve 
began cycling because the system nitrogen pressure was decaying. Smce the 
regulator controlling hydrogen pressure is referenced to nitrogen, as the 
nitrogen pressure dropped the hydrogen pressure followed In order to 
prevent the system from experiencing a shutdown due to low hydrogen 
pressure, the setpoint which controls the opening of the facility nitrogen valve 
was increased. The Item 053 valve was re-installed into the system at the 
375 hour mark; performance of the nitrogen-reference hydrogen pressure 
control system was satisfactory for the remainder of the test program. 



59 




UNITED 

TECHNOLOGIES 

KL&ftflO" 



SPEOGA 
Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 



2 T 







••ti; 



..}........> 



•r— — — ^ 



80 100 120 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



140 



1S0 



180 



200 




jwp^ 



200 



220 



240 



260 



280 



300 



320 



340 



360 



360 



400 



OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



FIGURE 5.3-2 

SPE OGA 

HYDROGEN PUMP VOLTAGE 



60 



IVSKSPoLOGIES 




SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



2 

1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 

1 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 








»•«••••*••• 



.«pw»NPF*^^ 



„ .;... ...---, --------i- 



400 



420 



440 



460 



480 



500 



( 
520 



r 

540 



560 



580 



600 



OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



g,,I 



-i 1.6 

< 

£ 1.4 
u 

? 1.2 



O 

a. 0.8 ■ 

s 

a. 0.6 

in 

S 0.4 

oe 

SI 0.2 4 



■ wyiiyffM^ ^ 



600 



620 



640 



660 6B0 700 720 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



740 



760 



780 



800 



FIGURE 5.3-2 (CONTD) 

SPE OGA 

HYDROGEN PUMP VOLTAGE 



61 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



SPE OGA 
Pinal Report 
Rev. Basic 



Q. 

2 



2.S 



o. 

2 

3 

a. 

Z 
u 
O 

o 

s 
a 



1.5 " 



1 ■ 



0.5 • 




OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



3 T 



a 



UJ 

tr 
a: 

3 
O 



2.5 



1.5 " 



3 
3 
a 

z 

UJ 

o 
o 

ec 
a 



1 ■. 



0.5 -J 




200 



l t t 1 

260 280 300 320 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



340 



360 



380 



400 



FIGURE 5.3-3 

SPE OGA 

HYDROGEN PUMP CURRENT 



62 




¥?Sf N D OLOCilES 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 




400 



420 



440 



460 480 500 520 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



540 



560 



580 



600 



3 ' 

ST 


I 


_-. 


i 

• 




i 
• 

■ 


i 

• 

■ 
• 


— 1 — 1 




i 

i 

i 

t 

....J...-. 

i 
i 
■ 
■ 
■ 
t 

1 
I 
• 
1 
I 

I 
« 

■ 

t 
1 I 

.I J 1 , 

iIa.Ii * 1 


• 

• 
• 

■ 

• 

• 

■ 

■ 

• 
• 

• 
l 
i 


• < 

• < 

• < 

■ • 
■ 

• 

• 
• 
■ 
• 

• 
« 

• 
• 
• 
i 
i 
i 




a- o c . 


i : 1 
: : 

: - : 1 

5 : 

* ' 1 








3 2 - 5 • 

< 






ui *■ 

oe 
oe 

3 

u 












a 1 " sJ 

2 
3 
a. 






■ * 

■ * 
• * 

t • 
f • 


■ 
• 

• 

■ * 1 1 
It ' J l 
lit J li^ilila 








OQEN 




i 


r * 
l ■ 

It i ' 


1 


t 


i 


' n 
i 




a 0.5 

>■ 

X 


6 




i 


to 

i 

i 


i 


i 


i 
i 
i 
■ 
i 


i 
■ 
i 
t 
i 




00 6 


20 


640 




66 


3 680 
OGAOPER 


700 7 
ATINGT1HE(H 


20 
RS) 


740 


760 


780 8 


00 



FIGURE 5.3-3 (CONTD) 

SPE OGA 

HYDROGEN PUMP CURRENT 



63 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



SPEOGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



o 
o 

K 

a 



50 1- 

45 

40 

35 

30 

25 

20 +- 

15 

10 

5 +■ 






.... B6SWCYCUC ....'. 

SYSTBHOPSWTWN • 



20 



1 I 
40 



i 
I 



I 

60 






80 100 120 
OQA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



140 



160 



ISO 



200 



50 > 




200 



220 



240 



260 



2B0 



300 



320 



340 



360 



380 



400 



OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



FIGURE 5.3-4 

SPE OGA 

HYDROGEN PRESSURE 



64 




VgSSUoGIES 

paaMDHTtsr 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 




400 



420 



440 



460 



-1- 

480 500 520 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



600 




600 



620 



640 



660 



680 700 720 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



740 



760 



780 



800 



FIGURE 5.3-4 (CONTD) 

SPE OGA 
HYDROGEN PRESSURE 



65 




•™ s Sffik 



5-4 Fe e dW a t.rM anagcm(lr , t 

^e redundant bellows accumulators (Items 605-1 and -2) manage the feed 
water from the fechty as well as the protonically pumped water from the 

L y £T* P ™* SeParat ° r - b additi0n • ** ° Utlined m "» *—» *-**« 
s^on, the fill rates and absolute volume of each tank serve as a method of 

*>■""« A- health of the hydrogen phase separator assembly. During the 
firs 475 hours of operation, the control laws governing operation ^ftLse 
dual accumulators were varied a number of times to try to match actual 
system performance. The variables that were adjusted included the factor 
used te calculate the proton water flow rate; the tolerance for the calculated 
fill rate versus the measured fill rate; the setpoints for introducing feed water 
mto the tanks from the facility; and the maximum volume for each of the 
tanks. The first two variables were the most difficult to establish since the 
evel sensors or the bellows accumulators, although they provide an analog 
output s.gnal. take approximately 1 in* step changes in their volume 
readings. Durmg th>s time, the system experienced a few shutdowns due to 
unproper fflhng of the bellows accumulators. The final control laws were 
nnp lememed at the 475 hour mark; the operation of the bellows tanks was 
flawless for the remainder of the test program. Total water volume managed 
by the dual accumulators is presented in Figure 5.4-1. 

5 -5 Electronic Test T)? ta 

The software for the Command & Display Unit (CDU) was created to record 
date both on a hue printer and to disk. When recording data to disk, the 
CDU wntes the data to a buffer at the rate of once per second such that, in 
the event of a system failure, the CDU win record data for the 30 seconds 
precedmg the event. The data from disk can be imported into a spreadsheet 
program for data manipulation and the generation of trend plots similar to 
those presented in this report. 

During the conduct of this test program, data was recorded at the rate of once 
per minute to the line printer, and once every 5 minutes to the disk during 
normal operation. Rather than producing photocopies of the line printer 



66 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



SPE OGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 




80 100 120 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 




280 300 320 340 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



400 



FIGURE 5.4-1 

SPE OGA 

FEED WATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE 



67 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



SPEOGA 
Final Report 
Rev. Basic 



400 




• < ■ » 

'r A i 

• ■ I 

• t I 

• • ■ 

• I • 

: : ! 
r .......^..... ........... 

! i I 



420 



440 



460 



480 



500 



520 



540 



560 



580 



600 



OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



50 ■» 




600 620 640 660 660 700 720 740 

OGA OPERATING TIME (HRS) 



760 



780 



800 



FIGURE 5.4-1 (CONTD) 

SPE OGA 

FEED WATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE 



68 




I UNITED SPE OGA 

TECHNOLOGIES Final Report 

te$P5$& Rev Basic 



data, a set of 8 floppy disks containing the electronic data is being provided 
as part of this report. The data has been compressed and is stored in self- 
extracting archives. The self-extracting archives will work with any 
Macintosh computer model except the 128K and 512K. The extracting 
computer must be running System File 3.2 or higher, and it must have 313K 
bytes of free memory available. The files were created using Microsoft Excel 
4.0, and compressed using Compact Pro, on a Macintosh II computer 
operating with System Software 7.0.1. 

The data files have been manipulated into two categories: total data and 
process data. Total data represents all the test data, including data recorded 
in the PURGE, PROCESS-VENT, PROCESS, and FAILURE states. The 
process data files only contain data while the system was in the PROCESS 
state; this data was used in the generation of the trend plots presented in this 
report. The total data was useful for troubleshooting; however, since it 
contains all the test data, these data files can be cumbersome to work with. 

6.0 FIELD SUPPORT 

Hamilton Standard will verify proper installation of the SPE OGA into the 
NASA/MSFC test bed and will provide on-site support during the test 
program. This support will be provided primarily by Hamilton Standard 
personnel resident in Building 4755. In addition, Hamilton Standard 
personnel based in Windsor Locks, Connecticut, will be available as necessary 
to provide test support. 

7.0 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

The effort to refurbish the SPE Oxygen Generator Assembly has been 
extremely successful. The system has been revised to eliminate the 
operational deficiencies present in the original unit, and has successfully 
implemented other design changes to allow variable, cyclic oxygen generation 
in order to satisfy the new mission requirements for the ISSA. In particular, 
the SPE electrolyzer, oxygen/water and hydrogen/water phase separators, the 
three key elements of the SPE OGA, have demonstrated their unique ability 



69 




TECHNOLOGIES S? 5 ',^^ 

KlACm'uW] Final Report 

maBM&h Rev. Basic 

to perform over a wide range of variable operating conditions, and to adjust to 
those conditions rapidly. Transitions from the light side of the orbit to the 
dark are made instantaneously, while the reverse direction takes 
approximately 40 seconds and appears to be only limited by the performance 
of the back pressure regulator controlling the hydrogen phase separator. 
During this acceptance test program, the SPE OGA completed approximately 
460 cycles simulating the space station orbit, demonstrating flawless 
performance of these technology items. 

Since the goal of this effort was to develop a reliable, robust system that 
successfully demonstrated the viability and flexibility of the SPE OGA to 
meet the ISSA requirements, this technology demonstration system did not 
address other key issues such as weight, volume, or total system power 
requirements. The progression of the SPE OGA to a flight design could 
possibly include: 

1) Reducing the weight of the cell stack and phase separator 
compression system, possibly through the use of composite end 
plates. 

2) Reducing the weight of the nitrogen-hydrogen gas management 
system by e limin a tin g the valve manifold and incorporating an all- 
welded tube assembly. 

3) Reducing the power of ancillary equipment by using latching valve 
assemblies rather than solenoid valves, and eliminating the feed 
pump by resizing and redesigning the feed water bellows 
accumulators. 

4) Fine tuning of the pressure control system for the hydrogen phase 
separator if the present transition rate from dark to light 
(approximately 40 seconds) is too long. 

The refurbished SPE Oxygen Generator Assembly could serve as a test 
vehicle for evaluation of these and other design concepts that would allow for 
the steady development of a flight system. 



70 



APPENDIX A 



MASTER TEST PLAN 

FOR 

BASELINE TESTING 

OF THE 

LFSPE OXYGEN GENERATING ASSEMBLY (OGA) 

CONTRACT NO. NAS8-38250-23 

SEPTEMBER 1994 



A-1 



1.0 OBJECTIVE 



has been returned ^ H»^w P S a r ! tebisl ™«nt of the unit. The OGA 
identified SSSfieW tes^tfl?"^ *°, ?"2* <»"»*"«I deficiencies 
changes to the^ yXt^d t ^to' S^Snt^X^ 7*""! 
requnrements for the International Space StaStonaTlSSA^ ^f^f f 
be conducted on the unit inrlnHo nmef.kr u • ^paa uo&A). The tests to 

system c« r ^T 1 ^££S£$Z SScftne^ """5 

basehne test conduced J&&£S££ SX'SffiSffiS,^ 
2.0 TEST ARTICLE DESCRIPTION 

s^nfin^ fee <* water electrolysis 

separator aJ^J^t^^L el * ct ™ l y™ .water/oxygen pise 
with interconnect cabled Tfc, ™ IT' "^ * D ? P ° Wer ^PP^ <** 
Standard dra^g nuinber SVSK! 1 SfSlT l T n f 1S ?, efined in Ha *"lton 
into the fadli^U^rr ac ^rf fl n~ >? e I' A r ^^a* * of the system 
TDH-ICD/99 K accordance with the Interface Control Document, 



3.0 TEST PLAN 



toZ^i^&^ZSj?*?!* "" *•. LFSPE OGA once 
the test program X testlondnS ™i . ' condusion of each P^se of 

review of thi^st^ist.anS ZZZS^™™*^ N ° «"• 
3 - 1 Verify Ti^fnflflf^n 

ve^^^pZoset^s^r ta-^tta, into the test facility must be 
the facility S?h uf» nJSL P J^ a ^- ox ^m "® be allowed to vent to 

power supply P ^ ""* 28 Vdc power "* be supplied by a separate 

will serve as the CDU. A ^e^^teTe^tt^^^ 

• SPE-Regi^d t^^ of United Technologies c^^ ^^ ^^ ^^ 



A-2 



u 

I 



Q 



oo 

I— HH 

QicC 
I— CXL 
COUJ 

OLxJLU 
ZCDI— 
LU CO 
OZ>- 
LUCO 
>-OCQ 
CD>-3 
OXCO 
JO 

o 

XQ. 
OCO 
LULL. 



I 



i — isa 

CC53 

IS? 
CJ*8 

w h 

CQSS 
21 S3 

3! 

CLSx 
23 

as 



i_Miii 




SiS^tS?? WlU be in f tall ? d * and a line P ri nter to record system performance 
data will be connected to the computer. . 

Conducted bv: M./Q L iLfa Verified by/ 




32 Verify Software Sfftpninfr PrtiV^v.LD: * •> '/AV-j' 

After verifying installation of the LFSPE OGA into the test facility the unit 
can now be energized Electrical power is provided to the system by turning 
the 115 Vac and 28 Vdc circuit breakers (CBl and CB3, respectively) located 
at the top of the EIB to the "ON" position. Initiate the CDU prog^i a nd 
verify the system status is in the OFF mode, OFF state NORMAT ct^c 
Select the VIEW OPERATION screen by depressing ^t^F^y^enfy ^ 
JSre i -f fl se *P° mts by comparing to the Static Parameters State Table 
mwQPQ?QQ^ e So ftware Requirements Specification for the LFSPE OGA, 
S5S ? R& \ F ired i™V- A copy of the table is included for reference. 
^li^:!^:^?^!^ 311 ^ 5 between the val ™* in the table and 



those displayed on the screen. 



Conducted bv: £1+ Q-. I ././^ Vcrified hr ^ V <^£j/U 



yJL 



3.3 Verify Mflnnnl Mode ?ASS'~o&>: Str^vi 

^tlu ^?£ F « mode ' 0FF state > and ™ th the system status NORMAL 
MANUAL ™f ^LECTION screen by depressing 7 the F3 key SeSe 
MANUAL mode. Depress the F5 key to select MANUAL OPERATION and 

f« oSS Pr0m ? **• 6nt f r !^ e a PP r °P riate Password to access the table. Actuate,' 
m order and singular y, the components listed in the table. Deactivate each 
component upon verification of its proper operation, and record the test 
results on the hard copy of the MANUAL OPERATION serein Mudedfn 
tnis test plan. Record and resolve any problems encountered during 
SSJttat 1*7 ^T??- Some , components may not be actuated in the 
majnual mode should the control laws governing their operation not be 

li^ftf *•&? ^.MANUAL MODE DEEMTION^S?rfa^aRS 
loxb-^l; tor additional information. 

Conducted bv: ILL / <L (L ^j n j^ Verified by: 

3.4 Baselino T> ff f f 

Kof^T^u 6 *f St ° { , the LFSPE 0GA ^ be inducted to establish a 
baseline for the electrolysis cell stack, the water/oxygen and hydrogen/water 
phase separators, and heat rejection requirements for the recirculating water 
loop. In addition, the test will verify the integrity of the lystem 




A-4 




S UNITED „ 

TECHNOLOGIES 



1UH-5R5/99 
Rev. F 



TECHCtCCY DEMONSTRATOR 
ST5- 15 
STATIC PARAUETERS STATE TABLE 



SYSTEM: 
COMMENTS: 



LFSPE 



PAGE 1 OF 1 




• »* I s O A 
HO*/ 



O.O^f 



i.t ■ ot 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



2)1 



TDH-SRS/99 
Rev. F 



2' MODE: XXXXXXXxLxxx**** S^ «^COgRATIQN TIIC: XX:XX:XX , , 

X3CO00000a ^^ STATE; XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX STATUS: XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX | 2 

13 



«l 

7| 

8| 

91 
1flf 

"I 
12| 
13| 

H| 
15| 
16| 
17| 
18| 
19| 

20| 

21| 

22| 

231 



3| 

♦J OXYGEN PRODUCTION RATE: XX.XX LB/DAY 

3 1 OPERATING TIME: XXXXXX.X HOURS 



HYDROGEN PROOUCTION RATE: X.XX IB/DAY | 4 



YB03 

vees-i 

VM5-2 

vesi-i 

V851-2 

V833 

V881-1 

VB81-2 

V881-3 

Y881-* 

FAN422 

PM»4«3 

F**»484 



CURRENT 

xxxxxxxxxxxx 

xxxxxxx 

xxxxxxx 

xxxxxx 

xxxxxx 

xxxxxx 

xxxxxx 

XXX 

xxxxxx 
x xxxxx 

XXX 
XXX 

xxxxxx 



"ST 688 LEVEL: X 
SELECTION 



lOLU£BAIt£| 
VENT 
VENT 
CLOSED 
CLOSED 
OPEN 
CLOSED 
CLOSED 
CLOSED 
CLOSED 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 



FILL2/DRAIN1 aC 
PRODUCT , ; >r*JUb 
PRODUCT OiSASieX) 
OPEN .„>£. 
OPEN -A„ i^-T Jc 
CLOSED :z. 



I 5 

I 6 

I 7 

I 8 

I 9 



OPEN 
OPEN :, 
OPEN "<■ 
OPEN 0£ 
ON j;< 
ON t 
ON 



)C 



he 






H2 

114 
1 15 
M6 
117 
118 
19 



Mu 



/WfiMrzf 



-*> Itt 












S^Sf€S v ^WT wcTc'.' 



/Z^rvrt- cyclic- wv r;-i. ,* w 

^ - ^~"**- ^"Z?" S&97- ~r*r 



A-6 




UNITED 
TECHNOLOGIES 



TDH-SRS/99 



wmm/kfis® Rev * F 

SYS - 21 
MANUAL MODE DEFINITION 



SYSTEM: LFSPE 
COMMENTS: 



PAGE 1 OF 2 



(1) Power suDoly and power supply current are not allowed to be activated In 
UJ thS! MANUAL mode; specifically PWR785, CNTL785, PS796 and PS797. All othsr 

devices can be altered manually. 

(2) The recirculating water pump, PMP463, and the feed water pump, PMP464, may 
be turned ON/OFF 1n the MANUAL mode. However, the following rules apply: 

(a) If PMP464 - "ON" then: 

PMP463 - "ON" 

CNTL464 - "LOWPMP" 

CNTL463 - "RECIRC" 

Y081-2 - "OPEN" 

(b) If PMP464 - "OFF" then CNTL464 - 0.0 and V081-2 - "CLOSED". 

(c) If PMP463 - "ON" then CNTL463 - "RECIRC" 

(d) If the operator commands PMP463 - "OFF", the operator must manually 
set PMP464 - "OFF" first. If PMP464 - "OFF", then set CNTL464 - 0.0 
and Y081-2 - "CLOSED"; 1f PMP463- "OFF" then CNTL463 - 0.0. 

(e) While any of LEY606-4 thru -7 - "ON", then operator commands for 
PMP464 should be overridden by PMP464 - "OFF", CNTL464 should be set 
to 0.0 and Y081-2 - "CLOSED". 

(3) Upon entering the MANUAL mode, if V003 position 1s unknown due to a cold 
software start (the last known position of the valve 1s lost from memory), 
then PMP464 - "OFF", CNTL464 - 0.0, Y081-2 - "CLOSED" and Y081-1 - "OPEN". 

(a) If LEV605-1 Increases by 0.5 cubic Inches, set Y003 position to 
FILL2/DRAIN1 and all associated variables to FILL2/DRAIN1, and command 
V081-1 - "CLOSED". 

(b) If LEV605-2 Increases by 0.5 cubic Inches, set V003 position to 
FILL1/DRAIN2 and all associated variables to FILL1/DRAIN2, and command 
V081-1 - "CLOSED". 



i 




# 



A-7 



^\l//> 



Mm UNITED 

WA TECHNOLOGIES 




TDH-SRS/99 
Rev. F 
SYS - 21 



MANUAL MODE DEFINITION 

SYSTEM: LFSPE 
COMMENTS: 

PAGE 2 OF 2 

of the feed water bellows *cam*Sl™?tJ2? &3 !n75U: ir eXtenSi ° n 
After the position .of V003 1s detennlned: 
(a) If V003 - -FILL1/DRAIN2" and 

d) If LEV605-2 < - -LOWLEY- then 
conmand V081-1 - "OPEN" 

(11) If LEY605-2 > - "MEDLEY" then 
command V081-1 - "CLOSED" 

(b) If V003 - "FILL2/DRAIN1" and 

(1) e£i22 £iv " L0WLEV " then 

command V081-1 - "OPEN" 

(11) I li EV605 - 1 > " '^DLEV" then 
command V081-1 - "CLOSED" 

(5) J&^jris^i^i s?as d ™J2 i i I -' - «"«» i. *. 

fb) I J thf 1 : 3 ■ : 0,,EM "- set V081-4 - -OPEN- 

<b) m^WiS??? ™" " ■«&>■. «,« operator «* ra „ M „ y 

(6) The nitrogen Inlet valve vnsi ? 

V053 may be OPEN/CLOSED In the" WmTJSl **££ n1trogen P ur 9e valve, 
applies to prevent pressurizing tnTS,S2?" ^ thC fon ° 2l "9 rule 

(a) If P706-2 > - "AMBPRF*;*:" n , 4 , tt 

AWPKE55 psla, then set V053 - "OPEN". 



'—■7 



A-8 



loop. In addition, the test will verify the integrity of the .system 
instrumentation and all actuated components prior to system refurbishment 
Any malfunctioning component will be identified and repaired or replaced as 



necessary. 



During the baseline test, a line printer will be connected to the CDU to record 
key operational data such as electrolysis cell potentials, phase separator 
membrane pressure drop and cell stack temperature rise. The data will be 
used, in part, as a baseline to determine the effectiveness of the system 

refurbishment. 

Initiate baseline testing of the system by accessing the MODE SELECTION 
screen (depress the F3 key) and selecting the ON . mode ^^ m ,^ 
transition from the OFF mode OFF state to the ON mode PURGE state^ 
Refer to the SRS to verify proper sequencing of components within the system 
during the PURGE state. Record any discrepancies observed while in tne 
PURGE state, particularly operation of the recirculation pump, Item 463, and 
the recirculation loop bellows accumulator, Item 606. Operation of these two 
components to effectively purge the recirculation loop of gas during start-up 
was ineffective during testing of the unit at NASA/MSFC. 

After satisfying the requirements of the PURGE state, the system will 
transition to the PROCESS-VENT state. At this point, the electrolysis power 
supplies are activated and DC power is supplied to the cell stack. 
Pressurization of the oxygen and hydrogen circuits in the system coincides 
with gas generation. Record any discrepancies observed while in the 
PROCESS-VENT state, particularly the quality of the hydrogen vent line. 
During testing of the unit at NASA/MSFC, a significant quantity of water 
was present in the delivery line at low hydrogen operating pressures. 
Monitor cell potentials and pressure differentials across both phase 
separators once gas generation has begun. 

Once the requirements of the PROCESS-VENT state are satisfied, the system 
will transition to the PROCESS state. Since the 3-way solenoid valves that 
redirect the flow of the product gases from the VENT interface to the 
OUTLET interface failed during testing in the field, there is no change m ttie 
system status when going from these two states. Once in the PR<-£f<<g 
state, select the CONFIGURATION CONTROL screen by depressing the F4 
key and select the EMERGENCY setting. Verify the current to the 
electrolysis cell stack increases from 60 amps to 79 amps. Return to the 
CONFIGURATION CONTROL screen, and return the system, setting to 
NORMAL. Operate the unit at both the NORMAL and EMERGENCY 
settings for sufficient time to observe any trends in performance ot key 
system components, such as ceU potentials and phase separator membrane 
pressure drop. Continue to record test data on the line printer for the 
duration of the baseline test program. 




n»nAiMoHW MCy/"y-:H^- Verified b; 




A-9 



£a&. 



a. i 



J-iv 



TABLE 3.4-1 

BASELINE TESTING 
DISCREPANCIES AND RESOLUTIONS 



y 



Disc ™T fl nrv 



? ;/:y/;r? 

- - 1: w: ;2_ 

Sfr" r<l/,r ftf J 

""-» iTc* c.«(. cam. 
Q ir. H: y^, 



A-10 



Resolution 






A<r-.'T*nr 



/t^-irymr 



//frrre /^ ^g^^C 






'° r-~ Sttc fPrt** 2.J rye) 

• ft.i+oujr t*a/x: treista. cu* rA ^ 

. STfi-tt/ai c£U /wot J'^fi.y 
P#tu& ; *jcn> To c4/ut&.<r ^ 
fi^mwc- CAttnr (c, A/ urf 

TSL*r\A./£ijr tjpfu^. 



TABLE 3.4-1 



BASELINE TESTING 
DISCREPANCIES AND RESOLUTIONS 



Date 



$-2l-<? H 






I'lH-IH 



f.ir-fy 



?->*-?</ 



pisnrer>ancv 



• {,iu I "T a rf> (/(At i-cVeJT- '/l> 

'ID a r f-iy-fv <« /H-.iu-.JZl 

>f fyaZb f^mf st,rf> feTT" J <>~ 
HO cu e p. w*-»V7i_ uvtl-ulo- TLso 



Resolution 



wen* itntr ; •»""- *&"*** 



ret" r-2o-fy, jr-n-.yt. 






Co/nm t/t/i c* -Tt,fiJ Dt/A-y/JO- 

Pin /*b»s S&/hi.A^tA- 



A-11 



Date 



f-2*-W 



TABLE 3.4-1 

BASELINE TESTING 
DISCREPANCIES AND RESOLUTIONS 



Discrepanry 






— Resolution 



?-'">- if _, //:j7:l/C 









A-12 






i_s*sssis*55ss£SssS52£ss*iS53sBSi?£^ssS;r^ = r555555l2---I-^^---2 






= 5 










i::::::t::>::::::::«:: * * * * * * *.* * * * * * r * 5* * * * * * 2 * * * * * 2 * 5 * 2 * 2 22** 




A-13 

























:!!???:?" 5 ""f 322223252222 »«f5«2«««^ 








A-14 



55 



5* 






i::::ii:i 



:i£sHsS5*SES£5s| 
ssiiisstsiiHs 






i» — w«»*g*»^ 

























A-15 













ff§|ff5*S*£5S: 

silisllillissri 
















A-16 



% 









x 



S 

3 



ri 

O -A v. 

e h 

if* 

-sk£ 

»* T -> 



1 . 1 



:£««■:««:«£ 



3 3 5 

5 2 2 



= S 2 =?=: = 






a. = ~ — ~ ^ ^ 

5ss. a "*"' 

-=• — "" 5 k S 5 2 ~ 

=S== |l 5 |s 

= * - IB • - i "*** 

IIII " U... 



B*«CCS««CC 



:;:!* 









~1» 
















ISSSXSSSSSS 



'SS55SS5S5555*£5 



ii xE* S SS 5 S 5 S w S £ 5 £ £ £ S 



A-17 






:*£si£si£s==i=; 



:t:::::= 









- - x \ 









a s 

i*:::: 




,S!S * ! ****a****aa*SS55SSS£Sgggggggggjjg??||gggfiggfaBas 



A-18 









S2S£=S=55S=SHH5£2SS5S5£S5555=S£555SS5 

2£5£S55 5S555S5SS55S555££5H5=SS5S=S=£5 

S53253E533S332525S32355£555SSS52-=s2£ 









:zxssssssszs=sxsssss: 



ixxssssssssxsxssssssz 



:iiiiiisSSSSSSSSSS5SS 
isSSxSSSSSSSSSSSSxSSS 



S*Siv»5SaXw*wiXw>«SCS3*wSS£S*SS3>S>Sa!3C< 



__ . O 

===================================== C 

f» 

= = sas ^<, 

s ~-~~~-.~~~~~~ .. _.- ~~ ~~ ^ * 

%£ 

::i::::::isitt:t::st:xi::::J::.:t::s; 

s 
SS£:SSSSS3EE£SSSZSZSSSSSSSESSSSss = £s££ 

^5 ^5 ^* »^ 5^ ^* ^5 »^ *^ #^ ^* *^ *^ *^ "• ^» *^ •£* ^S "2 *•* "■» ^5 ^J ^» ^2 "2 ^» *! ^— •• »• •••••• « *• 

S88£3S838S55533S6385585S58S85§35S55gg 



A-19 






521!!!!!!!!!* 









xxs 
xxs 



s|ssHss£:iiH£j::; 






x = 












:";«;"!???!?! S3S22222S52 sssssssssssisiisisjjjj.;. 









exxxx 

ssxxx: 



' * * * * ; 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 *■ '■*■ *• *■ 

:^*=*=*==xx==sxs= 



222222222222222222' 

ffr**sxxxxxxxxxxxx: 



li lIIIHIIililliiillilllili !!!!!!!■!!!!.!!»!!!!!■ 



a 
3s 




ssssssssssssJtiiijjjJJlJJ 2222222*22*********??*- 



A- 20 



SMMMMMMMMMM«iM"^MMMM*.§f5§IIIi^2i^-"-^--^- 

























lsx»xxs*sss**=**s***s*****5555fJ;525;j55;5f;*****55**5**5S5 



-5 ~ 



x x x x : 
:xxxx: 



:ssxssssssssszxxsx: 
:xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx**. 



EXXXXXXKXXXXXSXXXXSX^X.^s^s: 



* 
as 



i.......iiuiiiii»>»!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!»!!!!!!HH!!H " zf 




A-21 












US* 






"^£st£l§~§§ = 



« 5 5 B 5 S 5 5 






s 
4 



I 



i? 



_ = S55HS5 = =:=::= = = = = 111111 = = = = = = = *^ 

| ;- ; - : ^^-' = : = = = : = = = : = ; = 222!=!S!5B*55f£S5S2= j~ Z 




- -- - - - «c s 



SSs 




s s 

* B 
S j» 

is 
si 



If 



«SSSSgss 



I '=»* *s 



_ * 



A-22 



:::::::s 






zz:££KSBC! 






>3 



** 3 


- * 


' z s £ s: 3 ~ S 


S S 




= 1 






*^ 


££ _•>..*«*•*.«••» 


_*. 


^ ^ 


* s 


3 SSSSSSS 


s s 


-4 « 














s; 


= k«b£«s«c« 


5 X S - 




X - 












SE * - - - 














V s = - 


X 


»•«»»»»»» 








*s = = 3 = sx: 


« « 




S B 










_ w. ta_ 


» IB 


X s 




3 ~ 


— — -. #w -• ^ 


w w 






_ 5 5 a 5 5 S 






3 X 




= ar s s s 




5 555 = 5 £ 


as 


!!£:: 


c S 


2§ 






— s 




















*$ 




1"=:::! 5 




5 x 










a • ■ ■ • - a 












S ^ " — 




5»- = = I-. 








s a 
= S 






5 a SSitsSS * s I 



= X ss 



§1.22553222 



= = s a c e c i 






3 'tesssssss 

s^'Kcceieece 

SIfSSS§5SS5 
53E555555 



z 

5 * 

3 S 



1= 51 



!5 i=si!s::ssss =« 



5 = : 



A-23 




= 3 

= i 



;5 = = = = :: Si ii See 

f> s Z Z Z X ~ X "^ - ~ ~ 



! = = S S S 5 ! 



s S 



5 5 2 2 8 

iiiii 



a s 






5 £ 



55 ~ = 3555 
== s sssss 



;s 21 



: f ** f === ielilllllaa ^_ 



£2555 Sllsl 

. __ s 

•--la 



«_,._.«. 



5 »§ 5 

= S 



= = = 3 

ss s = 



a* 5 
2 * • 



ilsf if : 



A-24 















^.sssssssssss 



3 « 



«ec««««ee«£ss 






SSSSSS5K5SEBB] 

sesKiicesiiii 







5 5 S S S S5 SS S S ££ = £ 5 £ SS wasjsca mj 222 s * 5S 222 = * =i 



= 3 

IS 



II £££ 



A-25 









Si £ 






s « 




ii = 

Is i§ 



is 



= <sesi 






s s ;; : 



si 2= =« 



: aaaaassS as 



~ '" ~ ™ ~ R ~ " ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ « = » a ~ = S sS 



3 5 — »»•-•. 



3 S 



s 

£ 
n 



5 i 
— 5 



- v a 
a s- : 



S =2 ££ 25 



A-26 












e ■: e « c s 



2 s """ II.-I«.- ~- =~£=I**§*H=§=i 



* 
as s 



3 K 



I « 11 SB * ■ » 



iSSSSSSS - = = ■ ^ 

:s :-g 

'~5S55£S55SS$S$S$555S5 g'iss • 

ISssssssssssssssssssss s =**22«2222, 



_ si 

■£ = — — - - - 



sss-^sss: 



= * = 
*5§S2222 

""iiiis 

ilsssss 




A-27 






[SsSS35SSS555SSSs55S555H5 














-^f 



A-28 






Ssssssss: 





















iaEsiiiiisiiiiiiiisiiiiiissssiiisIiiiiiiiii^ 

SSSS£5SS£££SSssSS£5£SSS55SS5£s££Sk5SS5 



A- 29 































:sB*s&si555££££5::£2::£g2S*g^ 



A-30 









M «. 




































































— 


£ c * e e b « ** * =! * ess 


5 s 




x 2 


— 




s s 




s 










= = 


S 


5s5?5*55 5SS25 




* s 








i-====ii 



: s « a .= — a ; 



3* =. : 







2 — ---a»*«*»»»rf...fTi.^TTTTTTTTTTTT^^ i;| 



A-31 



^^*^^**5SS5S5S5S55 = = «Sss = £~a — ZZZZZZ~Z~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~^^*^^^^''^Z* 

























:ass;a s: 



;sssssa 



ssssexe: 









;£==SS5=£=££; 







A-32 









!££££££ 
: r a r r ss 













A-33 
















ssssssssssssssssssssssssstt£ttttt££ii£s££$$sll- 



A-34 










::::>:; 















:s:ssssss»ssssssssssis*s*tss*ss**sststi«sjxsjjj**?jsjsj^s«^t 




A-35 


















jSn;;;;*;;;;;;;J***s*tssissssstssssssssss*s-»t---»- --•»-^""I 







A-36 












iiiiiiiiiii 







111? I IP 11111111111111^ 



A-37 




























T T * * ' 










A-38 









= 3 1 
~ 5 - 






Si 

1! 

53 



si ;. 



s as 




— — — * 



55; 

ii! 



2? =i 



ii — -Z ,s£ II 



A-39 









(t((t 



sets 



il 




5S = 



ilfsss sssss:: 5= - - ! 

ii=lllllllllii§ssss*s§li -= 51 

5 =• ~~22 52322 333 322 3 2 3 2 2 2 ? gisrsc aeoa*«je» 



11 

a 5 



i?_ 



5S=. 
Ill 



Ss 



A-40 



:s = 53S35S5£s:S2SSi 





















SSs 



a 
* 

i! 



is 







A-41 












; a js xzz s a : 




A-42 



is 



= » w = = = - — 



2 = 






* =2 

at ~ " - ~ 



£5252*22 

isssSssss 



a 



!!|l 



•3S5S5SSS .= .= 55 



•— *■« _. __ ^ 






*s = s 



— — — w 



13 SS : 

■ - — 

5 S 5- = . 



ass 

il I = = 



Jis 2= eg -„_ = .*jtse: 




S3 === S 



A-43 



















iMMMMSi 













InUl 



*5ff**Jff2f^=**sssssrs 



SSXSS 







A-44 






^ 

K 

^ 



> 






■* 
■* 



5 



ISs=s;;;5;;;;;;5S* *5* " if 






i a a a * - = 




- !: = ' 

e X S s s , 



li lis 



— s 



sg !!!! 



A-45 










!s 
















s s - — r -■ . 



15 



»»>:t>s 



****«*a*«il.lAiliiiiiiis§|||||ii|?aj i* II 111 ! 



si s ::: 

s _ s **: 

s* a* — • 2 £ ■ 

Si fi" 



- §_2£s2S=I 

*■ I Iiiiilsi 



A-46 









5 - = ' 
Sis 



!I€. 



s si s a a a as a a a a aaas a :s aa a a as - liisss jii ji = 

*" £ S "* £ £ £ * a * * S S S = £ 



sxsssssssssxssssssszsss I |5 

3 = - 

sat _ _ s j. j. 



a = s __ _, a-r-: 

3 ~ ******* * • = = 

s at 



s * - - - 



sssEisssisiiiiisIssssIi 

5S5SS5S5$5$5£5S55555555 



J I 5 I -.. 3 S g ? f ? 



a 5 £ £ £ £ £ 1 = ss S £ £ 1 £ S£S = £ § 1 1 z = gr ie E a3 £ S 3 5 3 S * 5 

£ £ S S a £ £ £££ S 5 £S S S £ ££££ 2 a j^: S: |; 



A-47 



2 s 
= x 



sS £ = ~= 5*"~ = a s:s 

sss = 5 1 5 5£ £ £ ££5 55 §§ 



«*tt 5 = = 

— — <■ X « 



ass 



II 5 I 1 liliiiif |il 



j5*SS 



= s= is 5 5 5 S 



~" *" 5 
1 



3 



■ « _ - - 

III** 



IJlss 

•is?: 



£ M Zt - - S ~ * _ — _ 

-jo- = ="£££££££555§~ 

, 52* Si 

S IS. s 



at 



s s 

» te is 

a - ~ "" 5 5 5 £i 



a s e 



5 ISs SS : S 5£S£55£S 3=5 



-i2 

U _l • 
•-US 
09 CD _ 

>- s 

« Ui .£ v 
» O ~ •■ 

s a • 



I Si .? 31 

ss — _ — ss a: - fj^a _ 



=i=f=s=i=ililll 



I". 

si:: 



it: 






A-48 












_ K 

= se ess; 






a s * * * * * s — 2: x 



S 

i 



?*=======»===gS5SS££55SSII 



^seeisssE.seEt 



c r£ c eee s cic = c 



S S 



s = s = 5 = 22 = 22. 







85 



£ ;;i5s»s5ss5as5as(a*sa«ias(S**sji???j?r;jTrr 



A-49 






:~~ssa 



: = = s s r s 



|SS S £_ . 
: = r r r »i 



■jssssx: 



A- 50 





















s — 



:XXXXXXXXSXSSSSXXX 






i'Bsssssssssssssssssssbssss; 



i iisixsxrss:£iS££-~-s«BKiisasss-Bciiiiiiiiiiiis§iiiiiiii"iiiiiii 




rs ss»s*sasas = sssssjsaa5s5s5a»5ass»s»saix»3a»»3i<xasasa»^ 



A-51 












; - s £ 



"' = 3 ™ B 

if: I"?==__«„ __ 

: ? = £ 3 3 



II s - 



;=:sssS:£s * 5 



il 

■ - = 
53s 



= =7**«555i 



: a s s £ 
tees 



a - 



llliiiii 



35 
is 



III SI ii . 

ili 1* liiiilis 

SS5 33 si 






si 






A-52 
















aSssasasaassassaass 



sssssssaassasssssasasaaaaggig?^ 



A-53 









S5££££ 



















^ssasssajsRsSsKsSsSBRiiiSIsIIss^ 



A-54 






























»3hSSS3SSSSSS£SSSS££SSSS355SSS55SSSS 



A-55 



= s S 5 £ 
5 £ £ £ £ 
cases 



3 St S5 S 3 ■£ ~ 



* I 53 2 KSsres £">-~-£ 



sssss ~ § _ = 2E»***s:s = = s 2- -= ='££££S£*5 = ~§£ 






i s s * s 2~~ 



iL 

stis s 
E5E a b 

— — — * B 

at - 



Si 

c s 



lis*" 



= 8 """"* - = = *_ S5 iiiiiais 2 ~ = 

ff I lislllli ill 1*2 1= i ssisiiis sli ! £ i=== 

- "" ~ ~ as a * - ----- 

=j:iksSssssa«i« 



> 2seZ=222S8_ _ 



ICSdCtlt 



hSSS! 



fffff = « isiliilllllslll .= _ si* 5, =»iiiiilll|illl _ »!*=!== 

SSSSCSXSX — — SS MS- ^. 8§ ■ *■•• _— *«»^*fc*S«s»» w EE *-— SSST^TT" 



A-56 






tss;:: 






• — a — « — - 5 



» S s 

i £ £ 5 S £ s i = = 



*iE* s =i 



= *£ ===5 



s ass *= *i" --- "' ^sslllsls 

. — s — ~ ~ s S ~ss2™22222_ _ 2— --222§ 
: s 3 2 i:: s EgrssSSseSSeSaS s5§**5§* 



A-57 









= a 






*••••**••••• 5 5 — Ska 



5 55 _ 







SI =I=52r; 



A-58 



— o 

-o O 

-* o : 



-i - 

is 5 



s s 






— — -o M ■ 

S -o • 
-r *- r» o 



S - - 
111.,? = 



S2i 



I issisilili-.. 

". * = S * lis si SS5£ = Si 



as;:: 

•• ~ « ■ » 



= St 



2 £ £ m = 

■- — « »| CD ^ 

51 = = §<= ~a 



= | = ssss= = ii'""" 









s ssssss s s 25 
= S 55555 - 

IS iisiii £* 



■ ==s22=2222^, 



=f=(KS«! 



•= SSS5SS .= £ si 



s * s* 



A- 59 






O p :n tn in m (/i ™ 



25 



■XXUXStXXX 



5ss_ 





tn 


•K - __ 


■ <-j '-i ~" 


z\ 


3 


■ 1 ■ „r. S ©. ,> . 

Z -C -C -O O i"> C «■ r .. 




<£ 


o o o o o **. f- •*■. --. %.. 












CI 


j M ^^^S5Sow 






2 _J 








a uj 








a :> 








or Ui 




Z 




a. — 




C 




Z -0 








UJ © 








£ S3 




<E 








cc 




2 h- 




s 








UJ 






t £ £ — — i i 


z 


u 


a 


o o c = t 5 o 


Ul 

'J 


AC 


7 


n n » it. -A \ 


>■ 


3 


c >o 


■■c >o -o «o »? *c »r> 




A. 


■=» o 


O O O O O O UB 






>» "© 


■C "O *0 <0 C -O N 




UJ 


* > 


>>>>>■= u. 




-J ( UJ 


U w u, U, 4.' u. 3 


Ul 


« 


o i — 


-J -J _! _: ii 


u. 


*■* 


C> 3 








"^ _« c S S . 

* 3 3 -' = • 

ZZu » — 

o « — s ^ 

JO 



Z„^ 5§f^^^^=="»*SSSSS: 




UJ UJ U 



- ** uj uj _j . 



' > L' J - u 

— w — r, — 



.« — _,*>-*-.- 



ilgf f = = == = = = = 



Z h- 
UJ < 



-• =■ > r* > 



o o ■ 



UU 








« Z 




'/» z z 

O -u UJ U U_ '_ 








S2 


a 333 


u o 5 n S 7 








X U _ ■» 


2 = 55 


w "j t r j " c 
* r* *o << 








5TE 

mi 

IWI 


£555 


o O i <t E c 

> _• > L. ti. j_ 


- 






en uj 5 8j 

3 o » 


::|: 










UCS 


















c 












2 


o 


t4. 


™ t*! w « 

u. u. Ss *-• 


£ S £ 5 i 




« 


<r 


«-' 







a a at s 
5 S 5 £ 
5 55 5 






3 s a » s 
£55 5.' 



s«S555s: 






A-60 


















= 3 2 

s ■ ~ 

-•»» — — - — • — — — — g: 

s " 



itaiitsta 



aatsaaasaasas 

SSSSSSBSSSC 



5 5 = i - 

• a 



z 5b s 2 2 2 S3 3s _ _ 






ss a a a as at at a at at as ~~ S3 



§ a 



. * a- £55«5££* 2-- 

Ss. sa _ _ rr .--^-_ ,t; 

IS5 55 --S3SSS3SS w=S 



3= m l==22=22£s. 

£2 i H = _ j ^ x ~- Z~~ X I 

»S ~_" .= .= 3 5 

Is S£» si si 



zssxss : 



SESSSS ! 

=r srss : 



r.r.Bsiir. 



A-61 






iSJSSss;;..;,.., 









-■ x s a ^ s s : 
















A-62 






;sst:::; 
:e a s s s = : 






ssss: 






;a i ztzz zzttzii- 

'2 s "* 2 5 2 2 2 5 2 £ 2 5 5 i 









* _ ~ - - 



x = !SSSBSS 



!a= 










A-63 



















i2aas:;:=s:;; = ,5-;;5 S . : . :: ._ s ._ JS! ..,~3~"I~ =---- 










A-64 















= 5 .= 



55 .3 

S B 



isrcsssssss: 






« s 



»s = -;? 



I:::::::::::::::::;:::::::::;:::::: Ss Zs g a • 

; 22 2 3 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 2 3 * 22 2 g 2 3 S 2 S3 32 2 2 £ 2 2 2 2 - = = * _ ^ _ 2 "" ' 

; i i i i i = i i i i i I i I s i i i s i i s i i i i i i i i i i i i 



a „__;; 



;*-~-; 



» mC SSS S« SS 5* v« 3* 3» S3! S* ■% 5X 5!» 53* w* ■*» So ^» w* )#■ wS «St BC 3C 5SS 3C 5C 52 SS «!■ V* ^ * S3S !#» *** *3 33C ^tf 



~ S ■ £ & 



A-65 


















= i 



3 * 

s at 

a ; . 



c; sr tf«??9*7^^^^~~^ 



ss :es »! 






:Ss 



g ,i ^ g «m <■> Jt s 

5 * I aSllll 



Hllr>* = a:s 5 



CCKCSCCC c 




SIisgg«s» s| E s 



l| .. 5S555S :2;t* 
gr z ££§££§ IfSSr 



tf =s<SS*: 



II ggg 




A-66 












S3 ;: — S A 35 K i 












S S 

52 = = = »- 



cecscstcea 












saasse r~- 
"~~~~SJ5 3 3: 



mXS~s«sss i 2 ~ X •* t£ X *■ 
- _ ssx::::::: X s £«§§§§§§ 



liL, 5 

X_Z233333335335§5S53 3-5 2 5 3 3 5^ 

>!:t:::i::t::i::::::::::::: 

jSas s assess s£ssssss£xss = ss^r" 

|| t._ 5 5 SSSi a « 5 5 2 S a Sc 5 S S 5 5 S SS 5 5 $■■ 



A-67 



:=SSS555=55S£5£=5=55RsssR=sss 






















ssssssss: 
















A-68 

























A-69 



f|2f SSSZSSSSS: 













:S£Z£SS£££££S£ S£££ = £: 












-S»SR-... g j IS!( , 



x'sxsxsaxxxg.. 




tx »*»»»xss3txxatxsissxstst: 






f^aeacsssss 







A-70 












i£r522E255£5S£55S5:?: 


















rssssssssssssstsesestsstsssessK: 









gg22ggSjjj2ii:5g35SSS£jiiSS2Sgg§£ 



SSRSSn^Kr.nKSSSKRSr.r.rJ!SSBMf,SR«MR»Rr.Rl!SSRRl!RrR 



A-71 















IJJSIJISSSS,..,,.. 






! » S98i!S: 












:cj::::::::stt:::i;j 



2 2 2 H 

5S5 £ 
s sea 



s a i 
22: 

iii 

sft a : 



ssss 

5525 

5 3c £ £ 
a a a s 



• = = = s = asa IBs 









at x 

ss 






iilillliiilliiiilliliiilliliiiiiliilliiilii ii 

_"S*5™^^"»»^^**w» «• 91 3 3 SB 3 2E 3 2 3* IS * «9 •• "• «*m«»««»wba_^____ 




:«Hssati 



at sc a at 
K r J5 S5 






2 — a: 



*-= = = 

SB 



SI 



S 3 



A-72 






; x x x x x xx: 
it::::::! 









lisSScSieSS 



ssssxxxxxxxx 



;I .......... " ^^ *? s : : : x x x s 



s s s s 

£tc:a>skk»t: 

55 = = = 553E3E5 = 5 

:::::::::::: 

SSSSSSSSSSSS 



A-73/A-74 



I ?gS«?0« ocies Master Test Plan 




SPE CGA 
Master To 
Rev. Basic 



APPENDIX B 

MASTER TEST PLAN 

FOR 

ACCEPTANCE TESTING 

OF THE 

SPE® OXYGEN GENERATOR ASSEMBLY (OGA) 

rmmnffllSEMENT OF THE TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATOR 

<REFUB l^botkgen Feneration subsystem) 
contract nas8-38250-23 



BY 



UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORPORATION 

HAMILTON STANDARD DIVISION 

SPACE & SEA SYSTEMS 

WINDSOR LOCKS, CT 06096 



Prepared by ^SA- Approved by: '^^ ^ 
Prepared by. tfj^f Merlin A. Shuey/ 

Engineering Manager Program Manage* 



SPE® - Registered Trademark of United Technologies Corporation, Hamilton 
Standard Division 



B-1 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 



MASTER TEST PLAN 
REVISION SUMMARY 



REVISION 



Basic 



PAGE 



All 



DESCRIPTION 



Initial release 



DATE 



4/10/95 



L 



B-2 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



Section 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 



APPENDIX A 
APPENDIX B 
APPENDS C 
APPENDDCD 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



OBJECTIVE 

REFERENCE DOCUMENTS 

TEST ARTICLE DESCRIPTION 

TEST EQUIPMENT 

TEST PLAN 

5.1 Electrolysis Cell Stack Testing 

5.2 Oxygen Phase Separator Testing 

5.3 Hydrogen Phase Separator Testing 

5.4 System Check-out Testing 

5.5 MODE/STATE Transition Verification 

5.6 Performance Test 

5.7 Final Testing 

SYSTEM POWER REQUIREMENTS 
GAS PRODUCTION RATE CALCULATIONS 
GAS PURITY 
TEST ANOMALIES 



Efigft 

B-4 
B-4 
B-4 

B-9 

B-10 

B-10 

B-14 

B-17 

B-21 

B-33 

B-41 

B-48 

B-51 

B-57 

B-61 

B-63 



B-3 



I 




SPE OGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



1.0 OBJECTIVE 



The purpose of this Master Test Plan is to define a series of tests to be 
performed on the refurbished SPE Oxygen Generator Assembly (OGA). The 
SPE OGA has been refurbished to correct operational deficiencies identified 
during field testing of the unit, and to effect hardware and software changes 
to the system in order for it to be consistent with the most recent 
requirements for the International Space Station Alpha (ISSA). The test 
program defined in this document will verify the integrity of the subsystem 
hardware and software and will test the effectiveness of the refurbishment. 

2.0 REFERENCE DOCUMENTS 

The following documents for part of this document to the extent specified 
herein. If no documentation revision letter is shown, the latest revision will 
apply. 

( SVHSER16748 Software Requirements Specification for the 

SPE OGA Command & Display Unit 

SVHSER16750 Software Requirements Specification for the 

SPE OGA Process Controller 

3.0 TEST ARTICLE DESCRIPTION 

The SPE OGA, shown schematically in Figure 2.0-1, safely generates oxygen 
and hydrogen gas from the electrolysis of water. The oxygen gas is generated 
and delivered at ambient pressure directly to the environment, while the 
hydrogen is generated at slightly elevated pressure for possible delivery to a 
CO2 reduction system. The SPE OGA includes all valves, regulators, sensors 
and other controls for safe operation of the system. 

The cell stack is a liquid anode feed water electrolyzer consisting of 18 SPE 
water electrolysis cells assembled in a bipolar arrangement between two 
compression end plates. In the electrolysis process, liquid water is fed to the 



B-4 



r-. 



r 



SPEOGA 
I U*H&Lm ««« Master Test Plan 

Rev. Basic 




-woni-r bed to ensure the water is free of any ionic contamination (cation 

^uTunmediately downstream of the deionixer bed monitor. *«-<-*» 
Xrformance of the deionizer bed. Wator flow to the modufe ,. motutored 
by a flow switch located immediately upstream of the cell stack. 

The oxygen gas produced in the SPE elecfcoly- is fr« of £**-. ^ 
purities of 99.5% or greater typically measured. Smce the SPE «**"»£ 
designed to operate with hydrogen pressure always greater than oxygen 
'res^ure redundant combustible gas sensors located at the oxygen outlet 
JtorfTce' Constantly monitor the oxygen for hydrogen. A pressure sensor 
^a" aTutdown should an obstruction occur in the delivery Une and a 
^ef valve provides redundancy in the event ofaMed pressure sensor. 

The hydrogen-water exiting the cell stack is mostly hydrogen gas by volume 
rth a small amount of liquid water present from protonic pumpmg m the , on 
«Lg. membrane. The hydrogen/water phase separator employ, two 
cavitiT each containing a hydrophuic and hydrophobic membrane, and « 
"in design and operation to the polishing section of the «xvgen/waUr 
£T£»E. The hydrogen gas passe, through the hydrophobe 
Lmbrane, to the hydrogen valve manifold containing 4.^^ 
system and the water is delivered to the -stripper" action of the phase 
epa^T The .tripper section contains four electrochemical hydrogen 
C^t remove dLlved hydrogen from U,ewa^brfore it is return^ 
L water recirculation loop. The electrochemical hydrogen pump uses an 
^ E m^brane and electrode assembly similar to the elects* membrane 
L electrode assembly. The degassed water i. subsequently *ehve^> one 
of two metal bellow, accumulator, after dropping m pressure through a 
negative bias back pressure regulator referenced to hydrogen. 

As stated previously, the water exiting from the separator is stored in one of 
two metal bellow, accumulators. Two tanks, in conronction w.th the four- 
way baU valve, are provided for fault isolation in the event of a failure of the 
Imogen Phase separator that is undetected by either the dafferen^ 
pressure sensor or the stripper cell voltage and current momtors. Wmle 



B-7 




SPEOGA 
Blaster Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

water is being fed to one tank from the phase separator the second tank is 
providing water, as required, to the water recirculation loop via the feed 
water pump. Employing two tanks in this manner ensures that hydrogen gas 
is not introduced into the system anode loop, where it would subsequently 
flow into the oxygen delivery system. As an additional back-up, redundant 
combustible gas sensors in the delivery system would detect hydrogen carry- 
over into the anode loop and initiate a system shutdown. 

Hydrogen pressure control is maintained by a differential back pressure 
regulator referenced to nitrogen. The primary hydrogen regulator maintains 
hydrogen generation pressure 25 psid below nitrogen. Hydrogen pressure 
control is monitored by a pressure sensor; shutdown of the SPE OGA will 
occur if hydrogen pressure drifts above or below the normal band of the 
primary regulator. Mechanical backup for both low and high differential 
pressure is provided by the redundant differential back pressure regulator 
and relief valve, respectively. If the primary regulator foils closed and either 
the pressure sensor or controller fails to detect it, the redundant back 
pressure regulator will open to ensure nitrogen pressure is maintained above 
hydrogen. Conversely, should the primary regulator foil open and either the 
system instrumentation or controller fails to detect it, the nitrogen-hydrogen 
relief valve opens to introduce nitrogen into the hydrogen circuit to ensure 
hydrogen pressure is always maintained above oxygen pressure. A three-way 
solenoid valve at the regulator outlet directs flow to either the hydrogen 
outlet interface or to the vent interface. 

As mentioned previously, nitrogen is used as a reference pressure for the 
hydrogen pressure control system. The nitrogen is also used as a purge gas 
during start-up and shutdown transient conditions: during start-up, the 
nitrogen purges any air from the hydrogen lines and, during shutdown, it 
purges hydrogen from the same lines. Nitrogen is introduced from the 
facility through a normally closed solenoid valve. A pressure sensor monitors 
the nitrogen pressure and controls the operation of the solenoid valve. A 
nitrogen accumulator provides sufficient purge volume to safely and 
effectively purge the hydrogen circuit during start-up and shutdown. 
Purging of the hydrogen circuit is accomplished by removing power to the 



S 



B-8 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

C- normally open solenoid valve located between the hydrogen and nitrogen 

circuit. 

Feed water is provided to the SPE OGA from the facility through a normally 
closed solenoid valve. Operation of this valve is controlled by the water level 
in the two feed water metal bellows accumulators and the position of the four- 
way ball valve between the two tanks. 

4.0 TEST EQUIPMENT 

Testing of the refurbished SPE OGA wiH be conducted in one of four test cells 
in the Electrochemical Engineering Laboratory of Building 2 in Windsor 
Locks, CT. Required services for operating the system are: 

. 115 VAC, 60 Hz, 3 phase, 20 amps (provided by Hamilton Standard 

Rig 216) 

•28 VDC, 15 amps 
r -IBM Personal System/2, Model 50Z (50-031), with the following 

Tninimnm attributes: 

Operating system: DOS 3.0 

Mass Storage: Fixed disk and removable disk 

Memory: 1 Mbyte RAM 

Printer Epson FX-1050 

•Test stand for fluid control: nitrogen inlet; feed water inlet; hydrogen 

outlet; oxygen outlet 

•Recirculating chiller, 1 GPM water, 65°F, minimum 1000 watts heat 

rejection 

Other test equipment as required to successfully complete the test objectives 
described herein will be described in the applicable section. 



B-9 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



5.0 TEST PLAN 



This section defines the tests to be performed on various subassemblies 
within the SPE OGA prior to final assembly and on the system itself once 
installation into the test facility is complete. At the conclusion of each phase 
of the test program the test conductor and a separate reviewer will verify, by 
signature, that the tests were conducted in accordance with the test plan and 
the results recorded in the test plan were actual measurements. Red-lining 
of this document in order to successfully complete the defined test objective is 
permissible. No other review of this test program is planned or anticipated. 

5.1 Electrolysis Cell Stank Testing 

Testing of the electrolysis cell stack is conducted prior to installation into the 
system to verify the mechanical and electrical integrity of the assembly and 
to measure individual cell performance at the SPE OGA operating conditions. 

5.1.1 Cell stack ftlectrical testing 

Once assembly of the 18-cell SPE water electrolysis cell stack is completed, 
the module is tested to verify no electrical shorts are present. This is 
accomplished by utilizing the cell short check meter, which charges the cell 
with a battery to a potential of approximately l VDC. Once charged, the 
battery is removed and the cell potential is allowed to decay. If the decay 
rate is too sudden, an electrical short is present The short must be repaired 
prior to initiating any further testing of the module. 

1) Attach short check meter to cell #1. 

2) Charge the cell to approximately 1 VDC. Remove power to the cell 

3) Observe the cell potential decay rate; if the rate is too sudden, the cell 
has an electrical short that must be corrected prior to continuing the test 
program. 



B-10 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



4) Eepeat steps 1-3 for the remaining cells in the assembly. 




Conducted br"- "' < ««— Verifiedby: 



IkfJf. 



5.1.2 r» ft ]i fttrfrfe " if rhnnin.1 tr gHng 

Afte r the eleetrical integrity of the 18-cell stack has been verified, *emodule 
Ubrought to proof pressure and is subjected to an overboard and cross-cell 
leakage test 
5.L2.1 Overboard proof pressure and leakage test 

Proof pressure testing of the electrolysis module will be a, ^ mtaimum 
pressure of 2 times the maximum allowable workmg pressure (MAWP). For 
Z rXbished SPE OGA. the MAWP i. 75 psig, resulting in a F«*P<~" 
£tf£o psig. Proof pressure testing of the module will be conducted wUh 
LWn! su^the proof pressure limit is well within the normal operaung 
SSSr of the cJll hardware (approximately 400 psig). Once the proof 
pressure test of the modu!e is completed, the nitxogen pressure u reduced to 
the MAWP and an overboard leakage test is conducted. 

1) Attach a dean, regulated nitrogen supply to the water inlet manifold 
and the hydrogen-water outlet manifold. The nitrogen source should have 
a pressure gauge to monitor pressure at the electrolysis module, and a 
shut-off valve to isolate the nitrogen source from the test item. 

2) Cap the oxygen-water and the remaining hydrogen-water outlet 
manifold. 

3) Slowly pressurize the cell stack by increasing the regulator setting in 
10 psig increments. 



B-11 







SPEOGA 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 

4) Continue to increase pressure until the nitrogen pressure on the 
gauge equals 150 +2/-0 psig. Maintain this pressure for a minimi*™ of 5 
minutes. After the 5 minute period, slowly depressurize the module by 
decreasing the regulator setting to 1.0 times the MAWP, or 75 psig. 

5) Close the shut-off valve to isolate the module from the nitrogen 
source. Carefully monitor the nitrogen pressure in the module. No decay 
is allowed in a 30 minute test period. 





Conducted hy rr^Uif/ JUrlf^ j f/ f jf Verified by: 

5.1.2.2 Cross-cell leakage tesi\ 

Upon successful conclusion of the module leakage test, the nitrogen lines to 
the cell stack are reconfigured such that only the hydrogen side of the cells is 
pressurized. The oxygen side of the cell stack is left open to ambient 
pressure, while the hydrogen side is pressurized with nitrogen to three 
different pressure levels. The gas flow rate across the 18 cells is measured, 
and it must be below the normal permeation rate for nitrogen across Nafion 
membrane at each of the pressure levels. If a higher rate is detected, a leak 
is present across one or more of the electrolysis cells, either across the cell 
membrane itself or into one of the fluid headers. A cross-cell leak must be 
repaired prior to initiating any further testing of the module. 

1) Attach a clean, regulated nitrogen supply to either of the two 
hydrogen-water outlet manifold ports. Cap the remaining port 

2) Attach a plastic line to either the water inlet manifold port or the 
oxygen- water outlet manifold port. Cap the remaining port 

3) Insert the other end of the plastic line in a beaker filled with DI 
water. Install an inverted burette in the beaker and fill the burette with 



B-12 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



water by uring a pipette bulb. Place the plastic line in the open end of the 
burette. 

4) Pressurize the hydrogen side of the cell stack with nitrogen to the 
pLs^ls indicaLl below, determine the gas flow rate b y m^ng 
Z volume of water displaced by the nitrogen m the burette. The 
permeation rate should not exceed the values listed below. 

^pressure Maximum permeation rate ^^T^ 

50 2 - 6 —jF~ 

4.0 



75 *•" ^7 

100 5 * 3 

5) Slowly depressurize the module and disconnect the nitrogen lines 
ZJL module. Refill the manifolds with fresh. DI water, and cap all 
the fluid ports on the module. 




Conducted by:. 

5.1.3 r*]] ftff ric operational test 



Verified by. 



_Mi^, 



A 100 hour operational test of the 18-cell electrolysis stack « conducted to 
iZ *e perLnance of each of the cells within the assembly, ft. to*» 
conducted in a separate test rig at the SPE OGA magnum operating current 
o^sto Individ ceU potential, should fall within the range of 
USTTtO-I 75 Vdc at a current density of 215 ampaW. Water flow 
X ZZ ZZ»*. - cell current wO. also be monitored during 
the conduct of this test. 

1) Install the 18-cell module in the mobile test rig Connect the 
Mrogen-water outlet manifold to a phase separator, with the hydrogen 



B-13 




t SFEOGA 

Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

\ •' delivery to the laboratory vent and the water delivery to the laboratory 

drain. 

2) Verify the test rig data acquisition program is operational. 

3) Turn the recirculation pump on; verify a minimum fl ow ^^ of 
100 cc/min/cell, or 1800 cc/min through the electrolysis module. 

4) Turn the electrolysis power supply on and set the current level for 
approximately 5 amps. Monitor individual cell voltages, ensuring proper 
charging of each of the 18-cells. 

5) Increase the current setting to 50 amps; note the time on the test rig 
timer. Operate the module for 100 hours. Set the data acquisition system 
to record performance data of the module at the rate of once per hour. 

6) At the conclusion of the test program, verify performance of the cells 
C is within acceptable limits. Remove the module from the test rig and fill 

the manifold ports with fresh, DI water. Cap all the manifold ports. 





Conducted by: *Ob7jf, A^ Verified ^___ 

5-2 Orrgen Ph«g«> ft>n»r<.to r TfTtinr 

Testing of the oxygen phase separator is conducted prior to installation into 
the system to verify the mechanical integrity of the assembly and to verify 
the performance of the hydrophflic and hydrophobic membranes. 

5.2.1 Mechanical testing 

The oxygen phase separator assembly is subjected to a proof pressure test at 
a minimum pressure of 2 times MAWP for the recirculating water loop, 
followed by a leakage test at a minimum pressure of 1 times MAWP. For the 



B-14 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 



refurbished SPE OGA, the MAWP of the recirculating water loop is 30 psig. 
resulting in a proof pressure test requirement of 60 psig. When conducting 
proof pressure and leakage testing, all three fluid ports (two P^J^ 
water outlet and oxygen outlet) are simultaneously pressurized to protect the 
separator membranes from high differential pressures. Once the proof 
pressure test of the separator is completed, the nitrogen pressure is reduced 
to the MAWP and a leakage test is conducted. 

1) Attach a clean, regulated nitrogen supply to the oxygen-water inlet 
manifold, the oxygen outlet manifold and the water outlet manifold. The 
nitrogen source should have a pressure gauge to monitor pressure at the 
electrolysis module, and a shut-off valve to isolate the nitrogen source 
from the test item. 

2) Slowly pressurize the separator assembly by increasing the regulator 
setting in 10 psig increments. 

3) Continue to increase pressure until the nitrogen pressure on the 
gauge equals 60 +2/-0 psig. Maintain this pressure for a minimum of 5 
minutes. After the 5 minute period, slowly depressurize the separator by 
decreasing the regulator setting to 1.0 times the MAWP, or 30 psig. 

5) Close the shut-off valve to isolate the separator from the nitrogen 
source. Carefully monitor the nitrogen pressure in the separator. No 

decay is allowed in a 30 minute test period. 

6) At the conclusion of the leakage test, remove the nitrogen lines and 
fill the manifold ports with fresh DI water. 




Conducted byrf , < /^-W Verified by: 




B-15 



c 



L 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



/'"■; 5.2.2 Performance testing 



Performance testing of the separator is conducted prior to installation of the 
separator assembly into the system package to verify proper operation of the 
hydrophilic and hydrophobic membranes. Testing of the oxygen phase 
separator is conducted in the phase separator development test rig in the 
Electrochemical Engineering Laboratory in Building 2. The separator is to be 
tested with only water flowing through the assembly (no oxygen generation), 
and with a two phase mixture generated from a 12-cell electrolysis stack 
operating at 150% of the mBTJTnnm current density level for the OGA 18-cell 
stack. Membrane pressure drop and water flow rate will be monitored. No 
water carry-over into the product gas stream is allowed. The amount of gas 
present in the water outlet stream will be measured; the level of gas present 
should not exceed that predicted by Henry's Law. 

1) Install the oxygen phase separator assembly in the phase separator 
development test rig. 

2) Start the test rig. Verify a water flow rate of 1800 cc/min through the 
12-cell electrolysis stack. 

3) Record the hydrophilic and hydrophobic membrane pressure drop. 
Verify outlet streams are clean, i.e. no gas in the water outlet and no 
water in the gas outlet. 

4) Turn the electrolysis power supply on and set the current level to 
approximately 3 amps. Record the hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
membrane pressure drop. 

5) Slowly increase the current level to the cell stack to 75 amps. Record 
the hydrophilic and hydrophobic membrane pressure drop. Verily the 
outlet streams are clean (NOTE: Occasional bubbles in the water outlet 
stream are expected due to gas evolving from solution due to the drop in 
pressure across the hydrophilic membranes). 



B-16 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

r>< 6) Measure the amount of gas being evolved in the water loop due to the 

drop in pressure by installing a graduated cylinder immediately 
downstream of the separator water exit The oxygen evolution rate should 
not exceed 21 cc/min. 

Measured evolution rate: L cc/min 

7) Cycle the current setting to the electrolysis cell stack; verify proper 
operation of the phase separator at both extremes of operating current 
levels. 

8) At the conclusion of the test fill the manifold ports with fresh DI 
water. 





n^A^^A u r l/lrAty. fry Verified b, 

5.3 ffy'*™**" PfrflT s »™ rgtor Testing 

Testing of the hydrogen phase separator is conducted prior to installation 
into the system to verify the mechanical and electrical integrity of the 
assembly and to verify the performance of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
membranes. 

5.3.1 fflpf*"'™ 1 testing 

Once the hydrogen phase separator is assembled, the electrochemical 
hydrogen pumps in the stripper section of the separator are tested to verify 
no electrical shorts are present. This is accomplished by utilizing the cell 
short check meter in the same manner as it was used to test the electrolysis 
cells. Each of the four cells is individually charged and, once charged, the cell 
potential is allowed to decay. If the decay rate is too sudden, an electrical 
short is present that must be rectified prior to operation of the assembly. 



B-17 




SPEOGA 

Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



1) Attach short check meter to pump #1. 



2) Charge the cell to approximately 1.0 VDC. Remove power to the celL 

3) Observe the cell potential decay rate; if the rate is too sudden, the cell 
has an electrical short that must be corrected prior to continuing the test 
program. 



4) Repeat steps 1-3 for the remaining cells in the assembly. 




Conducted b 



5.3.2 Mechanical testing 



Verified by: 




f 



The hydrogen phase separator assembly is subjected to a proof pressure at a 
minimum pressure of 2 times MAWP for the hydrogen- water circuit, followed 
by a leakage test at a minimum pressure of 1 times MAWP. For the 
refurbished SPE OGA, the MAWP of the hydrogen-water circuit is 75 psig, 
resulting in a proof pressure test requirement of 150 psig. When conducting 
proof pressure and leakage testing, all three fluid ports (two phase inlet, 
water outlet and hydrogen outlet) are simultaneously pressurized to protect 
the separator membranes and the electrochemical hydrogen pump membrane 
and electrode assemblies from high differential pressures. Once the proof 
pressure test of the separator is completed, the nitrogen pressure is reduced 
to the MAWP and a leakage test is conducted. 

1) Attach a clean, regulated nitrogen supply to the hydrogen-water inlet 
manifold, the hydrogen outlet manifold and the water outlet manifold. 
The nitrogen source should have a pressure gauge to monitor pressure at 
the electrolysis module, and a shut-off valve to isolate the nitrogen source 
from the test item. 



B-18 



r 




SPE OGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

r- 2) Slowly pressurize the separator assembly by increasing the regulator 

setting in 10 psig increments. 

3) Continue to increase pressure until the nitrogen pressure on the 
gauge equals 150 +2/-0 psig. Maintain this pressure for a minimum of 5 
minutes. After the 5 minute period, slowly depressurize the separator by 
decreasing the regulator setting to 1.0 times the MAWP, or 75 psig. 



5) Close the shut-off valve to isolate the separator from the nitrogen 
source. Carefully monitor the nitrogen pressure in the separator. No 
decay is allowed in a 30 minute test period. 

6) At the conclusion of the leakage test, remove the nitrogen lines and 
fill the manifold ports with fresh DI water. 





Conducted br-ffrj MVM- Verified 1* 
5.3.3 PTfttrmflT"* testing 

Performance testing of the separator is conducted prior to installation into 
the system package to verify proper operation of the hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic membranes during transient and steady state conditions. 
Testing of the hydrogen phase separator is conducted in the phase separator 
development test rig in the Electrochemical Engineering Laboratory in 
Building 2. Since the test rig has no provisions to evaluate the performance 
of the electrochemical hydrogen pumps, only the performance of the 
hydrophilic and hydrophobic membranes will be verified. The separator is to 
be tested at ambient pressure and at the system maximum expected 
operating pressure of 75 psia (assumes nitrogen reference pressure of 
100 psia) and at cell current levels ranging from the standby level of 2 amps 
to the maximum current level of 50 amps (for the 18-cell SPE OGA stack; 
since the test rig contains only a 12-cell stack, the cell current levels will be 
50% higher, or 3 amps for standby and 75 amps for the maximum current 



B-19 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

level). Membrane pressure drop at all operating conditions will be monitored 
to ensure the bubble point of the hydrophilic membrane is not exceeded. No 
water carry-over into the product gas stream is allowed. The amount of gas 
present in the water outlet stream will be measured; the level of gas present 
should not exceed that predicted by Henry's Law. 

1) Install the hydrogen phase separator assembly in the phase 
separator development test rig. 

2) Start the test rig. Verify a water flow rate of 1800 cc/min through the 
12-cell electrolysis stack. 

3) Turn the electrolysis power supply on and set the current level to 
approximately 3 amps. Record the hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
membrane pressure drop. 

5) Slowly increase the current level to the cell stack to 75 amps. Record 
the hydrophilic and hydrophobic membrane pressure drop. Verify the 
outlet streams are clean (NOTE: Occasional bubbles in the water outlet 
stream are expected due to gas evolving from solution due to the drop in 
pressure across the hydrophilic membranes). 

6) Slowly increase the hydrogen back pressure to approximately 75 psia, 
ensuring the differential back pressure regulator controlling the two- 
phase inlet pressure accurately tracks the increasing hydrogen pressure. 
Record the hydrophilic and hydrophobic membrane pressure drop. Verify 
the outlet streams are clean. 

7) Decrease the current setting to the electrolysis cell stack to 3 amps, 
the standby current level. Record the hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
membrane pressure drop. 

8) Return the current level to the electrolysis stack to 75 amps. 
Measure the amount of gas being evolved in the water due to the drop in 
pressure by inserting the outlet water stream in the opening of an 



B-20 



r\ 



r 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 



inverted burette. The hydrogen evolution rate should not exceed 
3.1 ecftmn when the pressure is dropped from 75 psia to eminent. 

Measured evolution rate: _££[_cc/min 

9) Continue to cycle the current setting to the electrolysis cell stack; 
verify proper operation of the phase separator at both extremes of 
operating current levels. 

10) At the conclusion of the test fill the manifold ports with fresh DI 
water. 





Conductedby:_ l"K« hhy. Verified bj 

5.4 flnf"" ™»«-1r-r" tT ''« t,ng 

A system check-out test will be performed on the complete SPE OGA prior to 
the generation of oxygen and hydrogen gas. The test program wJl mclude 
validation of the system installation into the test fcrfh*. venficafcon .of 
Intern communication between the Electrical Interface Box (DB) and th 
Command & Display Unit (CDU), proof pressure testing of the system at 2 
times MAWP, and leakage testing at 1 time. MAWP. Upon successful 
completion of the system check-out test program, performance testing of tte 
system can be initiated. 

5.4.1 YHifYirtr f * 11fltion 

Prior to operation of the unit, proper installation into the test ^ty must be 
verified. A schematic of the test set-up is included as Figure 5.4.1-1. Both 
the oxygen and hydrogen outlet lines from the OGA will be connected tote 
respective interfaces on the fluids control panel. The oxygen relief interface 
will be allowed to vent to ambient, while the hydrogen vent interface will be 
connected to a line vented outside of the test cell. Feed water will be supplied 



B-21 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



O 



c 




c 



FIGURE 5.4.1-1 
SPE OGA TEST SCHEMATIC 



B-22 



/T^ 



r 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



by the facility DI water system; regulated nitxogen wdl be supply by £ 
» mitogen (am, Electrical power win be supphed by b. 216 ftr the 
115 VAC, 60 Hz, 3 pha« power, and by a Kepco power supp* f« * 28 Vd 
requirement. All electrical connections between the electrolyse DC power 
Tpply cart and the system will be completed. Chilled water for the OGA 

flow rate of 1 GPM and a temperature of 65 F. The cnuier wm 
minimum heat rejection capacity of 1000 watte, minimum. 

Once installation into the facility is completed, the CDU «*~^ A 
loaded into an IBM personal computer which will serve as the CDU. A 
harness linking the ED to the CDU will he installed, and a line pnnter to 
record system performance data will be connected to the computer. 




Conducted by.. "™ ' -™ — Verified 




5.4.2 ffiffilirir* 1 rrnntymfflt Checfr-wt Testing 

Electrical testing of the system is conducted prior to conducting any other 
acceptance test to verify proper communication between the system contxoUer 
in the BIB and the CDU, proper actuation of all electrical components within 
*e system package and to verify proper installation of the wiring harnesses. 

5.4.2.1 Controller/Display Check-out 

Check-out testing of the CDU display is conducted to verify proper states of 
all actuated components and proper output of all instrumentation with the 
system in the OFF mode OFF state. 

1) Verify the RS-232 communications cable is properly installed 
between the CDU and the system ED3. 



B-23 




SPEOGA 

Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

Q 2) Apply power to the EIB and the CDU. Verify the system is in the 

OFF mode OFF state. 

3) Compare the status of all actuated components with the required 
status in the Effector Control State Definition Table of the SPE OGA 
Process Controller Software Requirements Specification (SRS) for the 
POR state. There shall be no discrepancies. 

4) Compare the values of all system parameters on the system 
parameter screen with the values listed in Table 5.4.2.1-L All values shall 
be within the ranges specified. 

5) Select the Assembly Configuration screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F4 key on the keyboard. The Oxygen Delivery configuration shall be 
set to "CONTINUOUS", and the Hydrogen Delivery configuration shall be 
set to "VENT". 

C 





Conducted bv: /j^7y-'f-rj\/ Verified byi 

5.4.2.2 Component Actuation/Harness Check-out 

All electrical components (with the exception of the electrolysis power supply 
and electrochemical hydrogen pump power supply) are actuated to verify 
proper sequence by the controller in the EIB and to verify the integrity of the 
electrical harnesses. Actuation of some of the components in the system is 
governed by control laws contained in the Effector Control Function section of 
the SRS. As a result, the controller may override and/or ignore the user's 
commands. 

1) Verify that the system and the CDU power is on and that the system 
is in the OFF mode OFF state. 



B-24 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



£Tn, 



SENSOR 

W745 

LEV606 

LEV605-1 

LEV605-2 

CVOLUME 

MVOLUME 

P7061 

P7062 

P7063 

DP709 

DP708 

P749 

T762-1 

T762-2 

T736-1 

T736-2 

CG746-1, 2 

CG746-3, 4 

CS755 

1766 

H2V768-1 

thru -4 

1768-1 thru 

-4 

VLT906-1 

thru -18 



TABLE 5.4.2.1-1 
SPE OGA OPERATING PARAMETERS 

pF.SCRIPTION 

Recirculating water loop flow switch 
Retire water loop bellows accum. level 
Feed water bellows accumulator level 
Feed water bellows accumulator level 
Calculated proton water volume 
Measured proton water volume 
Oxygen outlet pressure sensor 
Nitrogen reference pressure sensor 
Oxygen generation pressure sensor 
Oxygen phase separator differential 
Hydrogen phase separator differential 
Hydrogen pressure sensor 
Retire, water loop temperature 
Retire water loop temperature 
Heat exchanger water outlet temp. 
Heat exchanger water outlet temp. 
Combustible gas sensor, ambient 
Combustible gas sensor, oxygen outlet 
Retire water loop conductivity sensor 
Electrolysis cell stack current sensor 
Electrochemical hydrogen pump cell 

potential 

Electrochemical hydrogen pump cell 

current 

Electrolysis cell potential 



VALUE 
NO FLOW 
0-55 in 8 
0-55 in* 
0-55 in 8 
0-30 in 8 
0-30 in 8 
15 ±1 psia 
15 ± 2 psia 
1 ± 1 psig 
1 ± 1 psid 
1 ± 1 psid 
1 ± 1 psig 
Amb.±2°F 
Amb.±2°F 
Amb.±2°F 
Amb.±2°F 
1 ± 1% LEL 
1±1%LEL 
<10umho/cm 
1 ± 1 amps 
<1VDC 

.005 ±.005 A 

<1VDC 



B-25 




8PEOGA 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 

2) Place the system in the MANUAL mode by depressing the F3 key on 
the keyboard, followed by selecting the MANUAL mode. Once in the 
MANUAL mode, depressing the P5 key on the keyboard, followed by 
entering the correct password, brings up the MANUAL mode menu 
screen. 

3) Actuate, in order and singularly, the components listed in the table. 
Measure the power requirement of each actuated component and record in 
Appendix A. Deactivate each component upon verification of its proper 
operation. Record and resolve any problems encountered during actuation 
of any component. 

4) Return to the Mode Selection screen and place the system in the OFF 
mode. Verify the system transitions to the OFF mode OFF state. 





("" Conducted bv: A&7 > / U* , Verified by; 

5.4.2.3 Controller Setpoints 

The controller in the EIB uses variable setpoints in the control software to 
allow flexibility during testing of the SPE OGA. Prior to initiating 
acceptance testing of the system, the correct values for the setpoints are 
verified. 

1) Verify that the system and the CDU power is on and that the system 
is in the OFF mode OFF state. 

2) Select the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F6 key on the keyboard. 

3) Verify the Oxygen Requirement is set at 7.40 lb/day, the Light Side is 
set at 54 minutes and the Dark Side is set at 36 minutes, the respective 

r default settings. 

B-26 



<T\ 



r 




SPEOGA. 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 



4) TiewtheBetpointdatabydepressi^theFlkeyon^ekej^ 
Verify the values for the setpoints by comparing to the CDU Setpoint 
Communication Data Packet Tables contained in the Control ft Display 
Unit Communication Inputs section of the Process Controller SRS. 
Resolve any discrepancies between the values in the table and those 
displayed on the screen before proceeding further. 




Conductedby: A<? ^ - Verifiedb ^ 

5.4.2.4 Verification of System Anomalies 

The SPE OGA has been designed to safely generate oxygen and hydrogen gas 
from the electrolysis of water. System instrumentation, in conjunction with 
the system controller, constantly monitor system health and performance. If 
the controller monitors an outK>Mimit condition, an automatic shutdown of 
the system is initiated. Prior to conducting performance testing of the 
system, all system shutdown levels will be verified Refer to the Fault 
Detection Function section of the Process Controller SRS for a listing of all 
anomalies and the associated shutdown level, and the Anomaly Messages 
section of the CDU SRS for the corresponding error messages. The 
procedures for safely conducting the verification of the shutdown levels will 
be developed at the time of testing. In most instances, the sensor wffl be 
replaced with an alternate stimulus that would replicate the signal the 
controller would expect to receive from that sensor. The stimulus would then 
be varied until the anomaly was triggered. The system will remain m the 
OFF mode for the duration of this phase of testing. As each anomaly is 
verified, confirm the system transitions from the OFF mode OFF state to the 
OFF mode FAILURE state. The anomaly can be cleared by changing modes 
for a Level 2 anomaly (transition from the OFF mode to the IMMEDIATE 
SHUTDOWN mode and back again), or by cycling power to the EIB to reset 
the controller for a Level 1 anomaly. 



Conductedby. f&rfrfor Verifiedbyj 

(s& "tot* I'm**] /n **0 '^ 
-7£ir frfij) B _ 27 




n 




SPEOGA 

Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



5.4.3 Proof nrftaatira f^ 



A proof pressure test of 2 times the MAWP of the fluid circuit with the 
highest pressure will be conducted on the complete SPE OGA system (for the 
SPE OGA, the nitrogen reference is the highest). Since the three metal 
bellows water accumulators have been proof pressure tested previously as 
part of the Technology Demonstrator program, and they will have already 
been charged with nitrogen, they will not be subjected to an additional proof 
pressure test in order to prevent damage to the bellows itself. In addition, 
the Item 7063 pressure sensor will be removed to prevent damage to the 
sensor diaphragm, and the Item 163 relief valve outlet will be capped to 
prevent loss of nitrogen during the test. The isolation valve to the 
combustible gas sensor housing located at the oxygen outlet of the oxygen 
phase separator assembly will also be closed to prevent damage to the 



sensors. 



(^ Since the system has been designed to prevent reverse fluid flows and the 

inadvertent pressurization of one fluid loop with fluid from another proof 
pressure and leakage testing of the system must be conducted by introducing 
the pressurizing fluid at different locations within the system. Pressurizing 
upstream and downstream of some components (in particular the 
membranes of the phase separator which allow one fluid to pass but not the 
other) ensures they wffl not be damaged internally during the proof pressure 
test. Sufficient safeguards exist in the system, however, to prevent damage 
due to pressure excursions during normal system operation. 

1) Verify the outlet to the Item 163, nitrogen relief valve, is capped. 

2) Verify Items 080-1 and 080-2, the shut*>ff valves to the Item 605-1 and 
Item 605-2, feed water bellows accumulators, are dosed. 

3) Verify Items 080A-1 and 080A-2, the shut-off valves to the Item 606 
recirculating water loop bellows accumulator, are closed. 

4) Verify Item 080-3, the shut-off valve for the oxygen phase separator is 
closed. 



B-28 



•" 




SFEOGA 

Master Test Flan 

Rev. Basic 



r* 5 ) Item 051A, nitrogen pressumation solenoid valve and Items 081-1 

1 end 081-2, feed water solenoid valve., must be energized oper . ■ .orier* 



pressurise the nitrogen and feed water circuits. Disconnect the electncd 
Lness at connector designation J801, and install the proof pressure test 
cable to energize the valves from a separate 115 VAC, 60 Hi .supply 
6) Attach a regulated nitrogen supply to the system ^*****~* 
the following points in the system (refer to Figures 5.4.5-1 and 5.4.5-2). 

a) The nitrogen inlet interface of the system package. 

b) The hydrogen outlet interface of the system package. 

c) The hydrogen vent interface of the system package. 

d) The water inlet interface of the system package. 

e) The shut-off valve at the oxygen phase separator oxygen outlet 

(Item 167-7). 

f) The shut-off valve downstream of the temperature sensor block 

housing Items 736-1 and 736-2 (Item 167-1). 

g) The shut-off valve upstream of the two-phase inlet to the 
hydrogen phase separator assembly (Item 167-2). 

h) The shut-off valve attached to the hydrogen valve manifold at 

the top of the system package (Item 167-3). 

i) The shut-off valve downstream of the water outlet of the 

hydrogen phase separator assembly (Item 167-4). 

j) The shut-off valve downstream of the Item 105-2 check valve 

(Item 167-5). 

k) The shut-off valve downstream of the oxygen phase separator 

water outlet (Item 167-6). 

7) Disconnect the electrical harness and remove Item 7063, oxygen 
pressure sensor, from its port; ^^J^J^^JSS^^f 
electrical harness to the sensor. * ^ c „, r *r ***r '•*• <^^ * 

8) Verify the CDU is installed and the power is on. Turn the system 
power on and verify the system is in the OFF mode OFF state. 

7Z2* P-sWtion of the system, monitor Items 708, 709 and » M^ 
(differential pressure sensors), Items 605-1, 605-2, and 606 (metal bellows J, 
accumulators), and Item 7061 (oxygen pressure sensor). The values 



B-29 



n 



C 









SPEOGA 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 




$i 



f 



§ 



Is i|s 



FIGURE 5.4.5-1 
SPE OGA PROOF PRESSURE INTERFACE LOCATIONS 



B-30 




<-*> 



r 



T 

« 



UJ 




U C/J 


H -J 


< UJ 
CL O 


Z ° 




8< 


to *-" 


g 


Z 



€> 



t 



SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



£u3 a 

583 

U on ,-5 

LL. -3T S 



/" 



FIGURE 5.4.5-2 
PROOF PRESSURE TEST SET-UP 



B-31 




SFEOGA 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 

O displayed on the CDU should only vary within acceptable electrical noise 

levels, and should not show any dear trends of increasing values with 
increasing pressurization. If any trend appears, immediately stop the 
test, depressurize the system and resolve the discrepancy. 

10) Verily the nitrogen regulator is closed and that there is no pressure 
in the nitrogen test manifold by opening the needle valve in the manifold 
to exhaust any pressure. Close the needle valve. 

11) Open the nitrogen supply valve upstream of the nitrogen test 
manifold. ^ ^ 

12) Verify the shut-off valves from Step 6 (Items 167-1 thru 167-^0 are 
completely open. Energize the Item 051A, nitrogen solenoid valve, and 
Items 081-1 and 081-2, water solenoid valves, using the separate harness 
installed in step 5. 

13) Slowly pressurize the system by increasing the regulator setting in 
10 psig increments. Allow the pressure readings on the nitrogen pressure 
gauges and the differential pressure sensors to stabilize prior to 
increasing pressure. 

^ 14) Continue to increase pressure until the nitrogen pressure on the 

gauge equals 150 +2/-0 psig. Maintain this pressure for a minimum of 5 
minutes. After the 5 minute period, slowly depressurize the system by 
opening the needle valve in the nitrogen test manifold. Monitor the 
differential pressure sensors to ensure equal depressurization throughout 
the system. After depressurization, visually check for any permanent 
deformation. No deformation is allowed. 



Conducted bv:J).Q. £flfl,(L . Verified by: 




B-32 



r 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 



/-n 5.4.4 fiffl tf m If fl Vfl<ire te8t 

Leakage testing of the system can be conducted immediately ^Jhep^of 
pressure test by limiting the depressurization level to 1 ^esMAWP 
(75 psig). Otherwise, it is necessary to repeat Steps 1-13 as outlined in the 
proof pressure test procedure. 

14) Continue to increase pressure until the nitrogen pressure on the 
gauge equals 75 +2/-0 psig. Maintain this pressure for a minimum of 5 
minutes. After the 5 minute period, close the nitrogen inlet valve and 
monitor the nitrogen pressure for 15 minutes. No decay in pressure is 
permissible. If the pressure decays, use leak detection fluid to determine 
the source of any gas leaks in the oxygen and hydrogen circuits, and £<** 
search for water leaking in water containing circuits. As an opfao^ the s ^<g 
system may be depressurized and recharged with helium, and a hehum c > 
detector employed to determine the source of any leak. Correct any leak J, Tjf> 

before proceeding further in the test program. <\t ^^ 

r 15) At the conclusion of the test, slowly depressurize the system by ^g> 

owning the needle valve in the nitrogen test manifold. Monitor the \^ 
differential pressure sensors to ensure equal depressurization throughout " 
the system. 

16) Restore the system to its original configuration before proceeding 
further in the test program. 







Conducted ty^ft, tiMA~ Verified by. 

5.5 Mflflf/Hfaito Transition Vf* riffoation 

The various mode and state transitions allowed for the SPE OGA will be 
demonstrated to verify proper sequencing of the software controller through 
the appropriate states within a mode and to verify correct control of system 



B-33 




SPEOGA 

Master Test Han 
Rev. Basic 

(7) hardware within a state (refer to the Effector Control Function section of the 

Process Controller SRS). A test schematic for conducting these tests is 
presented in Figure 5.4.1-1. The Oxygen Delivery configuration and 
Hydrogen Delivery configuration will remain at their default values of 
"CONTINUOUS- and "VENT", respectively, and the Oxygen Requirement 
will remain at its default setting of 7.40 lb/day for the purposes of this test 
sequence. 

5.5.1 PURGE State 

The following test procedures verify proper transition of the system from the 
OFF state to the PURGE state, and from the PURGE state to the PROCESS- 
VENT state, and demonstrate effector controls applicable to the PURGE 
state. 



C 



1) Turn the power to the system on. Verify the system is in the OFF 
mode OFF state. 

2) Select the Mode Selection screen on the CDU by depressing the F3 
key on the keyboard and select the ON mode. Verify the system 
transitions from the OFF mode OFF state to the ON mode PURGE state. 
Upon entering the PURGE state, the following effector controls are active 
(refer to the Effector Control State Definition Table in the Process 
Controller SRS): 

•V081-1 Fill Control 

•V051A & V053 Purge Control 

•PS797 On Control 

In addition, the recirculating water pump, Item 463, is energized and the 
flow is set for "RECIRC" gpm throughout all states in the ON mode. 
Verification of the correct operation of these controls is described below: 

VQ81-1 Fill Control: The feed water inlet valve (Item 081-1) is set to 
"OPEN" if the feed water accumulator level (LEV605-2 if V003 is 



B-34 



v 




SPEOGA 
Matter Tast Plan 
Rev. Basic 



■FniMJEAlW or LEV605-1 if V003 i. -FIUailBAIST) i. iewthan 

TtoJZ* accumulator level i. greater than the maxnnum dram 
tank level, "MEDLEV in». 

MIA to set to "SHUT and the system nitrogen purge valve Otem 053) « 
££ -O^eV upon entry into the PURGE state. After a penod of water 
^L CACCT1ME" minutes), the feu* nitrogen ^t valve^t 
^OTEIT. The system nitrogen purge valve (Item 053) » set to SHUT 
le the nitrogen inlet valve (Item 051A) has been open for greater than 
the purge time CN2PTME" minutes). 

?r „ n„ O-ntrol : The hydrogen phase separator **»*•££ 
hydrogen pump are energized and charged upon entenng the PURGE 
S^JLt t. the pumps is limited during initial chargmg to prev» 
damage to the power supply. Verify proper charging of the 
eteTochemica, hydrogen pump, hy ""^f^SS 
(H2V768-1 ttaBWeMJ and the cell ^ /^V*™??^ 
potentials should increase steadily to a level of approxunately 1.0 VDC 
while the cell currents should steadily decrease. 

3) Select the Mode Selection screen on the CDU by depressing the F3 
L ot the keyboard and select the STANDBY mode. Verify the system 
SiS the ON mode PURGE state to the "^^ 
PURGE state. Return the system to the ON mode and venfy the state 
re mains in PURGE. 

4) Verify the system transitions from the ON mode PURGE state to the 
ON mode PROCESS-VENT state when the system nitrogen pressure, 
Item 7062, equals or exceeds the value -STARTP" psia. 



B-3S 



c 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



O 5.5.2 PROCBflS.WNTafa.fai 



The following test procedures verify proper transition from the PROCESS- 
VENT state to the PROCESS state, and demonstrate effector controls 
applicable to the PROCESS-VENT state. 

1) Verify the Item 785, electrolysis power supply, is powered on when 
the system transitions from the PURGE state to the PROCESS-VENT 
state. 

2) Upon entering the PROCESS-VENT state, the following effector 
controls are active: 



•V003 Recycle Control 
•V081-1 Fill Control 
•V051A Pressure Control 
•Pump 464 Fill Control 
r »PWR785 On Control 



•PS797 On Control 

Verification of the correct operation of these controls is described below: 

V003 Recycle Control: The feed water accumulator four-way ball valve, 
Item 003, is set to "FILL1/DRAIN2" if Item 605-2 is the fill tank (V003 is 
"FILL2/DRAIN1") and the accumulator level LEV605-2 is greater than the 
tank full limit "HIGHLEV" in3. Conversely, the feed water accumulator 
four-way ball valve (Item 003) is set to "FILL2/DRAIN1" if Item 605-1 is 
the fill tank (V003 is "FILLiyDRAIN2") and the accumulator level 
LEV605-1 is greater than the tank full limit "HIGHLEV" in*. 

V081-1 Fill Control; Described in section 5.5.1. 

V051A Pressure Control: The facility nitrogen inlet valve, Item 051A, is 
set to "OPEN" when the nitrogen accumulator pressure, P7062, is less 
than the minimum pressure limit, "OPENV" psia. The facility nitrogen 



B-36 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

n\ inlet valve, Item 051A, is set to "SHUT when the nitrogen accumulator 

pressure is greater than the maximum pressure limit, "CLOSEV" psia. 

p^mnAfii Fill Control : The feed water pump, Item 464, is set to "ON", the 
feed water pump flow rate is set to "FEEDGPM" gpm, and the feed pump 
valve, Item 081-2, is set to "OPEN" if the feed water inlet valve, Item 081- 
1, is "SHUT", and the recirculation water loop metal bellows accumulator 
level, LEV606, is less than the minimum operating limit, "LOWACC" in 3 . 
The feed water pump is set to "OFF", the feed water pump flow rate is set 
to gpm, and the feed pump valve is set to "SHUT if the feed water inlet 
valve is "OPEN" or the recirculation water loop metal bellows accumulator 
level, LEV606, is greater than the maximum operating limit, 
"HIGHACC" in 3 . 

PWR785 On Control: The electrolysis power supply, Item 785, is set to 
"ON" and the current control setting set to "STANDBYT amps upon 
entering the PROCESS-VENT state. The current setting is increased 
f "INCREMENTT amps every "STEPI" seconds until the current equals 

"NOMT amps. 

PS797 On Control : Described in section 5.5.1. 

3) Select the Mode Selection screen on the CDU by depressing the F3 
key on the keyboard and select the STANDBY mode. Verify the system 
transitions from the ON mode PROCESS-VENT state to the STANDBY 
mode PROCESS-VENT state. Return the system to the ON mode and 
verify the state remains in PROCESS-VENT. 

4) Monitor the nitrogen accumulator pressure, P7062. When the 
pressure sensor reading equals or exceeds "HIGHLIM" psia, the timer 
•VENTTIME" is initiated. At the end of "VENTTIME" minutes, verify the 
system transitions from the ON mode PROCESS-VENT state to the ON 
mode PROCESS state. 

r 



B-37 



c 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



Q 5.5.3 TOOfiBSS State 



The following test procedures verify proper operation of the system in the 
PROCESS state, and demonstrate effector controls applicable to the 
PROCESS state. 

1) Upon entering the PROCESS state, the following effector controls are 
active: 

• V003 Recycle Control 
•V005 Vent Control 
•V081-1 Fill Control 
•V051A Pressure Control 
•Pump 464 Fill Control 
•PWR785 On Control 
•PS797 On Control 

r~ Verification of the correct operation of these controls is described below: 

V003 Recycle Control : Described in section 5.5.2. 

V0Q5 Vent Control: The three-way hydrogen solenoid valve, Item 005, 
defaults to the "VENT" position, delivering product hydrogen gas to the 
hydrogen vent interface. Select the Assembly Configuration screen on the 
CDU by depressing the F4 key on the keyboard and select "REDUCTION" 
for the Hydrogen Delivery configuration; the position of the three-way 
solenoid valve changes from "VENT" to TRODUCT", redirecting the flow 
of hydrogen from the hydrogen vent interface to the hydrogen outlet 
interface for subsequent delivery to a hydrogen reduction system. 

V081-1 Fill Control: Described in section 5.5.1. 

V051A Pressure Control : Described in section 5.5.2. 

P ^rqp 4<U Ffll Control : Described in section 5.5.2. 



B-38 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



Pfffl 7flfi rv control : Described in section 5.5.2. 
p <^7ft7 fw» Control : Described in section 5.5.1. 

5.5.4 FHT J) State 

The follows test procedure, verify proper traction from the PROCESS 
etate to the HOLD state, and demonstrate effector controls apphcable to the 
HOLD state. 

1) With the system in the ON mode PROCESS state, select the Mode 
Selection screen on the CDU by depressing the F3 key on the keyboard 
and select the STANDBY mode. Verify the system transitions from toe 
ON mode PROCESS state to the STANDBY mode HOLD state, and that 
the three-way solenoid valve position V005 is set to -VENT. 

2) Upon entering the HOLD state, the following effector controls are 
active: 

•V003 Recycle Control 
•V081-1 Fill Control 
•V051A Pressure Control 
•Pump 464 Fill Control 
•PWR785 On Control 
•PS797 On Control 

Verification of the correct operation of these controls is described below. 
Ynftfl fl ff Y rlA Control : Described in section 5.5.2. 
YAP1-1 Fill Control: Described in section 5.5.1. 
ynft-lft Pr^nrP Control : Described in section 5.5.2. 



B-39 



c 



c 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



(~^ Pump 464 Fill Control: Described in section 5.5.2. 



PWR785 On Control: The electrolysis power supply current setting is 
instantaneously reduced to "STANDBYT amps. Verify current has been 
reduced by monitoring the current shunt reading, 1766, on the CDU 
screen. 

PS797 On Control: Described in section 5.5. L 

3) Select the Mode Selection screen on the CDU by depressing the F3 
key on the keyboard and select the ON mode. Verify the system 
transitions from the STANDBY mode HOLD state to the ON mode 
PROCESS state. The electrolysis power supply will increase the current 
setting TNCREMENTT amps every "STEPI" seconds until the PROCESS 
current setting is achieved. 

5.5.5 RECIRC and OFF States 

The following test procedures verify proper transition from the PROCESS 
state to the RECIRC state, and demonstrate effector controls applicable to 
the RECIRC state. 

1) With the system in the ON mode PROCESS state, select the Mode 
Selection screen on the CDU and select the OFF mode. Verify the system 
transitions from the ON mode PROCESS state to the OFF mode RECIRC 
state. Verify the electrolysis power supply PWR785 is turned off, and a 
nitrogen purge of the hydrogen circuit has been initiated (V053 is set to 
"OPEN"). 

2) The recirculating water pump, Item 463, remains "ON" at a flow 
setting of "RECIRC" gpm to purge the loop of oxygen gas. After 
"ACCnME" minutes, the system transitions from the OFF mode RECIRC 
state to the OFF mode OFF state, and the recirculating water pump 
(PMP463) is set to "OFF". 



B-40 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



3) Select the Mode Selection screen on the CDU and select the 
IMMEDIATE SHUTDOWN mode. Verify the system transitions from the 
OFF mode OFF state to the IMMEDIATE SHUTDOWN mode OFF state. 
Return the system to the OFF mode. 





rnn fat-"T f*-7;**r Verifiedby, 
5.6 Pfirfrrm™ nffft Test 

The purpose of the performance test is to demonstrate continuous and cyclic 
operation of the SPE OGA, to verify the effectiveness of the refurbishment, 
and measure system performance parameters such as oxygen production 
rates, gas quality .and power consumption of the system. The performance 
test will be divided into two activities: continuous operation and cyclic 
operation. 

5.6.1 fifttitJTwinug flYflfr*™ operation 

The system will be run continuously to demonstrate variable oxygen 
production capability of the refurbished SPE OGA, measure the purity of the 
oxygen and hydrogen gases produced, demonstrate optional delivery to the 
hydrogen outlet interface for possible use by a CO2 reduction system, and 
verify proper system restart following a loss of power shutdown. 

1) Turn the power to the system and the CDU on. Verify the system is 
in the OFF mode OFF state. Measure system power while in the OFF 
state and record in Appendix A. 

2) Select the Assembly Configuration screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F4 key on the keyboard. Verify the Oxygen Delivery configuration is 
set to "CONTINUOUS" and the Hydrogen Delivery configuration is set to 
"VENT", the respective default settings. 



B-41 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

(~^ 3) Select the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU by depressing 

the F6 key on the keyboard. Verify the Oxygen Requirement is 
7.40 lb/day, the default oxygen production rate. Verify the light Side 
duration is 54 minutes, and the Dark Side duration is 36 minutes, the 
respective default settings (NOTE: Since the Oxygen Delivery 
configuration is set-to, 
change siateo 
minutes of operation). 



C 



ateo fr e m ihi PROOEOO uiuki Oo the HOLD s taff: after 54 



4) Select the Mode Selection screen on the CDU by depressing the F3 
key on the keyboard. Select the ON mode. Verify the system transitions 
from the OFF mode OFF state to the ON mode PURGE state. Verify the 
PURGE state transitions to the PROCESS-VENT state, and finally to the 
PROCESS state. Measure power while in the PURGE state, the 
PROCESS-VENT state and the PROCESS state and record in 
Appendix A. 

r 5) While the system is in the PROCESS-VENT and PROCESS state, 

note the quality of the exiting oxygen and hydrogen gases. Verify both 
streams are free of liquid water, especially at the beginning of PROCESS- 
VENT. The hydrogen phase separator has been refurbished to preclude 
water carry-over during system start-up transient conditions. 
6) The refurbished SPE OGA incorporates a liquid-to-liquid heat 
exchanger that has sufficient capacity to reject the waste heat generated 
by electrolysis cells operating at a wnTimnm potential of 2.5 Vdc per celL 
Monitor performance of the liquid-to-liquid heat exchanger throughout the 
conduct of this test program to ensure adequate heat rejection at all 
operating conditions. With cooling water flowing through the heat 
exchanger at a flow rate of 500 lb/hr (1 gpm) and an inlet temperature of 
65°F, the temperature of the two-phase fluid stream writing the heat 
exchanger should not exceed 70°F. 



7) Attach a wet test meter or other flow measurement device to the 
oxygen outlet and hydrogen vent interface. Measure and record the 
oxygen and hydrogen flow rates and calculate the mass flow rate in lb/day. 



B-42 



r 




SFEOGA 

Master Test Ran 
Rev. Basic 



Verify the oxygen production rate is 7.40 lb/day, minimum, and the 
hydrogen production rate is 0.93 lb/day, or one-eighth the oxygen rate. 
Include any calculations in Appendix B. 

8) Attach sample cylinders or other sampling device to the oxygen outlet 
and hydrogen vent interface and obtain samples of each gas. Analyze the 
oxygen for hydrogen and the hydrogen for oxygen. Record the results in 
Appendix C. 

9) Select the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F6 key on the keyboard. Change the Oxygen Requirement from 
7.40 lb/day to the tt^™™"™ requirement of 6.66 lb/day. Verify the current 
setting to the electrolysis cell stack has been reduced (1766). 

9) Attach a wet test meter or other flow measurement device to the 
oxygen outlet and hydrogen vent interface. Measure and record the 
oxygen and hydrogen flow rates and calculate the mass flow rate in Ih/day. 
Verify the oxygen production rate is 6.66 lb/day, ininimum, and the 
hydrogen production rate is 0.83 lb/day, or one-eighth the oxygen rate. 
Include any calculations in Appendix B. 

10) Select the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F6 key on the keyboard. Change the Oxygen Requirement from 
6.66 lb/day to the maximum requirement of 8.14 lb/day. Verify the 
current setting to the electrolysis cell stack has been increased (1766). 

11) Attach a wet test meter or other flow measurement device to the 
oxygen outlet and hydrogen vent interface. Measure and record the 
oxygen and hydrogen flow rates and calculate the mass flow rate in Ih/day. 
Verify the oxygen production rate is 8.14 lb/day, minimum, and the 
hydrogen production rate is 1.02 lb/day, or one-eighth the oxygen rate. 
Include any calculations in Appendix B. 



B-43 




SPEOGA 

Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 

12) Select the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F6 key on the keyboard. Change the Oxygen Requirement from 
8.14 lb/day to the nominal requirement of 7.40 lb/day. Verify the current 
setting to the electrolysis cell stack has been reduced (1766). 

13) Select the Assembly Configuration screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F4 key on the keyboard. Change the Hydrogen Delivery configuration 
to "REDUCTION". Verify the hydrogen delivery is diverted from the 
hydrogen vent interface to the hydrogen outlet interface, and V005 has 
switched ftom "VENT" to "PRODUCT". 

14) Adjust the hydrogen back pressure regulator on the test panel until 
the hydrogen pressure at the regulator is 25 psig, the maximum back 
pressure expected for delivery of hydrogen to a CO2 reduction system. 
Verify no hydrogen flow at the hydrogen vent interface. Monitor 
performance of the Item 005 valve during the conduct of the acceptance 
program; prior testing of the OGA resulted in failure of the solenoid coil in 

(~ the valve due to operating temperatures which exceeded the maximum 

design temperature. The valve has since been modified to reduce the 
operating voltage once the valve has been actuated. 

15) The recirculating water loop in the original Technology Demonstrator 
system experienced pump priming problems at start-up. The 
refurbishment of the system addressed this problem by reducing the 
operating pressure of the loop, minimising pressure drop within the loop, 
and operating the recirculating water loop bellows accumulator with a 
fixed nitrogen charge such that the pump inlet never operates at 
subambient pressure. Verify the effectiveness of the refurbishment by 
removing power to the EIB, thereby initiating a loss of power shutdown. 
After approximately 10 seconds, return power to the EIB and verify the 
system is in the OFF mode OFF state. Select the Mode Selection screen 
and select the ON mode. Verify the system transitions from the OFF 
mode OFF state to the ON mode PURGE state. Verify the recirculation 
pump, Item 463, operates correctly by monitoring the status of the flow 

C 

B-44 



n 




SPSCGA 
Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 



switch, Item 745, and by observing pressure drop DP709 across the 
oxygen phase separator assembly, Item 907. 

16) Repeat a loss of power shutdown, followed by a system restart, a 
minimum of 5 times to confirm proper pump priming. 






Conducted by:__j£±£ZL£z4^1- Verified 
5.6.2 ffrflKr Bvateim operation 

The SPE OGA will be operated cyclically to demonstrate the ability of the 
system to produce the daily requirement of oxygen while operating only on 
the light side of the space station orbit The system will transition to a 
HOLD state when the dark side of the orbit is simulated, with only a trickle 
current provided to the electrolysis cell stack to maintain pressure control of 
the hydrogen system and to offset diffusion losses. System instrumentation 
and operation of the pumps is also active during the dark side operation. 
Variable oxygen production capability and the ability of the system to deliver 
hydrogen to the outlet interface for possible use by a C0 2 reduction system 
will be demonstrated with the system operating in a cyclical mode. 

1) Turn the power to the system and the CDU on. Verify the system is 
in the OFF mode OFF state. 

2) Select the Assembly Configuration screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F4 key on the keyboard. Set the Oxygen Delivery configuration to 
TERIODIC" and the Hydrogen Delivery configuration to "REDUCTION". 

3) Select the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F6 key on the keyboard. Verify the Oxygen Requirement is 
7.40 lb/day, the default oxygen production rate. Verify the Light Side 
duration is 54 minutes, and the Dark Side duration is 36 minutes, the 
respective default settings. 



B-45 



n 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

4) Select the Mode Selection screen on the CDU by depressing the F3 
key on the keyboard. Select the ON mode. Verify the system transitions 
from the OFF mode OFF state to the ON mode PURGE state. Verify the 
PURGE state transitions to the PROCESS-VENT state, and finally to the 
PROCESS state. Measure power while in the PROCESS-VENT state and 
the PROCESS state and record in Appendix A. 



5) Attach a wet test meter or other flow measurement device to the 
oxygen outlet and hydrogen vent interface. Measure and record the 
oxygen and hydrogen flow rates and calculate the mass flow rate in lb/day. 
Verify the oxygen production rate is 12.33 lb/day (7.4 lb/day at a duty cycle 
of 60%), minimum, and the hydrogen production rate is 1.54 lb/day, or 
one-eighth the oxygen rate. Include any calculations in Appendix B. 



C 



6) After operating in the PROCESS mode for 54 minutes, verify the 




nt to the electrolysis cell stack is 



reduced to "STANDBY!" amps, and the hydrogen delivery valve dive rts 



Vcwiy the current to the electrolysis cell stack 




returns to its original value 

Ui bkd) XjuliUfeLU UudHT5£r1Sce^Rro!r^ ia ¥R^U0 , F-). Operate the 

system for a mirnTniim of two more cycles at these operating conditions. 

7) Repeat steps 1-6 at the minimum oxygen requirement of 6.66 lb/day; +n*~^ 
and at the maTimnm value of 8.14 lb/day. 



8) With the system operating at the oxygen requirement of 8.14 lb/day, 
initiate a loss of power shutdown by removing power to the EIB. Return 
power to the EIB and verify the system is in the OFF mode OFF state. 



C 



9) Select the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F6 key on the keyboard. Verify the Oxygen Requirement is reset to 
7.40 lb/day. Select the Assembly Configuration screen on the CDU by 



B-46 




^) 



SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

depressing the F4 key on the keyboard. Verify the Oxygen Delivery and 
Hydrogen Delivery have returned to their default values of 
-CONTINUOUS" and "VENT", respectively. Select TERIODIC" for the 
Oxygen Delivery configuration, and "REDUCTION- for the Hydrogen 
Delivery configuration. 

10) Select the Mode Selection screen on the CDU by depressing the F3 
key on the keyboard and select the ON mode. Verify the system 
transitions from the OFF mode OFF state to the ON mode PURGE state. 
Verify the recirculation pump, Item 463, operates correctly by monitoring 
the status of the flow switch, Item 745, and by observing pressure drop 
DP709 across the oxygen phase separator assembly, Item 907. 

11) Select the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F6 key on the keyboard. Enter 60 minutes for Light Side, and 30 
minutes for Dark Side. 

12) Once the system transitions to the ON mode PROCESS state, verify 
the state remains in PROCESS for 60 minutes. Measure and record the 
oxygen flow rate and calculate the mass flow rate in lb/day. Include any 
calculations in Appendix B. Verify the oxygen production rate is 11.10 






after 30 minutes 






13) After a minimum of 2 cycles at this duty cycle, select the Modify/View 
Operation screen on the CDU by depressing the F6 key on the keyboard. 
Enter 54 minutes for Light Side, and 36 minutes for Dark Side. Continue 
cyclic testing of the system until 3 days prior to the system ship date. 

14) At the conclusion of testing, select the Mode Selection screen on the 
CDU and select the OFF mode. Verify the system transitions from either 



B-47 




SPEOGA 

Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 

("'• the ON mode PROCESS state, or the STANDBY mode HOLD state, to the 

OFF mode OFF state. 








Conducted hv : Avcy/ 7- £s^/ Verified byy ^S^^^c 

5.7 Final Tftating 

Final testing of the system is conducted to verify the unit is ready for delivery 
to the customer. 

5.7.1 Verification of system pargmpf*^ 

1) Turn the power to the system and the CDU on. Verify the system is 
in the OFF mode OFF state. 

C 2) Select the Assembly Configuration screen on the CDU by depressing 

the F4 key on the keyboard. Verify the Oxygen Delivery and Hydrogen 
Delivery configurations are set at their default settings of 
"CONTINUOUS" and "VENT", respectively. 

3) Select the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU by depressing 
the F6 key on the keyboard. Verify the Oxygen Requirement is set at its 
default setting of 7.40 lb/day, and the Light Side and Dark Side settings 
are at^fand jMHninutes, respectively. 

4) Select pages 2 and 3 of the Modify/View Operation screen on the CDU 
by depressing the Fl key on the keyboard. Review the setpoint values and 
compare with those listed in the CDU Setpoint Input Communication 
Data Packet tables of the Process Controller SRS. Resolve any 
discrepancies between the values displayed and those in the table. 




C Conducted hv: H%J J-, fas Verified by: 



y p 




/ 

B-48 







r 
r 

c 

D 



r 

c ^ 

c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 

c 



DATE: 16-JUN- 


-95 




SPE OOi 


/. 


TIME: 13:=.. 






MODE: OFF 




STATE: OFF 




STATUS: NORMAL 




TOTAL OPERATION TINE: 


0.0 


HRS OXYGEN PRODUCTION RATE: 


0. 


,00 LB/DA'r 


ELECTROLYSIS 


DUTY CYCLE: 


100 


*.' HYDROGEN 


PRODUCTION RATE: 


0. 


,00 LB/DAY 


STANDBYI 


1.0 




INCREMENTI 


5.0 


STEPI 




5.0 


R EC IRC 


0.60 




ACCTIME 


2.0 


HIGH02SEP 




10.0 


FEEDGPM 


0.024 




LOWACC 


10.5 


HIGHACC 




13.0 


LOWLEV 


6.5 




MEDLEV 


10.5 


HIGHLEV 




25.0 


STARTP 


50.0 




HIGHLIM 


70.0 


N2PTIME 




2.0 


AMBPRESS 


30.0 




OPENV 


73.0 


CLOSEV 




75.0 


VENT TIME 


1.0 




H2CELLV 


0.9 


H2CVTIME 




60.0 



CURRENT VALUE: 

ANOMALY: 

ADVICE: 



1.0000 



NEW VALUE: 



TF11 PAGE 

TF2T SUBSYSTEM PARA 

TF31 MODE SELECTION 



TF4T ASSY CNFG 
TF51 MANUAL OPER 
TF61 VIEW OPER 



TF71 ACKNOWLEDGE 
rF81 DATA LOGGING 
TF91 EXIT 



TF101 MODIFY OPER 
TFin EFFECTOR CNFG 
PAGE 2 OF 3 



DATE: 16-JUN-95 








SPE 


OGA 


TIME: 13:53:0." 


MODE: OFF 






STATE: OFF 




STATUS: NORMAL 


TOTAL OPERATION 


TIME: 




0.0 


HRS 


OXYGEN PRODUCTION RATE: 0.00 LB/DAY 


ELECTROLYSIS DUTY CYCLE: 


100 


*, 


HYDROGEN 


PRODUCTION RATE: 0.00 LB/DAY 


02FAIL1 


18.0 






02FAIL2 


30.0 


DEPRES1 25.0 


HIGHN2P 


85.0 






LEAKTIME 


55.0 


LEAKTIME2 3.0 


HIGHH2P 


50.0 






L0WH2P 


25.0 


DELTIME 2.0 


HIGHH2SEP1 


10.0 






HI6HH2SEP2 14.0 


T6 40.0 


H2SEP 


3.0 






L0WH2SEP 


1.0 


T5 30.0 


L0U02SEP 


1.0 






T3 


30.0 


T7 10.0 


HIGHSDACC 


45.0 






HIGHSDLEV 30.0 


HIMEDLEV 24.0 


LOWSDLEV 


2.0 






T8 


10.0 


CVGASTOL 7.0 


CVRATE 


5.0 






HIGHCOND 


10.0 


FILLTIME 5.0 


HIGHCELL 


2.5 






HIGHPUMP 


1.3 


LOWPUMP 0.1 


VTIME 


20.0 












CURRENT VALUE: 


18.0000 








NEW VALUE: 


ANOMALY : 














ADVICE: 














TF11 PAGE 




TF41 


ASSY 


CNFG 


TF71 ACKNOWLEDGE TF101 MODIFY OPER 


TF2T SUBSYSTEM 


PARA 


TF51 


MANUAL OPER 


TF81 DATA 


LOGGING TFin EFFECTOR CNFG 


TF31 MODE SELECTION 


TF61 


VIEW 


OPER 


TF91 EXIT 


PAGE 3 OF 3 



B-49 



c 



c 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



O 5.7.2 Post-test visual inspection 



Inspect the system for any obvious defects due to improper handling during 
acceptance testing of the unit, or any improper wear of system components. 
Correct and/or repair any defects prior to shipment 





Conducted bv. fCActTJ. fas Verified byj 

5.7.3 System weight 

Prior to shipment, weigh the SPE OGA system package, and the electrolysis 
power supply cart. Record in the space below. 

System package: ° lb 

Power supply cart: 2 i I lb. 




CWnrted by. flS** 77- fOr Verified b; 




B-50 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



r> 



APPENDIX A 
SYSTEM POWER REQUIREMENTS 



B-51 



o 



CI 



c 




B-52 



o 



> 



s 



H 



Ml 

2 

E 



/- ! 



3 * 



i 

1 



a. 



S 

>■ 
« 



I 



B-53 






o 



*C0 
OQ. 

C5 fe <T " 
O^oCO 

... J to J 

Q. HI * m 
C0QU.O 

1— W> 



< 



tu 

»- 
O 

Q. 



< 
S 
UJ 

Q. 

o 

z 

z 
s 



■ 1 ■ 1 . 1 ■ I . 1 « 1 S I 



1 




o 



> 



- o 



IO 

evi 



«e eo e4 ^ 
d oi eg w 



CM 



1-+ 

o> so f<« <o 



o 
oo 



o 

CD 



I 

UJ 



oc 

UJ 

OL 

o 



^> 



o 



o 

CM 



IO 



(OQA) lVLLNaiOd 1133 



*Z? 



B-54 



in 



o 
eg 



1 



<<5r 

2d g 2 

0. Ill ' Hi 

obb° 



o 
o 



Ui 

O 

Q. 

O 

z 

DC 
Ui 

a. 
o 

s 
s 

5 



o 

00 



X 
UJ 

2 
P 

° a 



^ 



< 

CL 

o 



o 



cm 



CM 



1 . 1 ■ 1 ■ 1 ■ 1 ' I 

CO CNj ^ M 0> • 

cvi c\i c\i *- *- 

(OQA) !VLLN310d 1130 



o 

CM 



-i — I — i — r ° 

|>. «D »f> 



v_x 



B-55 



in 



n 



o 

CM 



J 



© 

o 






© 

00 



OO.C0 

Q.UJ • j 
WQU- UJ 

cbbO 



Sco 



z 

UJ 

o 

Q. 
O 

z 

5 

DC 
Ul 

o. 

O 

z 
s 



o 



X 

UJ 

2 
i= 
(3 

z 

§ 

c 

UJ 

Q. 

o 



-^ 



o 



o 

CM 



1 . I . 1 ■ I ■ I . 1 



IO •* P) C4 i-; CM OJ 

CM CM CM CM CM ^ 

(OQA) IVUNHlOd TI30 



IA 



^ 



B-56 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



o 



APPENDIX B 
GAS PRODUCTION RATE CALCULATIONS 



r 



r 



B-57 



n 




SPEOGA 

Master Test Flan 
Rev. Basic 



O2 (LB/DAY) - KCFM, meaauredXP - V**V) I (RXT ♦ 460)1(32 lb/!b-moleX60 min/hrX24 hr/day)] 
H2 (LB/DAY) - KCFM, meaauredXP • P**?) / (RXT + 460)1(2 Hrfb.moUX60 min/hrX24 hr/day)] 



whan: 



CFM * gas volumetric flow rate (cubic feetfminute) 

P « barometric + wet toft meter maaometar pressure (paia) 

P^P - vapor preesure of wator at temperature T (paia) 

R - univereal gae constant ■ 10.73 peia - cubic ft / lb mole • # R 

T ■ gas temperature in meter (*F) 



c 



TEST 
REP. 


Ot 


Hi 




PLOW 
(CFM) 


p 

(PSIA) 


T 
CF) 


pvap 
(PSIA) 


FLOW 

(LB/DAY) 


FLOW 
(CFM) 


P 

(PSIA) 


T 

TO 


pvap 

(PSIA) 


FLOW 

(LB/DAY) 


frttA 1 


,01,11* 


If.W 


Wfl? 


0.«/J 


7.r* 


.13^ 


/Y.i'J 


to 


OS I 


0.M7 


fcfe'*1 


.oun 


»V-V0 


'3fr 


y.v* 


&.*) 


.111.3 


IV.O 


$0 


[o.fi 


o.gfl 


PfttA M 


, oltf 


iv.yo 


"Vm 


0-V(, 


tf/W 


.mo 


iv.rj 


80 


OSI 


\-0H3 


ImA )<i 


— 





— 


— 


— 


0. )3<,b 


iM.n 


$0 


OSI 


<\M7 




. |IS"«V 


N. 4 * 


rt< /m 


.r& 


12.1,1 


XIHZ 


/v.va 


Ho 


tf SI 


/.r& 




.1011 


11.43 


g0"F 


.n 


/l.Z£ 


.2911. 


H-t8 


& 


dSi 


ay* 




.llJI 


IH.4? 


g(/°p 


.n 


tf-7*- 


.7H0V 


iHVb 


80 


oS 1 


/•7I 




.io\f 


IH-43 


nfi°f 


.«r? 


|l.5' 


- 


— 


- 


- 


- 







































































































































c 






B-58 



Table 1. Saturated Steam: Temperature Table 



Temp 

fahr 

! 



ar 

MJ 

iij 

38J 

«*j 
at 
to 
«j 
«u 

MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 

MJ 
IM 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 

7U 

715 
MJ 
7U 
7U 



OJ 

MJ 



NJ 
HI 
MJ 
MJ 



Abj Press 
Lb per 
Sqln 
P 



00869 
009600 
010395 
0.11249 

1171(3 
0.13143 
0.14192 
0.15314 
01(514 

0.17796 
0.191(5 
070625 
072183 
073443 

025611 
1274*4 
025497 
031(2( 
033*89 

0.36292 
03*844 
041550 
044420 
147461 

0.50683 
054093 
0.57702 
0.61518 

06S55i 

069813 
0.74313 
179062 
0.M072 
089356 



Specific Volume 

Sar S»« 

Liquid E»ap Vapor 

0016022 3304 7 3304 7 

0016021 30619 3061.9 

0016020 2839.0 2839.0 

0016019 2634 1 2634.2 



0016019 
0.016019 
0016019 
0.016020 
0016021 

0016023 
0.016024 
0016026 
0.016028 
0.016031 

0016033 
0.O16O36 
0.01(039 
0016043 
0.016046 

0016050 
0.016054 
0.016058 
0.016063 
0016067 

0016072 
0.016077 
0.016082 
0.016087 
0.016093 

0016099 
001610% 

0.016111 
0.016117 
0.016123 



24458 

22724 
21 128 
1965 7 
1830.0 

1704.8 
1589.2 
1482.4 
13836 
12927 

1207.6 
1129.2 
1056.5 
989.0 
926.5 

868.3 

8143 
7641 
717.4 
673.8 

(33.3 
595.5 
560.3 
227.5 
496.8 

468.1 
441.3 
4163 
3928 
370.9 



24458 

22724 
2112.8 
1965.7 
1830.0 

1704.8 
1519.2 
1482.4 
1383.6 
12927 

1207.6 
11297 
1056.5 
989.1 
926.5 

868.4 

8143 

764.1 
717.4 
673.9 

633.3 
595.5 
5603 
5275 
496.8 

4611 
4413 
4163 
392.9 
3703 



Sat. 
Liquid 

hi 



Enthalpy &* J l^ 
Sat. 
E*ap Vapor 



-0.0179 
1996 
4008 

6.018 

8027 
10.035 
12.041 
14047 
16.051 

11054 
20.057 
22.058 
24.059 
26.060 

28.060 
30.059 
32058 
34.056 
36.054 

38.052 
40049 
42.046 
44.043 
46.040 

48.037 
50.033 
52.029 
54.026 
56.022 

58.018 
60014 
62.010 
64.006 
66.003 



'l| 



10755 10755 

1074.4 10764 

10737 10772 

1072.1 1078.1 

1071.0 10790 

1069.8 1079.9 

1068.7 1080.7 

10674 1081.6 

1066.4 10*25 



10653 

10647 
1063.1 
10613 
10605 

1059.7 
10585 
1057.4 
10563 
10557 

10540 
1052.9 
1051J 
1050.7 
10495 

1048.4 
10473 
1046.1 
1O45.0 
1043.9 

1042.7 
1041.6 
1040.5 

1039.3 
10387 



10834 
10847 
10851 
1086O 
10869 

1087.7 
1088 J 
10895 
'.0904 
10917 

1092.1 
10930 
1093J 
1094.7 
10916 

1096.4 
10973 
10987 
10990 
10995 

1100.1 
1101.6 
1102.5 
11033 
11047 





Entropy 






Sat. 




Sat 


Temp 


Liquid 


Evap 


Vapor 


Fahr 


S| 


*'! 


s l 


t 


0.0000 


2.1873 


2.1873 


MJ* 


0.0041 


2.1762 


21802 


MJ 


0.0081 


2.1651 


21732 


MJ 


0.0122 


2.1541 


2 1663 


MJ 


0.0162 


2.1432 


2.1594 


MJ 


0.0202 


2.1325 


2.1527 


42J 


O0242 


2.1217 


2 1459 


MJ 


0.0282 


2.1111 


2.1393 


46J 


0.0321 


21006 


21327 


OJ 


0.0361 


2.0901 


2.1262 


MJ 


0.0400 


2.0798 


2.1197 


525 


0.0439 


2.0695 


2.1134 


MJ 


0.0478 


20593 


21070 


MJ 


0.0516 


2.0491 


2.1008 


MJ 


0.0555 


2.0391 


2.0946 


MJ 


0.0593 


2.0291 


2.0885 


125 


0.0632 


2.0192 


2.0874 


Ml 


00670 


2.0094 


2.0764 


UJ 


0.0706 


1.9996 


2.0704 


UJ 


0.0745 


1.9900 


20645 


>8J 


0.0783 


1.9804 


2.0587 


7}J 


00821 


1.9708 


20579 


74J 


00858 


1.9614 


20472 


76J 


0.0895 


1.9520 


2.0415 


78J 


0.0932 


1.9426 


2.0559 


MJ 


0.0969 


1.9334 


20303 


UJ 


0.1006 


1.9242 


2.0248 


MJ 


0.1043 


1.9151 


2.0193 


MJ 


0.1079 


1.9060 


2.0139 


MJ 


0.1115 


1.8970 


7.00*6 


MJ 


0.1152 


15*81 


2.0033 


KJ 


01188 


1J792 


19980 


MJ 


01224 


1J704 


1.9928 


MJ 


0.1260 


1J617 


1.9876 


MJ 



,- - 



I 



1MJ 
111.1 

1MJ 
1MJ 
IMJ 

IIU 
IIU 
114 J 
116J 
IIU 

IIU 
I22J 
IMJ 
12U 

17U 

IMJ 
1X2J 
IMJ 

IMJ 
IMJ 

I4U 
I4IJ 
144J 
14U 
IMJ 

IMJ 

1UJ 
IMJ 
IMJ 
IMJ 

1M.I 

1I2J 
IMJ 
IMJ 
IUJ 

IIU 

itjj 

IMJ 
17U 
ITU 



094924 
1.00789 
1.06965 

1.1347 

17030 

17750 
13505 
1.4299 
15133 
1.6009 

1.6927 
1.7891 

1.8901 
1.9959 
2.1068 

27230 
23445 
2.4717 
2.6047 
17438 

2.8892 
3.0411 
31997 
33653 
35381 

3.71M 
39065 
4 1025 
4.3068 

4.5197 

47414 
4.9722 
57124 
54623 
57273 

59976 

67736 
6.5656 
(.8690 

7)840 



0.016130 
0016137 
0.016144 
0016151 
0016158 

0016165 
0016173 
0016180 
0.016188 
0.016196 

0016204 
0016213 
0016221 
0016729 
001(238 

001(247 
O0I6256 
001(7(5 
0016274 
0016284 

0016293 
0016303 
0016312 
0.01(322 
001(332 

0016343 
0016353 
0016363 
001(374 
0016384 

0016395 
0016406 
0.016417 
0.016426 
0016440 

0016451 
00164(3 
001(474 
00164*6 
0016498 



3504 

331.1 

313.1 
29616 
28078 

26537 
251.37 
23871 
22S.M 
21470 

20375 
192.94 
18373 
174.08 
165.45 

15732 
149.(4 
142.40 
13555 
179.09 

12258 
11771 
111.74 
10(58 
10168 

9705 
9256 
8850 
M56 

8082 

77 27 
7390 
70.70 
(7(7 
64.78 

62.04 
5943 
5695 
54 59 
52 35 



3504 
331.1 
3131 
296.18 
28030 

2(539 
25138 
73872 
22555 
21471 

20376 
192.95 
18374 
174 09 
165.47 

15733 
149(6 
142.41 
13557 
129.11 

123.00 
11772 
111.76 
10(59 
10170 



9707 
9258 
8852 

8457 
(053 

7729 
7392 
7072 
(7(8 
(4.80 

(206 
5945 

56.97 
54.61 
52.36 



67.999 

69.995 

71.9S2 

73.99 

75.9* 

77.98 
79.98 
81.97 
8X97 
85.97 

87.97 
8996 
91.96 
9196 
95.96 

97.96 
99.95 
10155 
10195 

105.95 

10795 
109.95 
111.95 
11195 
115.95 

117.95 
119.95 
121.95 
123.95 
12196 

12796 
129.96 
131.96 
13197 
135.97 

137.97 
139.9* 
141.9* 
14399 
145.99 



1037.1 
10355 
1034.8 
10335 
10325 

1031.4 
10307 
1029.1 
1077.9 
103(5 

10255 
10245 
10233 
10227 
1021.0 

10118 
10117 
10175 
10114 
10157 

1014.0 
10125 
1011.7 
10105 
10013 

10087 
1007.0 
1005.8 
10046 
10034 

10027 
10010 
999.8 
99*6 
9974 

99(7 
995.0 
9938 
9925 
9914 



1105.1 
1105.9 
1106J 
1107.6 
11085 

11093 
11107 
1)11.0 
1111.9 
11I2J 

11135 
11144 
11153 
Hill 
11170 

1117J 
II IK 
11195 
11203 
1121.1 

1122.0 
11225 
11235 
11245 
11253 

11211 
11719 
11277 
11216 
1129.4 

11302 
11310 
1131.8 
1132.6 
11314 

11342 
1135.* 
11355 
113(5 
11374 



01795 


1J530 


15*25 


IMJ 


01331 


154M 


13775 


1825 


0136* 


1535* 


13725 


IMJ 


01402 


15273 


13675 


IMJ 


01437 


151*8 


13626 


IMJ 


01477 


15105 


13577 


IIU 


01507 


15021 


13528 


IIU 


01542 


1793* 


13480 


114J 


01577 


U85C 


13433 


IIU 


OKU 


1.7774 


133*6 


IIU 


OKU 


1.7(33 


13339 


IIU 


0.1(80 


17(13 


13293 


1225 


01715 


1.7533 


13247 


124J 


0.1749 


1.7453 


13202 


IIU 


01783 


1.7374 


13157 


IIU 


01817 


17295 


15112 


IMJ 


01851 


1.7217 


13068 


1325 


01884 


17140 


13024 


IMJ 


01918 


1.70(3 


159(0 


IMJ 


01951 


159K 


15937 


IMJ 


01985 


15910 


15*95 


14U 


07018 


15534 


15*52 


1415 


07051 


1.6759 


15*10 


1445 


070B4 


156*4 


157(9 


I4U 


07117 


15(10 


13727 


IMJ 


07150 


15536 


15CSC 


IMJ 


07183 


154(3 


1564* 


IUJ 


07216 


15390 


1560* 


IMJ 


07248 


15318 


1556* 


IMJ 


07281 


15245 


15526 


1U5 


07313 


18174 


154*7 


IMJ 


07M5 


1.6103 


15448 


1125 


07377 


15032 


15409 


1M5 


07409 


15961 


15371 


IM5 


07441 


15*12 


15333 


IMJ 


02473 


15822 


15295 


17U 


07505 


15753 


1525* 


ITU 


07537 


156*4 


15221 


174 J 


07568 


15(16 


151*4 


ITU 


07(00 


15548 


15147 


IIU 



B-59/B-60 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



APPENDIX C 
GAS PURITY 



B-61 




E 

(- 
< 

z 

U 

■J 



z o 

°0 
I- kl 
o »- 
u u 

(A J 

!l 

Z 
1- 



3 

i 

k. 

n 

x 



o 

> 

IT 
O 

< 



O 

Ll 

*- 

U 
3 
O 
Ll 

tr 



Slil 

u v 

E ^J 
U I 

Q 



'$ 



i° 



A. 



li 



m 



& 



u 

IE 

< 

c 



^ 



t- - 

,o' 
£ ^,; 

•""3C 
ui 

3 

Id 

E 



r 

o 

V 



ao 






So 
G 

1 



B-62 



UNITED 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



APPENDIX D 
TEST ANOMALIES 



B-63 






^C; 



o — 
jC i u. 
»Z0 

— ■' Sn , 
co cc a. 



v. 

I 

a: 
< 

i 



a 



(0 



on 

e 
o 



C3 


00 


s 


ED 

NOLO 
LTON 
DARD 


5 


< 

o 




NITI 
ECH 
AMI 
TAN 


£. 


o 
v 


SH-XIO 




1 



IN 



1 1 
5 « 



■o a. 
v o 

£. < 

=. O 

= o 



8 § 

S "° 

IS 



(2 

a 
_o 

"5 



z 




o 




F5 


UJ 


UJ 


oa 


H 


< 


UJ 


H 


a 


Z 


H 





U 
3 


t 


< 


7 


u. 






u. 


X 


u 


»J 


Q 


1 


uj 


■w 


t- 


u 

-J 


S 



s 




B-64 



t~- = 






■A 



© 
© — 

£og: 

w "> . ■ 
VI — uj 

= >. C 

>££ 



I 

a: 
< 

2 
i 

3 

Q 



UJ 

o 

7 Q 

ZUJ<P 
3t=X(0 







,u 






kfjj 



•1i 



I *^: -i »s^ 



i 'All 






is 



1" 






* w *• 



51 



I 



» 






it 



li 



51 



3 

si 

5} 



M 



A 






4 £ 

a** 

*1 



! V 



!«« 



5l 



51 



51 



d 



1 






n 



=i 



si« 



51 



Ji 
51 



*i 



•2 .0 H 
1 &~ 

** 7 > 



a » a 
s i § 



8 ,2 






5 s - 

r s 8 

.2 e «n 

b < it a 
on 

» s «■ £ 

fi -5 « .3 

~ o _ — 

* <• 5 
=s E 6 

• Co 
.— On 
o a w 



UJ 



H 

UJ 

Q 
O 
U 



-J 

% 

2 
O 



uj 



B-65 



t 



§ 



M 



\i 



v* 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



r 



DATE 



y-/7.?r 



1-i8-lf 



H-ao-tr 



c 



H-X-1S- 



y-j^?r 



f-n-<ts~ 



finr 



r-i-ir 



ANOMALY 



( 170* n a) if 0f>*" "7<^ i-*^6- 



(3. occAf/v) 



(2 occAShh!) 



cube 32f' t-otj /Le-cgiuuir,** /*u>-> 



ACTION TAKEN 



C*A*#i> StfiftgLe' "i.t-*£T,*tc'7" fit*" 

I.C m^>7n n 2-0 **~"T<3' If** ?/*>? 









•**•£" C>T#* 0H'f) Of(C*f r*o ****- 






catfe" It-f" U>u t£Cift<.vi*A-Ti*i> 



/l#w 



CoUc IX f' *-<>" OfC'XCi/istrn}* /*u>u/ 



/Hom o.tjf of* to arr*f"n 






Tfi-T,** DiFFtaavf co*.*e*n~ iLxmA'-t- 






code Olfb- lL<.e(rAL. X*J7dtf.<ST 






Cobc 2 IT- l*u* tC<-i*Cuu*Tif> A*" 



Cot€ 22S~- t-o<M HcciilC<*lA*>oJ ft-*" 



Slum o. >fV f-Am T*> OST- 6¥"1 



CHrtt to*JtJa.r«AT "** I'VE /?***£> 






o.¥V *** & o.n 6&1 C *rt*+*v ■** O-W *~* 

Aft**- cue fftlf A"™*-* - toOfTBLy 8*€£-f 



Ciitc W"- t - 0%0 Ae-^HLcn^fna n>«P 



<.HAfoe r"~ 1 0~««*»»> "* ^ >m/ " f*"" 
O.C1bfm 79 o.rr 6V>1 ' •""- "*&) 7 ° 



tooe zir- **" ArcsMCvwrw *««/ 



<: 8 £b- 2v<"- lou /UCtlU.<A*rTMt> fu>*> 



<oOC ZT->~' <-ou fieil/U.***** 1 *-"" 



StX~ A4»v£ . 









c 



B-66 




SPECGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



DATE 



r- r if 



r-i'ir 



r-g-tr 



r-?-?r 



( 



r-n-ir 



r-u-rr 



r-ir-ff 



r-iz-^r 



ANOMALY 



Co Of lir- Low GfC/jtcUt-^T/t^ fau 






//oT f'u- >/■}£- ffi-ifeni-Y (i*-r£- 



CoDC 1IO~ i-o^J Mi. P<->r*P rot.T/)Sc 



i"o«>c" V-C - iou tec i ec vuriaj ft-*u 



roDf 1jo - »u W t >W roi.-rshff 









fiOiLfd ftx-en Ju/Av fci/icvt-r j 



code 2 13- looJ H^. P££fSva£ 



£4?>C WL.- imfilvfun BC-L+'jJ' 
fiu.nH- J&H^W=H^»^/ ( t*rW 



tit tHvTBu^tJ^ |vT TOtlfirClHir t*>ST 



ACTION TAKEN 









i*> tAo loZ>£ - code ffXcb 



TO 8e~ Dwt 4T rt u+T£l>- 2wrr. 



/M-fienfC T/nt&i. S£TP9Mi7 fit** /O 
7u 7° fiZo^dS 



CQ#T*.tL ciACviT (n)#*Jv«i. /li*rr>/'" J 6-Jj 









get-*/ wont ro /e/a^/trfuvr OrtTffcet) 

m*.i>urt*e ,,, f>,utn rufAf cmc7~ 
t&rae.iA-*-r,o*> mtfj yd 'jjcurn*** /*/6 3*7* 



l-r&n eC? (*.o.) P«**t- **i.v€ stucco fa*- to 
ro vo^i)ve ' fit /tefrt/jL. 



sufPczr *otie o*> data- c^e- E#-r* Oofx *«r 



Ss-iawt fcri#v,jt- jtr Oti 7/1*1? h* n 
eo*Fit^,4,rr,0j t p- poa7,A/t- jtt 77/* oF 



L 



B-67 




SPEOGA 
Master Test Plan 
Rev. Basic 



DATE 



r-;«,M-f*" 



(r3-ir 



(,'^ir 



L* i-tr 



( 



ANOMALY 



fO»*" 111. - frtTD Wit7e*. f£lu>*>S 

Sirr Films' fto&itt-v (wt» tevt-iN 



£o0f lei <■ t«w girCTtllYTlf 






ethe nl~ FtTft »*rten dtVLouf 
serf f >cl, 46- /ttfewi (itnC 



ACTION TAKEN 












SLICtTI.* *>**>!?!<& (4fJ7/li>L t-**«if To 



C 



B-68 



