General Disclaimer 


One or more of the Following Statements may affect this Document 


• This document has been reproduced from the best copy furnished by the 
organizational source. It is being released in the interest of making available as 
much information as possible. 


• This document may contain data, which exceeds the sheet parameters. It was 
furnished in this condition by the organizational source and is the best copy 
available. 


• This document may contain tone-on-tone or color graphs, charts and/or pictures, 
which have been reproduced in black and white. 


• This document is paginated as submitted by the original source. 


• Portions of this document are not fully legible due to the historical nature of some 
of the material. However, it is the best reproduction available from the original 
submission. 


Produced by the NASA Center for Aerospace Information (CASI) 





NASA Technical Memorandum 81&21 


I 




AN INTERACTIVE MODULAR DESIGN 
FOR COMPUTERIZED PHOTOMETRY 
IN SPECTROCHEMICAL ANALYSIS 


(HASA>TH>81S21) AH IHTB8ACTIVB BODaLAB 
DESIGH FOB COMPOTEBIZEO PUOTOBBTBY XU 
SFECTBOCHBNICAL AHALYSIS (HASA) 17 p 
HC A02/HF A01 CSCI 07D 

G3/25 


H80>24386 


Onclas 

20953 


Virginia L, Bair 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 


•wifriaaj 


Prepared for the 

Pittsburgh Conference on Analytical Chemistry 
and Applied Spectroscopy 

cosponsored by the Society for Analytical Chemists of Pittsburgh 
and the Spectroscopy Society of Pittsburgh 



E-465 


AN INTtRAcTlVt modular DESIGN FOR cOMPUTERiZED 
photometry in speltrolhemilal analysis 
by Virginia L. Bair 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research tenter 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 


abstract 

The populer ideal of a Po"'P'‘ter-controlled analytical instru«e^ 
no human intervention after the process is initiated, 

iHoti ronilires a comorehensi ve functional description of the process to be 
wtiud TgeneJSl ^l^onal description of totally aoton«tic Photo^tr, 

Jf Sistiin spictra is not available for an operating environment PP 

samnle compositions and analysis procedures are low-volume and non-routine. 

^This paoer will Illustrate the advantages of using an interactive approach 
to computer control in such an operating environment. This approach includes 
™duuf subroutine elected at Slulttple-option. menu-sty e decision points. 
The ute n this style of progranming will be illustrated by a project to com- 
puterize trace elemental determinations including the automated reading of 
?pecJrograh?nptaLs produced by a 3.4 m Ebert mount spectrograph using a 

TecTna^SSiiSlHr^fi^ 

r!nrre\:id^SrJjn2o??t?'^°o5?“p""^"“5dNngtg^ 

of intermediate data printed out, amount of user prompting, and mult 
directional decision points. 


introduction 

The use of the photographic plate as a recording medium in spectrochemical 

analysis has been limited by the time-consuming tasks of plate 
data analysis. Yet there is an overwhelmingly large amount of data containe 
on the typical 10-inch by 4 inch (Z5.4-by 10.16-cm) spectrographic glass 
Plate Workers at the NASA-Lewis Research Center have been developing a sys- 
t™ ?or automati? plate reading and data analysis using a minicomputer- 

“"‘™IlimiM^rwort'd4™"d»4'o^ program for heading the plate sb^ ton- 

rm^‘nis^rr:^jL^rn:!'ira?p;:ird’rbari'™;r?Uxire^^?:g^ 

optional operator interaction with the program would be needed to be able to 

tn"d’m33rpuc3s 3rrr3tifSr^3‘?mpie-- 



meriting this approach were top-down structured design, menu-style multiple 
option decision points, and user-oriented input techniques. 

This report will discuss the use of these design methods to create a func- 
tion design to read spectrographic plates and convert the optical densities to 
background cc Tec ted relative intensities. A brief functional overview of 
this desiC'i >111 be given along with examples of interactive options and menu- 
style decision points. 


Equipment 

Spectrograph 

Emission spectrographic plates of type SA3 were exposed by a 3.4 m Ebert 
mount spectrograph using a dc-arc in an argon atmosphere. The spectrograph 
had a 30-inch (76.2 cm) focal curve and accommodated three photoplates, 10- 
inches oy 4-inches (25.4-cm by 10.2-cm) each. Eleven spectra were recorded 
on each plate. A rotating step sector provided calibration information and a 
wide dynamic range. The reciprocal linear dispersion at the focal curve of 
the spectrograph was about 2.5 angstroms per millimeter (A/mm) varying about 
*0.1 A/mm as a function of wavelength. 


Densitometer 

Optical density is obtained by the use of a commercially available desktop 
microdensitometer (Joyce-Loebi, MK3). This microdensitometer is controlled by 
a minicomputer with 32,768 16-bit words of core memory (Digital Equipment 
Corporation PDP-11/05). Minicomputer peripherals include a hard disk, dual 
cassette tapes, and a typewriter/printer. 

As seen in Fig. 1, the spectrographic plate is placed on the specimen 
table to the front. Light from a quartz lamp is split so that part of it goes 
through the plate and onto a viewing screen that is also the final aperture. 
The other part of the beam is directed through optical filters, the last one 
being a servo-controlled optical wedge. This wedge is moved to null balance 
the two beam signals as they alternatively strike a photomultiplier tube. The 
pen to the rear of Fig. 1 is directly attached to the wedge. As the wedge 
moves, its position can be either drawn by the pen on graph paper or converted 
to a digital signal that is sent to the minicomputer through a Joyce-Loebl 
supplied interface. 

Stepper motors move the specimen table holding the plate in 5-pm steps in 
either parallel or perpendicular direction to the spectra. The motors can be 
either automatically or manually driven at a step rate of about 20 steps/sec 
to read data, or a slew rate of 60 steps/sec in the perpendicular direction 
and 300 steps/sec in the parallel direction to travel between data points. 


Minicomputer 

The microdensitometer is moved and read under computer control using a 
machine language function that is callable in the minicomputer system high 
level BASIC language (DEC version VOiB-02) under RT-li (DEC version V02-02B). 
The BASIC language is used for all of the minicomputer programming. 


2 



DESIGN METHODS 


The Interactive Approach 

Depending on the type of laboratory sample load, the most effective degree 
of automation will vary. As shown in the Fig. 2 'idea graph*, the minimum 
frustration level, frustration here referring to time, money, accuracy, etc., 
will be at a variable amount of percent automation depending on the routine- 
ness of the sample type. For a laboratory with a varied sample load, an 
analysis program with the least frustration would involve the operator to a 
greater degree in running the program; in this complex case, total automation 
might be impracticable. 

The interactive approach allows variation of the level of percent automa- 
tion so that the experienced user can find the most effective way to run the 
sample. All of the options that might be used to vary the degree of automa- 
tion are included in the program design as it is first written, thereby avoid- 
ing the confusion and error caused by hasty software patches. The functional 
design is set up so that the main functions are defined but the manner of con- 
trol is decided upon as a result of user experience. 

Design methods that facilitated this interactive approach were top-down 
structured design, menu-style multiple option decision points, and user- 
oriented input techniques. These methods will be discussed in this section. 


Top Down Design 

The most generally useful design technique employed was top-down struc- 
tured design (Refs. 1 and 2). As illustrated in Fig. 3, the large function 
F-1 is divided into two smaller functions, G-1 and G-2, that together perform 
function F-1. The net input and output from these two subprograms, shown in- 
side the dashed box, equals that of F-1. This process is continued until the 
function modules are of a convenient size, about 50 lines or less of code in 
BASIC. An executive module, also kept fairly short, performs intermodular 
control so that the modules are independent of each other, at least as much as 
possible. The executive module uses subroutine calls to run the other mod- 
ules. In the interactive approach, user inputs are directed to this executive 
to select the options to be performed. 

The top-down approach has many other advantages for the writing of rela- 
tively 'bug-free' we 11 -documented code. The shorter modules are easier to 
write and understand. The design process forces a clear description of the 
manner in which the data and variables will be acted upon by the functional 
modules. This method emphasizes that the executive module is the most impor- 
tant one because it controls the other modules. By using an optionally inter- 
active executive, this critical task is given a human overseer. 


Menu-Style Options Selection 

A second useful technique, the menu-style multiple option decision point, 
maintains optimum control flexibility in the flow of the executive module. 
Figure 4 shows an idealized flow diagram of this control method. 

Performance of each subroutine depends on the appearance of its code in an 
ordered list. As this list is read, the function called for is performed. 


3 



Say, for Instance, that code “B“ appears on the list. At the fii^st decision 
triangle the program does not perform “a“ since the code is "B . 
triangle, however, B is present so the executive routine calls the B module 
on the right. The “B“ function is performed and control returns to the <^eci- 
sion triangle "C". Since the code is still "B“, “C" is not done, but the flow 
goes on and inputs the next listed value. Breaks in the figure indicate that 
an almost unlimited list of functions could be included. 

The list of options to be performed may be initially input by the user in 
an interactive mode. If, after trial and error, a given algorithm or routine 
is decided upon, the options can be permanently fixed with the addition of a 
few lines of code designating the input list. By using a list to control pro- 
gram flow, major changes in the control design can be made without major 
changes in the program code. It is good to avoid such after-the-fact changes 
that are often sources of hard to find program 'bugs'. 


User-Oriented input Techniques 

A third important feature, along with top-down structured design and 
multiple option decision points, is user-oriented input techniques. By this 
method the time spent by the user interacting with the program is minimized in 
a manner that is not confusing to the user. For instance, the level of 
prompts can be selected to meet the user's needs. In addition, inputs are 
often mnemonics that remind the user of the function requested. The code word 
DONE, for instance, is a useful signal for the end of input for many of the 

code lists. ^ . . . 

User-oriented options allow interaction with the program before, during, 
and after the main program is run. Many control options that do not need user 
interaction may be preselected before the run, the program could thus be run 
automatically when the sample is routine or circumstances prevent total super- 
vision of the program. Post-run control is accomplished by using several 
points of possible data editing and review. The degree of intermediate data 
printout may also be selected to the amount desired by the user. 


PROGRAM DESIGN OVERVIEW 

The complete top-down analysis for this program is, of course, lengthy and 
detailed. For the purposes of this brief report only a summary of the key 
modules in the microdensitometer program will be discussed. The functional 
module names for the complete design are given in Tables 1 to 3. 

The first level of top-down analysis for the design of the densitometer 
program is given in Fig. 5. The function (F-1) of getting the corrected rela- 
tive intensities for the spectral lines is done by first (G-1), running the 
microdensitometer to get the peak and background densitites, then (G-2), ob- 
taining a photographic characteristic curve for the plate (a two-curve pro- 
cess), and finally (G-3), using the characteristic curve obtained in G2 to 
assign relative intensities to the data, which are then corrected by subtract- 
ing the background relative intensities. 

Figure 6 shows the final top-down breakdown of the densitometer program 
design. It is meant to show that up to five levels were needed to reach use- 
ful functional modules. Funtion G-3 is not as complex as the others so fewer 
levels of design were needed. The module lengths ranged from 10 to 100 lines 


of BASIC code« although the most useful size seems to be about 30 lines. 
Several of the bottom level modules are used more than once, in particular, 
the EDlT-REVlEW function, a set of five modules. Is used three times In the 
design. Executive modules In this design are at the same hierarchical level 
as the modules they control. An outline of the modular breakdown of the pro- 
gram Is given In Tables 1 to 3. 


Modules to Get Optical Densities 

The purpose of module H-1 Is to prepare all necessary data and options for 
running the microdensitometer. Table 1 lists the modular breakdown of H-1. A 
hard disk file Is used to hold the data as 'virtual' memory that Is seen by 
the program almost as though it were resident In the core memory. By not tak- 
ing up core memory space, more core Is available for the use of the program. 

A string variable virtual file Is used to convert the user oriented element 
codes to atomic numbers which can be held In the same type file as the data. 
This element code file Is opened In module J-1. The wavelength position In 
steps of Sum Is input either manually (J-3) or calculated from a relationship 
based on the reciprocal linear dispersion. After the line positions have been 
reviewed and edited, the average clearplate density is set to a reasonable 
level and recorded for subtraction from the raw counts when densities are mea- 
sured (1-4). 

Other preselected options are the spectra (V) spacing and the sectored 
steps to be read. Fiducial (check) lines may be indicated as well as lines 
that are to be skipped. The peak location options also include a variable 
peak location span (in steps) and an optional systematic error (drift from 
center) routine which may be set at various levels of correction, warning, or 
halting in response to a suspected error in position. 

Module H-2 (see Table 1) next performs the actual running of the micro- 
densitometer. The pattern of spectra recording can be set along the x- 
direction (J-ll) or along the Y-directlon (J-12). The Y motion is slower, 
but generally stays on the same line for all 5 steps with less chance of 
getting lost. 

As the program steps through the line position list, the old micro- 
densitometer position is stored as Xq, Yq and the new position to be 
moved to as X, Y, in 5-um steps. The module to get the next X, Y pair is 
0-13. There are many options in doing this. Although the next wavelength 
position may be selected extemporaneously as the program is run, the lines are 
generally input on a list in module H-1. Position corrections to this listed 
position can be made by the systematic error correction option (J-18), by 
fiducial lines, assumed to be clearly present in the spectrum, and by user 
iiput. Unwanted lines can also be skipped. 

Now that the X, Y position is calculated, the microdensitometer moves to 
the start of this new scan area. Just before the scan is read, an optional 
user check can be run so that the operator can visually confirm the line. The 
scan is read, then background and peak position values are selected by modules 
J-16 and J-17. Additional operator verification is possible by intermediate 
data printout, either as a summary at the end of a step or after each individ- 
ual line. This user check is very useful when there are two nearby lines to 
be distinguished between in the same peak scan area. 

Module H-3 (Table 1) allows input of light-step sector/dark-step sector 
optical density data pairs with review and editing in preparation for the 


5 



curvefitting of the preliminary characteristic curve. Figure 7 shows the flow 
diagram for this useful editing routine, as explained above« this is * 
of a multiple-option menu-style decision point. The option mnemonics LIST, 
SORT, EDIT, and DELETE are input from the keyboard. Each is soon 

as it is input. If “DONE" is input, the edit routine is ended. If HELP is 
input, prompts are given. An error message occurs if no recognizable code is 
typed to avoid an infinite loop if the user forgets the codes. Deletions are 
made for flagged data points so that one can edit, then list, to be sure the 
proper points were flagged, before deletion. 


Modules to Calibrate the Emulsion 

Module 6-1, using modules H-1 through H-3, records the plate densities and 
prepares the light-step/dark-step pairs for the calculation of the preliminary 
chdracteristic curve* Module 6-2 will take this photocnetric data and find the 
preliminary and then the final characteristic curve which will be used to 
transform the optical densities to relative intensities by module 6-3. 

Table 2 lists the modular breakdown for 6-2. 

In module H-4, the data and variables are prepared for the curvefit. For 
the preliminary curve, dummy values of optical density pairs at r,0 and 3,3 
are added to bias the plot to the standard curve. Options for the curvefit 
are selected with either no prompts or copious prompts. The function to be 
fit to the data is chosen term by term in module 1-15. These functions can be 
complex. The typical functions used are: 

Y * Co ♦ CiX ♦ C2 x2 + C 3 X 2 

where Y is the dark step optical density and X is the light step optical 
density for the preliminary curve and the t's are coefficients. The final 
characteristic curve often follows the form: 

Y - Dq + DjX + 02X2 D 3 e^^^ 

Where Y is 1092 relative intensity, X is the optical density and D's 

are coefficients. . r. .. 

Figure 8 is a generalized schematic of the curvefitting program. Details 
of this program are to be found in Bevington under the program CURFIT, 

(Ref. 3). The theory behind the algorithm is given in Marquardt (Ref. 4). 

The additional parameter K of Marquardt, footnoted on page 438 of Ref. 4, 
was used in addition to the basic Bevington program in order to overcome some 
poor convergence conditions caused by the form of some of the equations (espe- 
cially the preliminary curve). The program seeks a minimum error value of 
chi-squared (x^) which is the sum of the squared difference between the y 
of the data and the calculated y. , . ^ 

As the flow chart in Fig. 8 shows, an initial fit to the user selected 
function and constant is performed. Then the initial chi-square (x6) 
error between this fit and the data is calculated, an algorithm is used to 
find increments to the function constants that should cause the to de- 
crease. The new x^ is then found. If the new fit is not equal to or 

better than the first fit the search mode is changed. Eventually there is a 

new, smaller x^* If this error sum is small enough, the fit is done, if 

not, the various user options are performed and then this new fit is used as 

the initial value and another iteration is begun. 


6 


The options routine allows the user various levels of information and con- 
trol over the curve fit. Table 4 lists the program options. A useful pre- 
selected option is that the operator may select to have information printed 
only at every nth iteration of the new loop* and thereby speed up the 
program. The user may also select real-time control of the program. The stop 
criteria may be set so that the user decides if the fit is gooo enough. Real- 
time control also allows changes in the function to be fit, in the mooe of 
fit, and in the printout options. A useful feature is to printout the fit for 
every nth data point so trends can oe seen but time isn't wasted. 

Figure 9 illustrates how the options executive (J-41) uses the menu-style 
decision point to run the various options. The NOnauTO option for real-time 
control does not return to the options executive if the option to end the fit 
is selected. The NONauTO option is generally placed at the end of the option 
code list in order that the results may be viewed before deciding to end the 
fit. If the fit is finished, the program runs the options routine to printout 
all of the data and parameters of the fit. This is oone by automatically 
changing the options list. 


Modules to convert Optical Deni sty to correcteo Intensity 

A final, short mouule, b-j (see Table ^), converts the density data to 
relative intensities. The relative intensity of the background is then sub- 
tracted from the line peak relative intensities. The data are edited, then 
stored for later use in the determining the unknown concentrations. 


CONCLUDING remarks 

This exercise of using an interactive, top-down structured program design 
has produced a general flexible functional description of the process to 
determine corrected intensities for emission spectrochemical plate data. A 
key feature of this funtional description is to allow user interaction so the 
program can then be optimized under user experience with real oata, without 
numerous programming changes. 

A program is under development using the methodologies of top-down struc- 
tured design, user interaction, and menu-style decision points. The top-oown 
design approach helps keep documentation fairly orderly ano useful. It also 
helps in the design of the interactive executive module. In the varieo sample 
workload of Lewis Research center, the interactive approach is one way to be 
able to vary the plate reading program to meet new situations without having 
to rewrite a large amount of code. 


REFERENCES 

1. Hearn, Albert D.: Top-Down Modular Programming. BYTE, vol. 3, no. 7, 

July 1978, pp. J3-38. 

2. McGowan, Clement L.; and Kelly, John R.: Top-Down Structured Prograiwning 

Techniques. First eo. Mason/Petrocelli Publ., 1975. 

3. Bevington, Philip R.: Data Reduction and Error Analysis for the Physical 

Sciences. McGraw-Hill Book co., Inc., 1969. 

4. Marquardt, Donald W.: An Algorithm for Least-Squares Estimation of Non- 

linear Parameters. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., j., vol. 11, no. 2, June 1963, 
pp. 431-441. 


7 



Table 1 

Module G-1 - Get Densities 


H-1 - Setup to Get Densities 


1-1. 

Executive Program 

1-2 

Create 

Positions List and File Area 


0-1. 

Open Element Code Ll^t 


0-2. 

Reopen an Old File 

or 

0-3. 

Manually Input a New File 

or 

0-4. 

Use an Old Wavelength List 


0-5. 

Calculate Steps from Angstroms 

1-3. 

Review 

and Edit Positions List 


0-6. 

Edit Executive 


0-7. 

List Data by Index Number 


0-8. 

Sort Data by Wavelength 


0-9. 

Edit Data 


0-10. 

Delete Flagged Line Positions 

1-4. 

Input Dens1ton«ter Baseline 

1-5. 

Preselect Densitometer Run Options 


H-2 - Run Densitometer 

1-6. Executive for Running Densitometer 
1-7. Loop Control 

0-11. Move Along Wavelength List (or 012) 
0-12. Move down a Line Reading Steps 
1-8. Take Data 

0-13. Get Next (x,Y) Position 

0-14 Move to (X.Y) from (X old, Y old) 
0-15 Step Across Peak Scan Area 

1-9. Manipulate Data 

0-16. Determine Peak Density 

0-17. Determine Background Density 

0-18. check for Systematic Error in Position 

0-19. Printout Peaks 

H-3 - Review and Edit Data 

1-10. Executive Program 

1-11. Input Data (Light Step/Dark Step Pairs) 

1-12. Edit and Review Data 
0-20. Edit Executive 

0-21. List Data 

0-22. Sort Data 

0-23. Edit Data 

0-24. Delete Flagged Data Points 


8 



Table 2 

Module 6-2 - Calibrate Emulsion 


H-4 - Select Function and Options for fit 

1-13. Executive Program 
1-14. Ir^ut Data Pairs 

J-25. Input (X,Y) Pairs 

J-26. Insert (0,0), (3,3) Weights (Preliminary Curve Only) 
1-15. Select Function Terms and Constants 
J-27. Proin)ted Version 

J-28. Nonprompted Version 

1-16. Set Fit Limits 

0-29. Prompted Version 

J-30. Nonprompted Version 

1-17. Choose Options 

J-31. Prompted Version 

J-32. Nonprompted Version 

1-28. Determine Characteristic Curve Points from Preliminary Curve 
Equation 

J-33. Prompted Version 

si-34. Nonprompted Version 

H-5 - Fit Curve to Data (Minimize Error) 

1-19. Find Constants with Lower Error 
J-35. Executive for Search 

J-36. Determine V Calcuated 

J-37. Determine Partial Derivatives 

J-38. Find Inverted Matrix and Determinant 

J-39. Determine Chi-square (x‘) Error 

1-20. Run Program Until Done 
J-40. Decide if Done 

J-41. Options Executive 

J-42. Run Options Selected 

J-43. Run Nonautomatic Option 


9 



Table 3 


6-3 - convert Density f^rr^cted Intensity 


H-6 - Executive Program 


rt-7 - Input Data and Curves 


1 - 21 . 

1 - 22 . 


KtJ S*o‘5.1.Uv. intensity Cn.racterlstlc Cur.es 


H-8 - Convert Density to Relative Intensity 
H-9 - Subtract Background Relative Intensity 


H-10 - Review and Edit Outa 


1-23. 

1-24. 

1-25. 

1-26. 

1-27. 


Edit Executive 
List Data 
Sort Data 
Edit Data 

Delete Flagged Data Points 


10 



Table 4 

OPTIONS FOR CURVEFiT 


Preselected Options 

Fre()uef^y of Doing the Options 
Whether to Have Real-time Control 
Function (Term-by-Term) to be Fit 
Initial Constants of function 
Criteria for the End of the Fit 
Data (X,Y) to be Fit 

Printout Options 

Print New Chi-Squared Error 

Print New Constants and Fit Mode 

Print New Constants in More Detail 

Print Stop Criteria 

Print Error Matrix 

Print fit for Some or All of Data 

Real-time Options 

Print a List of Options 

Change Function constants and fit Mode 

Change Stop Criteria 

End Fit With or Without a Printout 
Change Print Options 
Change to Nonreal-time Mode 


11 




FIjurt 1. - An tutomaltd microdtnsitomtttr. 



Figure }, ■ Iiv-down program design. 











Figure 6. - Densitometer program design. 


CS-80-U59 











(EDIT. LIST. ETC. I 


^ PRINT ERROR MESSAGE | 


c5-fto-n'»- 


Figur* 7. - Flowchart ol adit executive module (HJ). 



Figure 8, - Fiow diagram ol curve lilting module (H5I. 














2. Govtrnnitnt Aeetuion No. 


1. Raport No. 

NASA TM-81521 


3. Aectpitnt’s Catilo 9 No. 


4. Titit and Subtitit 

AN INTERACTIVE MODULAR DESIGN FOR COMPUTERIZED 
PHOTOMETRY IN SPECTROCHEMICAL ANALYSIS 


S. Rtport Oatt 


6. Performing Organiiation Code 


7. Author(s) 

Virginia L. Bair 


8. Performing Organieetion Report No. 

E-465 


9. Performing Organization Name and Addrau 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 


10. Work Unit No 


11. Contract or Grant No 


12. Sponeoring Agancy Nama and Addrau 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, D. C. 20546 


13. Type of Report »nd Period Covered 

Technical Memorandum 


14. sponeoring Agency Code 


16. Supplemantary Notes 

Prepared for the Pittsburgh Conference on Analytical Chemistry and Applied Spectroscopy co- 
sponsored by the Society for Analytical Chemists of Pittsburgh and the Spectroscopy Society of 
Pittsburgh, Altantic City, New Jersey, March 10-14, 1980. 


16. Abitract ' — 

The popular ideal of a computer-controlled analytical instrument involves no human intervention 


after the process is initiated. Realization of this ideal rec)uires a comprehensive functional de- 
scription of the process to be automated. A general functional description of totally automatic 
photometry of emission spectra is not available for an operating environment in which the sam- 
ple compositions and analysis procedures are low-volume and nonroutine. Ihis paper will 
illustrate the advantages of using an interactive approach to computer control in such an operat- 
ing environment. This approach includes modular subroutines selected at multiple-option, 
menu-style decision points. The use of this style of programmii^ will be illustrated by a pro- 
ject to computerize trace elemental determinations includii^ the automated reading of spectro- 
graphic plates produced by a 3.4 m Ebert mount spectrograph using a dc-arc in an argon atmo- 
sphere. Advantages of an interactive approach include adaptability to nonroutine spectra and 
procedural deviations and optimum utilization of operator decision-making ability and experi- 
ence. The simplified control logic and modular subroutine approach facilitates innovative re- 
search and program development, yet is easily adapted to routine tasks Operator confidence 
and control are increased by the built-in options including degree of automation, amount of 
intermediate data printed out, amount of user prompting, and multi-directional decision points. 


17. Kty Wordi (Suggnttd by Authof(»)| 
Spectrochemical analysis 
Con^iuterized densitometry 
Atomic emission spectrometry 

18. Oiftribution Statement 

Unclassified - unlimited 
STAR Category 25 

19. Sbcufity Oinif. (o1 thii rtport) 

Unclassified 

30. Svcurity Oatsif. (of this p« 9 e} 

Unclassified 

21. No of Pages 

22. Price* j 


For sale by the National Technical Information Service. Springfield Virginia 22161 











