AD-A280 867 

iiniiliii 

NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 

Monterey, California 



A SURVEY OF THE SOFTWARE 
REUSE ENVmONMENT 
A STUDY FOR THE NSRS 

by 

Edward G. Bryant 
March, 1994 

Thesis Co Advisors : Dr Myung Suh 

CDR William Short 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


;94 6 29 0 66 


94-20044 










Best 

Available 

Copy 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMBNo 0704-0188 


Public rtporting burden tbdis collection ot information is estimated to average 1 nour per resportse including the time tor reviewing instructions searcnmg emstirig data sources 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection ot mtormation Sena comments regarding this ourden estimate or any otne' asoect or inis 
collection of information including suggebons for reducing this burden to Washington Headquarters Services Directorate for information Operations and Reports oeherson Da^ s 
Highway Suite 1204. Arlington VA 22202-4302. and to the Office of Management and Budget Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0166) Washington DC 20503 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave Blank) 


2. REPORT DATE 
Mar 1994 


3. REPORT TYPE AND OATES COVERED 
Master's Thesis 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

A SURVEY OF THE SOFTWARE REUSE ENVIRONMENT: 
A STUDY FOR THE NSRS 


6. AUTHOR(S) Bryant, Edward G. 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAMES (S) AND AOORESS(ES) 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey. CA 93943-5000 



8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND AODRESS(ES) 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

The views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of Defense or the United States Government. 


12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlim‘: d. 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

This Study investigates the needs of software developers in the area of software reuse. The study formulates 
recommendations on how a software repository can meet the needs of the software development community. The 
Naval Software Reuse System (NSRS) is the focus of this research and the findings are intended for their use. 

The study focuses on eight core questions that are the central issues for the NSRS. On the basis of these eight 
core questions, a survey was developed that elicited the opinions of Department of the Navy software developers. 
The analysis of the survey provides conclusions for seven of the eight core questions. These conclusions lead to 
recommendations that for the most part are completely within the control of Naval Computers and 
Telecommunications Station (NCTS) Washington. NCTS Washington is the agency presently building the NSRS. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Software Reuse, Ada. Repository, NSRS, DSRS.Software Development, 
Software Engineering 


OF REPORT 
UNCLASSIFIED 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

96 


16. PRICE CODE 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF THIS PAGE 

OF ABSTRACT 

UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 



NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form 298 (Rev 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Sid 239-18 298-i0: 


































Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


A Survey of the Software Reuse Environment: 
A Study for the NSRS 

by 


Edward G Bryant 
Lieutenant, United States Navy 
B.S., Pennsylvania State University, 1984 

Submitted in partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for the degree of 

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT 

from the 

NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
March, 1994 


Author: 

Edward G Bryant 


Approved by: 


William B. Short, Thesis Advisor 



Myung W Suh, Thesis Advisor 



David R. Whipple, Chairman 


Department of Systems Management 

ii 











ABSTRACT 


This study investigates the needs of software developers in the area of 
software reuse. The study formulates recommendations on how a software 
repository can meet the needs of the software development community. The 
Naval Software Reuse System (NSRS) is the focus of this research and the 
findings are intended for their use. 

The study focuses on eight core questions that are the central issues for the 
NSRS. On the basis of these eight core questions, a survey was developed that 
elicited the opinions of Department of the Navy software developers. The 
analysis of the survey provides conclusions for seven of the eight core 
questions. These conclusions lead to recommendations that for the most part 
are completely within the control of Naval Computers and Telecommunications 
Station (NCTS) Washington. NCTS Washington is the agency presently 
building the NSRS. 


AooessloQ For ^ | 

FTIS GRAil 


DTIC JAB 

□ 

Uunnnouncsd 

□ 

Just. If Icatlcn_ 



By_--- 

D13tr _ 

Avn 1 lilt 111 ty r®(5pa 




Dial 


tal 1 




n 


J-\ 

1 


«•.* ; 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I INTRODUCTION .1 

A. OVERVIEW .1 

B. OBJECTIVE .4 

C. RESEARCH QUESTIONS .5 

D METHODOLOGY .7 

E. SCOPE .8 

II. BACKGROUND .9 

A THE NAVY REUSE CENTER .9 

B. NAVY REUSE POLICY .11 

C. SOFTWARE REUSE .12 

D. THE ENVIRONMENT .13 

E. DOMAIN ANALYSIS .16 

F. ROLE OF THE REPOSITORY .17 

III. ANALYSIS OF DATA .19 

A. CORE QUESTION 1 .19 

1. Organization of Data .19 

2. Analysis .22 

B. CORE QUESTION 2 .27 

1. Organization of Data.27 

2. Analysis .29 

C. CORE QUESTION 3 .31 

1. Organization of Data .31 

2. Analysis .34 

D CORE QUESTION 4 .36 

1. Organization of Data .36 

2. Analysis .39 

E. CORE QUESTION 5 .47 

1. Organization of Data .47 

2. Analysis .50 

F. CORE QUESTION 6 .52 

1. Organization of Data.52 

2. Analysis .55 


IV 







































G CORE QUESTION 7 57 

1. Organization of Data .57 

2. Analysis .61 

H CORE QUESTION 8 .65 

1. Organization of Data .65 

2. Analysis .67 

IV. CONCLUSION.69 

A. SUMMARY OF CORE QUESTIONS .69 

1. CORE QUESTION 1 .69 

2 CORE QUESTION 2 .70 

3. CORE QUESTION 3 .70 

4. CORE QUESTION 4 .70 

5. CORE QUESTION 5 .71 

6. CORE QUESTION 6 .71 

7. CORE QUESTION 7 .72 

8. CORE QUESTION 8 .72 

B. SUMMARY COMMENTS .73 

APPENDIX A. SOFTWARE REPOSITORY MARKET SURVEY.74 

APPENDIX B. TABULATED SURVEY RESULTS 79 

LIST OF REFERENCES .86 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST .88 


V 






























I. INTRODUCTION 


A. OVERVIEW 

Software development represents an increasingly large portion of the 
military systems' development budget. The escalating costs are a result of the 
rapidly increasing size and complexity of these software projects. Many articles 
and papers have already been published on how software development will be 
changing in the future. The old process of build it from scratch each time you 
start a new application is finally starting to give way to a new process. Now an 
increasing number of software development organizations are taking existing 
components off the shelf and putting them together to build a totally new 
application. These off the shelf components are often referred to as Reusable 
Software Components (RSCs) [Ref. 11]. The RSCs are normally stored in a 
software repository that resembles a conventional library system A developer 
can access this library and search for an RSC that fits his/her needs and 
withdraw it from the library. 

Managers of software development projects learned early on that the 
documentation, testing, specifications, and requirements data associated with 
the components were at least as valuable as the executable code. In many 
cases the executable code was considered the least important piece of the 
reusable package. Being able to understand how the component was designed 


1 





and the process used to build it could be applied to design aspects throughout 
the overall project. [Ref. 2] 

Using RSCs to build a new application increases the quality of the end 
product while decreasing the development costs. The quality of the end product 
will be higher since the RSCs within the main program have already passed 
extensive testing and have been used by other activities as well. If an error is 
detected in an RSC by a developer, then the error is reported back to the 
repository. The maintainers of the RSCs will then make the necessary 
corrections. As more users utilize the library, the components will progressively 
become more reliable. The costs of correcting errors in the later stages of the 
development process are dramatically greater than the initial design stages 
Since the components from a library should be more reliable than a component 
built from scratch, fewer errors should be showing up later in the design process 
[Ref. 8] 

The concept of reusing software components is not a new one. The 
software industry has routinely reused various components on an opportunistic 
basis. However, the concept that the practice of software reuse should be an 
integral part of software development is a novel one. [Ref. 12] Figure (1) 
illustrates the stages that new ideas and technology will go through before they 
become institutionalized. In our opinion the software development industry is 
currently at the understanding phase with respect to software reuse. We are 


2 




attempting to understand the concept of RSCs and develop the most suitable 
process to implement it. It may require that we travel up and down the curve a 
few times between understanding, evaluation and trial use until a suitable 


approach is found. 



Figure 1. Stages of Software Reuse Maturity. [Ref. 3] 


Recently there has been a trend toward centralizing the RSCs so that many 
unrelated activities can utilize each other's components. In the past, it was 
normally in-house components that were being reused, not another institution's 
components. As a result, we now have a collection of relatively small libraries 
scattered about the industry. 

One of the major stumbling blocks to making an institutional standard is 
understanding what the software developers, the customers of repositories, want 


3 




and need. Based upon discussions with several professionals in the software 
reuse field it is the authors opinion that the initial focus of software repositories 
was not on who would actually be using the resources. Several of the centralized 
libraries that have already been established were initially created with a goal to 
populate the library with as many components as possible in the shortest amount 
of time possible. One of the main reasons for this initial goal was a political one. 
The managers of these libraries felt that it was imperative to present some 
numbers to the people that held the purse strings to continue to be funded. In 
the budget climate of today this is an understandable concern and tactic. The 
goal can only work in the short term though. Eventually, the repository must tailor 
itself to meet the needs of the users and let the justification for the system 
become its' value to the customers. 

B. OBJECTIVE 

The objective of this thesis is to determine what software developers in the 
DON want from a software reuse library system. The information that we collect 
will be passed on directly to NCTS (Naval Computers and Telecommunications 
Station) Washington which is in the process of building the NSRS (Naval 
Software Repository System). The results should enable the repository system 
and its customers to better serve each other. 


4 







C. RESEARCH QUESTIONS 

To meet the objective of the thesis we first devised a set of "Core 
Questions". These questions would form the basis of our analysis. All further 
study would be based on these questions and answering them would satisfy the 
thesis objective. The "Core Questions" and the motivation for them are listed 
below: 

• Core Question 1 ; Which domain^ or domains lend themselves to becoming 
customers of the NSRS? 

• Motivation : We are investigating to see if the domain of the development 
activity will influence whether an activity would more likely become NSRS 
users. If there is an impact what is it and what should NCTS do as a result of 
the finding. We will be targeting three types of domains for this question: 
CC/Tactical, MIS, and the horizontal domains. 

• Core Question 2 : Should NCTS concentrate their efforts on developing 
electronic links to various sources of RSCs or should NCTS incorporate as 
many RSCs into their own library? 

• Motivation : This question addresses the issue of whether NCTS would be 
better served pursuing a decentralized or centralized repository scheme. A 
centralized scheme is where all the assets are collected into one central 
repository and subscribers have access to the central library. A decentralized 
scheme would be a collection of smaller libraries interconnected in a network. 

• Core Question 3: How much demand is anticipated for RSCs written in 
languages other than Ada? 

• Motivation : All initial DoD efforts into reuse have focused on Ada as the 
language of choice for reuse. Question 3 is aimed at uncovering other 
languages that hold promise in the field of software reuse. 


^ See section E of Chapter II for definition of domain as it applies to reuse. 


5 




• Core Question 4 : What incentives would be required in order to motivate an 
organization to donate RSCs? 

• Motivation : One of the major hurdles that a repository faces is populating the 
library with sufficient quality assets. By asking the representatives of 
development activities, we plan to determine the most effective means to 
motivate activities to donate their assets. 

• Core Question 5 . How much business could you expect from an individual 
customer? 

• Motivation : This question is focused on uncovering potentially large reuse 
customers. We will be looking for activities that are receptive to reuse and are 
producing a large amount of code per year. 

• Core Question 6 : What level of documentation do the customers want 
before they will consider using an RSC? 

• Motivation . From this question we expect to determine the optimum effort 
that should be placed into providing software documentation and testing data. 
Each asset is reviewed and evaluated before being placed into the repository. 
Assets that are donated to the repository come in different levels of quality and 
have various levels of documentation accompanying it. Establishing a critical 
value for the documentation and the testing required will be a useful tool for the 
library staff to use in order to focus their efforts more effectively. 

• Core Question 7 : What will the impact of fee for service be on NCTS? 
What can NCTS do to prepare for fee for service? 

• Motivation : Fee for service will have a major impact on software reuse. This 
question may prove difficult to answer since a policy for implementing fee for 
service into the reuse field has not been established. This question is focused 
on exploring new ideas on how fee for service could be implemented into reuse 
and obtain feedback from the software development community. Based on the 
responses from the community we expect to determine a course of action that 
NCTS can take to better prepare for the change. 

• Core Question 8 : What is the preferred mode of access for organizations 
that currently have their own library system? 

• Motivation : Activities that have a repository in place can be reasonably 
expected to be more involved in the field of reuse since they have made the 


6 




investment into a reuse library system of their own. We also felt that the 
components stored in these individual repositories are more likely to be written 
with reuse in mind than components from a development activity without an 
in-house repository. These activities need to be looked at separately from 
other respondents to see what trends can be detected since they are of a 
higher relative importance. 

D. METHODOLOGY 

From these core questions a survey was developed (Appendix A). Some of 
the "Core Questions" required several survey questions to answer, while others 
could be asked almost directly. We felt that some of the research questions were 
so broad in nature that if we asked them directly we would either not get a reply 
or the answers would be so varied that it would be impossible to draw a 
conclusion. The majority of the survey questions were constructed so that the 
respondent would answer by selecting from a list of possible choices. Two of the 
fifteen survey questions asked for written comments for answers. A great deal of 
effort was put in to make the survey quick and easy to answer to get a relatively 
high response rate. This was very important since the sample population was 
less than sixty people. 

Feedback on the Core Questions and survey were solicited from NCTS 
Washington and many of their suggestions were incorporated into the final draft 
NCTS was included into the research process to ensure that the conclusions and 
recommendations were relevant to their repository. 


7 










Once the data was collected, the Core Questions were matched with the 
survey question responses. The data was organized in tabular form and then 
analyzed in an effort to answer the Core Question. 

E. SCOPE 

We felt that since the repository that we were doing the research for was a 
Navy system, we focused on primarily Navy software developers. We came to 
this conclusion since it could be expected that the majority of the users of the 
Navy repository would be Navy software developers. Some administrators were 
also surveyed because they held Key positions in the future development of 
software repositories throughout the DoD. Given the time and resources 
available, it was not feasible to get the names and addresses of every Navy 
related software developer. Through various contacts we were able to obtain 
approximately sixty people that fell within the scope of the research population by 
the time the survey was sent out. 


8 












II. BACKGROUND 


A. THE NAVY REUSE CENTER 

The Navy Reuse Center is located at NCTS Washington DC and is 
managed by NCTC (Naval Computer and Telecommunications Command). The 
Reuse Center was established on the 3rd of March 1992 and is sponsored by 
the Defense Information Systems Agency/Center for Information Management 
(DISA/CIM) [Ref. 10]. The center does not currently receive any funding from 
the Navy but it is targeted towards the Navy software development community 
[Ref. 9], 

The mission of the center is to encourage and assist the Navy's software 
developers to institutionalize reuse practices in the development process. The 
center has a customer support component that provides a variety of services 
These services include [Ref. 10); 

• Coordination of training for software engineers and managers 

• Individualized service to the customer by locating reusable products and 
assisting in their integration into the engineering effort. 

• Identification and/or acquisition of high demand components within a family 
of systems. 

• Systematic creation of a generic architecture for a specific and well-defined 
family of systems (i.e., supply, personnel, etc.) 

• Assistance in the development of potential RSCs. 


9 










The products that the center can offer to the customer are listed below: 

• Source code, designs, architecture, templates, documentation, test suites, 
and code metrics. 

• Connection and coordination with other repositories to obtain the desired 
RSCs 

• Metrics on existing Ada code which provide measures of its reusability, 
maintainability, portability, and reliability. 

The Navy Software Repository System (NSRS) runs on a Micro VAX 
computer and holds 593 RSCs as of 30 Oct. 93. The NSRS is a Navy version of 
the Defense Software Reuse System (DSRS) and falls under the jurisdiction of 
the The Center for Software Reuse Operat. ns (CSRO) [Ref. 13]. The CSRO 
has overall responsibility for all DSRS facilities. The center has an ongoing 
effort of identifying and populating the library with high demand components 
from all possible sources [Ref. 9]. 

The center has not focused on a particular domain for two reasons. First, 
the field of software repositories is still relatively new and the process of building 
a repository is not well defined. Second, the center was established and funded 
by DISA/CIM for the Navy. The sponsor had an initial focus of Information 
Systems Domain but the majority of potential Navy customers are in the 
Communications Domain. [Ref. 9] 


10 










B. NAVY REUSE POLICY 


The DoD established a policy on software reuse in the DoD Software 
Reuse Initiative Vision and Strategy Initiative. How to implement this vision and 
strategy within the DON is described in the Software Reuse Implementation 
Guide. 

The vision of the DoD initiative is 'To drive the DoD are community 
from its current re-invent the software cycle to a process-driven, domain-specific 
architecture, library-based way of constructing software [Ref. 12]." The strategy 
to achieve this vision is to incorporate reuse into the software development 
cycle. The strategy is broken down into ten elements that address issues such 
as; 

• Targeting domains with the greatest potential for reuse. 

• Solving the legal issues surrounding reuse. 

• Establishing a metrics program to measure the payoff and guiding 
developers in the selection process. 

• Exploiting near-term products and services which facilitate movement to a 
reuse paradigm. 

• Integrating reuse into the software acquisition process. 

The objective of the DON Software Reuse Implementation Guide is to 
provide the guidance to achieve the vision of the DoD Initiative. The guide 
seeks to institutionalize the practice within the DON. 


11 









C. SOFTWARE REUSE 


A common misconception is that a software component, once isolated, is 
automatically reusable. To fully exploit the advantages of software reuse the 
components within the repository need to be designed to be reusable, A 
reusable component is one that is cohesive and loosely coupled. Cohesive 
means the component should be limited to a single topic or function. For 
example, a cohesive module that performs a sort routine would only sort data 
provided to it and nothing else. Loosely coupled means the component should 
require minimal interaction with other modules to perform its main function 

The reusable component should also meet the standards that all other 
software components are held to. They should be maintainable, efficient, 
reliable, correct and well documented. The importance of proper documentation 
is not trivial. The level and quality of documentation is as important as the code 
itself. The documentation is instrumental in enabling a reuse customer to identify 
the suitable RSC effectively. The documentation will also allow the user to 
understand the component so that It can be molded into the main program 
efficiently. 

Building new software components so that someday someone else can use 
it may not make much sense to a program manager on a tight schedule. It is 
more time consuming and expensive to design generalized components than 













specialized ones. It is not surprising then to see that software reuse has met with 
significant resistance. 

The existence of a library system in itself does not ensure a significant level 
of reuse. A library could hold all the right assets, and be easy to use, yet still go 
un-utilized. To change the software development paradigm activities like NCTS 
Washington will have to play a key role to make the change a successful one. 

D. THE ENVIRONMENT 

There are many library systems operating today but they generally fall into 
one of three types of library systems. These general categories of library 
systems are faceted, bulletin board and an object oriented/ hierarchical style 
system. The NSRS uses a faceted structure to organize and allow retrieval of 
the RSCs. Bulletin board libraries such as Public Ada Library (PAL) and Ada 
Technical Support Bulletin Board are more simplified forms that use a series of 
directories and sub-directories to organize the RSCs within the repository. The 
Air Force has a system called CARDS that is a hierarchical system. 

A faceted approach uses a list of facets to describe the asset [Ref. 7]. 
Each facet is filled with a descriptor that best describes the asset. The list of 
possible descriptors for each facet is predetermined and the descriptor selected 
must come from that list. The list can be modified as needed to meet the 
constantly changing environment of software development. Listed below are the 
nine facets for each asset held in the NSRS. 


13 








• Component type 

• Function 

• Object 

• Language 

• Algorithm 

• Data representation 

• Unit type 

• Certification level 

• Environment 

The valid descriptors and their synonyms for the facet component type are: 


Facet Descriptor 

• Design 

• Functional_spec 

• Implementation 

• Requirement 


S^napyms 

Specification 

Functional_descript 

Code 

Need 


This is not the complete list but it is illustrative of the facet. [Ref. 14] 

The Air Force’s Central Archive for Reusable Defense Software (CARDS) is 
a software reuse process. It uses a hierarchical organizational structure to 
organize the components in a repository. The system takes a specific domain of 
software development and arranges it into a hierarchical tree structure. This 
tree structure is similar to that of the directories and sub-directories that PCs use 


14 






to manage their disk drives. One of the libraries that has been modeled under 
the CARDS process is the CARDS Command Center (CC) Library The CARDS 
CC Library like the NSRS is a full service library system. The library utilizes a 
graphic representation of the domain model to refine and clarify application 
requirements. Since the library is organized in a tree like structure the user can 
visually see the relationships between the various components within the library 
and understand how they interact. The knowledge contained in the library is not 
only in what is stored in it but how it is stored. CARDS was initiated by the Air 
Force with the goal to create a program to establish software reuse processes 
and support specific application domains. [Ref. 1] 

A less robust but a rapidly emerging form of software repositories, is the 
Bulletin Board style. One such library is the Public Ada Library (PAL) which is a 
part of the AdaNet. The PAL is a library of Ada software, courseware, and 
documentation on an Internet-based host computer. PAL provides no warranties 
or guarantees as to the quality or functionality of the resources downloaded by 
users. It does provide quick and easy access to a large repository of software 
assets. PAL provides some help services on-line and a general announcement 
bulletin. One of its main attractions is its lack of administrative overhead. There 
are no middle managers, it is simply programmer to programmer. [Ref. 6] 


15 






E. DOMAIN ANALYSIS 


The DON defines a "domain" as a functional area covered by a family of 
systems or across systems in which similar software requirements exist (DON 
Software Reuse Guide). Domain Analysis is a process of identifying and 
organizing Imowledge that addresses a common class of problems Once 
identified and categorized the knowledge asset can be grouped and stored with 
other assets in the same domain. In the process of building a software 
repository this is an essential tool to enabling efficient use of the modules within 
the repository. [Ref. 13] 

Domains can be vertical or horizontal. A vertical domain would be a family 
of assets that correspond to one domain. The vertical domains are further 
broken down into sub-domains that categorize the assets down to a more 
detailed level. A horizontal domain would be a family of assets that apply across 
more than one vertical domain. [Ref. 13] 

Examples of vertical domains and sub-domains include: 

• Domain - Management Information Systems (MIS) 

S^bPomain - Logistics 
SubDomain - Personnel 
SubDomain - Finance 

• Domain - Command and Control (CC) 

SubDomain - Air Traffic Control/Carrier Landing Systems 
SubDomain - Local Communication Infrastructure/Base Communications 


16 






SubDomain - Naval Sealift 

• Domain - Tactical 

SubDomain - Embedded 

SubDomain - Deployable Combat Service Support 

Horizontal domains are related by their technical capabilities and features. 

Examples of horizontal domains include; 

• Communications (MIS, CC, Tactical) 

• Real-Time Scheduling (CC, Tactical) 

• Simulations (CC, Tactical) 

• User Interfaces (MIS, CC, Tactical) 

F. ROLE OF THE REPOSITORY 

The role of the repositories has been slowly evolving into being 
increasingly proactive in the software development process. Software 
repositories have begun to offer a complete line of services to assist the 
programmers. A typical repository would offer services such as those already 
listed for the NSRS. 

Some may argue against this trend, seeing it as an intrusion on their field. 
A programmer at the Fleet Numeric and Oceanographic Center (FNOC) in 
Monterey CA, had the opinion that he did not want the software repository to 
"tinker" with the software held within the library. He also did not want any advice 
or unsolicited input from the library. In his words, "I do not mind the repository 
packaging and shipping the software to me, but I don't want them handling it. I 


17 





will take a look at it and see if I want to use it I want to make any changes 
needed, not some third party who knows nothing about my programming 
problems," [Ref. 5] 

Other repositories have taken more of the hands off approach. They make 
no guarantees about the available software and perform only simple tests to 
analyze the software component. The most common test is that the item be 
tested to see if it compiles. Both types of library systems are growing in their 
acceptance throughout the industry and in their level of sophistication. 







III. ANALYSIS OF DATA 


A. CORE QUESTION 1 

Core Question 1 was; "Which domain or domains lend themselves to 
becoming customers of the NSRS?" It took several survey questions to answer 
the Core Question. We have arranged the survey data into tabular form. The 
table reflects the respective answers to the survey questions from each 
respondent. 

1. Organization of Data 

The survey respondents have been divided into four general groups, 
depending on the survey respondents' domain of activities (Table 1). Group A 
consists of the respondents that could be deemed as coming predominately from 
the MIS field. Group B consists of respondents who are equally or almost 
equally split between MIS and CC domains. Group C is categorized as coming 
predominately from the CC field. The final group, Group D, fits people that are 
strictly higher level administrators and do not do any software development. 


19 




TABLE 1 CORE QUESTION 1 ANALYSIS TABLE 



1. Indicated that they were equally split between choices I & 2. 


20 































































































We used survey questions 9 and 10 to segregate the respondents into 


the various groups. Questions 9 and 10 are listed below. 


• Question 9. What percentage of your software development projects would 
you categorize as being in the Information Systems domain? 

5) 100% 

4) 70% to 99% 

3) 50% to 69% 

2) 20% to 49% 

1) Less than 20% 

0) 0% 

• Question 10. What percentage of your software development projects 
would you categorize as being in the Command and Control or Tactical 
domain? 

5) 100% 

4) 70% to 99% 

3) 50% to 69% 

2) 20% to 49% 

1) Less than 20% 

0 ) 0 % 


The number to the left of the percentage range represents the value to 
be placed into the analysis table. If a respondent checked 100% for question 9, 
and 0% for question 10, then a 5 would be entered into table column Q9 and a 0 
for column Q10. 

Questions 1, 2 and 3 are represented in Table 1 by entering a Y for a 
yes or an N for a no response to the respective question. Questions 1, 2 and 3 
are listed below; 

• Question 1. Do you or your organization have a policy for utilizing reusable 
software components in development projects? (Y/N) 

• Question 2. Is this policy practiced by you and your staff? (Y/N) 


21 







• Question 3. Do you currently have a library of reusable components of 
your own? (Y/N) 

Question 5 has three choices for an answer. The question is 
presented below with appropriate numbers next to the possible answers 
provided. For example, if the respondent chooses to "maintain your own library", 
then it would be shown on Table 1 as a 1. The abbreviation Q5 represents 

question 5 in the table. Question 5 is listed below; 

• Question 5. Would you prefer to maintain your own library system allowing 
others to have access, or turn your library over to a centralized library. 

1) Maintain your own library with all maintenance responsibilities. 

2) Turn over reusable software assets to a centralized repository, with the 
library assuming the storage and maintenance responsibilities. 

3) Would not consider either 

The column labeled "Do not utilize external SA/V reuse services" is 
based on survey question 4. Question 4 asks, "What is the software repository 
system(s) that you are utilizing?" For this core question, it was not important to 
know which system they were using. We were only interested to see if they 
presently subscribe to any external service. 

2. Analysis 

We examined each domain in more detail to uncover any 
inconsistencies that may be present. Survey respondent number 7 appears to 
have an inconsistent answer since his command did not have a policy or 


22 





practice reuse, while they had a repository of their own. For this reason we 
excluded response number 7 from our analysis. 

Figure 2 shows the relative breakdown of the groups. The MIS is the 
largest of the groups with CC/Tactical and OTHER groups being well 
represented. Group D is shown on the pie chart as N/A, as they didn't fall into 
any of the domains. Since they were a relatively small portion of the population 
we decided to exclude from this core question. 



Figure 2. Domain breakdown 


We felt that if a particular person or agency met four conditions then 
they would be prime candidates to become customers of the NSRS. The first 
condition was that they have a reuse policy in practice (Question 2). The 


23 

















second was that they were willing to hand RSCs over to a software repository 
(Question 5). The third condition is found in question 3, which was included to 
gauge the level of sophistication of the respondent, asking if the person had a 
library of his/her own. The fourth condition was that they were presently using 
an external software repository system. If a developer was already using an 
external repository system then they should be more prone to trying another. 
Any negative answers in these categories would adversely affect their prospects 
of signing up to the NSRS. 

The MIS group displayed a strong support for reuse. Excluding survey 
respondent number 7, all respondents practice reuse. (One respondent 
practices reuse even though they have no reuse policy.) Only one respondent 
within this group indicated that they did not have some sort of reuse library of 
their own. Only two of the eight restrict themselves to using only an internal 
repository system. The answers to question 5 show us that only two of the nine 
in the MIS group would consider turning their software components over to a 
central authority. The MIS group as a whole would be highly likely to consider 
the services of the NSRS but they would probably be less likely to become 
heavy users. This is based upon the higher percentage of internal repositories 
and their resistance to donate software to a central authority. The NSRS will 
need to adjust its operating practices in order to lure this group into becoming 


24 









substantial customers. We feel that NCTS Washington will have to offer a 
separate set of services to motivate this domain to participate in NSRS. 

Group B, the "OTHER" group, also showed strong support for reuse 
All within this group practiced reuse, with one that practiced reuse even though 
they had no reuse policy as in Group A. Two out of the five did not have a 
library system of their own. Only one would not consider handing their 
components over to a central repository. All in Group B use some sort of 
external library system. Group B holds high promise for the NSRS. Their 
relatively strong support for reuse and their willingness to donate their RSCs 
would indicate that they could easily become regular customers of the NSRS. 

Only half of Group C, the CC/Tactical group, showed a strong interest 
in reuse. Of the three involved in reuse, only one appeared to be uninterested in 
utilizing the services of an external repository. Of the other half that were not 
involved in reuse, all were willing to hand over their software to a central system. 
We feel that CC/Tactical is a domain that will need to be managed on a more 
case by case basis. There is support within this group for donating software 
components, but they seem divided as far as their level of reuse involvement. It 
appears that each activity within this domain would need to be approached 
separately. Training in the field of reuse would need to be offered to each 
activity and would probably be required to make them viable users. 


25 



Research supports the assumption that a library needs to focus on a 
well-defined domain or collection of related domains to be an effective system 
We support this assumption and recommend that the NSRS focus on one of the 
domains and not attempt to please all of them. [Ref. 2] 


26 








B. CORE QUESTION 2 


Core Question 2 was: "Should NCTS concentrate their efforts on 
developing connections to various sources of RSCs or should NCTS incorporate 
as many RSCs into their own library?" This Core Question attempts to determine 
if NCTS Washington should look to establish a vast network of interconnected 
libraries or should they seek to have the smaller library systems donate their 
resources to a central library. The Core Question is not focused on the concept 
of linking major library systems together. The question is meant to address the 
smaller local library systems. It took several survey questions to answer the 
core question. We have arranged the survey data into tabular form. The table 
reflects the respective answers to the survey questions from each respondent. 

1. Organization of Data 

The data are segregated into three groups on the basis of survey 
questions 3 and 5 (Table 2). Group A represents people that indicated they 
would prefer to donate their software assets to a central agency and presently 
had a library system of their own. Group B represents the respondents that 
indicated that they preferred to donate their software assets to a central 
repository, but did not possess a library system. Group C consists of the people 
that indicated they would prefer to maintain their own system independent of a 
central activity. Survey respondent number 5 was included into this group. The 
purpose of question 5 was to identify people that would consider donating 


27 




TABLE 2. CORE QUESTION 2 ANALYSIS TABLE 



Survey # 

Aaencv 

OS. 

01. 

Own library 








mmmm 



1 

NCTS 

2 

Y 

GROUP 

2 

NAWC 

2 

Y 

A 

3 

FNOC 

2 

Y 


7 

DISA 

2 

Y 

Own 

library 

willing 

to 

8 

FNOC 

1.5^ 

Y 

15 

U of Tenn. 

2 

Y 

16 

DSR 


Y 

donate 

21 

NCTS 

-1 

_ 2 _ 

_Y_ 


GROUP 

B 

W/0 

own 

library 

4 

FNOC 

2 

N. 

11 

TELOG 

2 

N 

13 

OASD 

2 

N 

14 

Soft. Prod. 

2 

N 

17 

SPAWAR 

2 

N 

18 

NCTS 


N 

19 

NCTS 

2 

N 


GROUP 

C 

Own 
lib. not 
willing 
to 

donate 

5 


Neither^ 

Y 

6 


1 

Y 

9 

NCTS 

1 

Y 

10 

NCCOS 

1 

Y 

12 

Mntn. Net 

1 

Y 

20 

NCTS 

1 

Y 

22 

NCTS 

1 

Y 


Indicated that they were equally split between choice 1 & 2. 
Indicated that they did not prefer either choice 1 or 2. 


28 









































































software to a central authority. Since it appears that survey respondent number 
5 is not interested in doing so, he/she also fell into Group C. 


Questions 3 and 5 are represented in Analysis Table 2 in the same 
fashion as in Table 1. Questions 3 and 5 are listed below; 

• Question 3 Do you currently have a library of reusable components of 
your own? (Y/N) 

• Question 5. Would you prefer to maintain your own library system allowing 
others to have access, or turn your library over to a centralized library. 

1) Maintain your own library with ail maintenance responsibilities. 

2) Turn over reusable software assets to a centralized repository, with the 
library assuming the storage and maintenance responsibilities. 

3) Would not consider either 

2. Analysis 

We looked at Group B first. Survey respondent number 18 was 
excluded from the analysis since they did not answer question 5 It is logical 
that this group would prefer to turn over their software assets to a central 
authority since they do not already have a repository system of their own. It is 
not surprising that an activity would prefer to turn over the responsibility of 
managing a repository, rather than start one up on their own. 

Groups A and C are the focus of this core question and they are 
almost equally divided. Of the thirteen respondents in these groups, 6 would be 
willing to turn over their components while seven would not. Our data does not 


29 







show a majority of support for either a centralized library system or a more 
networked one. The overhead involved in linking up many libraries would be 
more extensive than incorporating various components into one central system 
If you factor in the overhead costs, the centralized concept would probably hold 
a slight edge. A significant portion of the software development community that 
already has libraries of their own will need some additional incentives if they are 
to donate their software assets Core Question 4 will address this issue. 


30 






C. CORE QUESTION 3 


Core Question 3 asked: "How much demand is anticipated for RSCs written 
in languages other than Ada?" The purpose of this Core Question is to 
determine which programming languages should be included into the library 
besides Ada. We are addressing this issue on a domain by domain basis so 
that when the NSRS decides to focus on a particular domain they will know 
which programming languages need to be added to the repository. It took 
several survey questions to answer the core question. We have arranged the 
survey data into tabular form. The table reflects the respective answers to the 
survey questions from each respondent. 

Survey questions 9 and 10 which were used to segregate the groups is not 
repeated in the table. Table 1 should be referred to if the reader cares to see 
the results of questions 9 and 10. 

1. Organization of Data 

The survey respondents have been divided into four general groups, 
depending on the survey respondents' domain of activities (Table 3). Group A 
consists of the respondents that could be deemed as coming predominately from 
the MIS field. Group B consists of respondents who are equally or almost 
equally split between MIS and CC domains. Group C is categorized as coming 
predominately from the CC field. The final group, Group D, fits people that are 
strictly higher level administrators and do not do any software development. 


31 




TABLE 3. CORE QUESTION 3 ANALYSIS TABLE 







Question 11 


Use 

ADA 

£±± 

Q 

EIBAB CflBfll. OTHER 


Ext. 

D3 Lik 




^ 

BRAND 


1 25 






30 30 1 


55 

ORACLE, FOXBASE 

Y 

2 I ' 



3 I N 


100 BASIC+2(90%), Y 1 N 

ORACLE PL/SQL 



19 DBASE/CLIPPER, 
PARADOX, QUICK 
BASIC 


GROUP 

2 

12 

B 

13 

(OTHER) 

16 


19 


16 80 10 10 





10 90 


1 


11 40 


17 


3 96.5 


99 


20 40 


40 FOXPRO 



5 Assembler. Pascal, 
Basic. PL/M 


Y 1,5'I Y 


N 




2 N 


N 2 


1. Indicated that they were equally split between choice 1 & 2. 


32 

























































































































We used survey questions 9 and 10 to segregate the respondents into 

the various groups. Questions 9 and 10 are listed below: 

• Question 9. What percentage of your software development projects would 
you categorize as being in the Information Systems domain? 

5) 100% 

4) 70% to 99% 

3) 50% to 69% 

2) 20% to 49% 

1) Less than 20% 

0 ) 0 % 

• Question 10. What percentage of your software development projects 
would you categorize as being in the Command and Control or Tactical 
domain? 

5) 100% 

4) 70% to 99% 

3) 50% to 69% 

2) 20% to 49% 

1) Less than 20% 

0 ) 0 % 


Questions 3 and 5 are represented in Analysis Table 3 in the same 


fashion as in Table 1. Questions 3 and 5 are listed below; 


• Question 3. Do you currently have a library of reusable components of 
your own? (Y/N) 

• Question 5. Would you prefer to maintain your own library system allowing 
others to have access, or turn your library over to a centralized library. 

1) Maintain your own library with all maintenance responsibilities. 

2) Turn over reusable software assets to a centralized repository, with 
the library assuming the storage and maintenance responsibilities. 

3) Would not consider either 


33 




Question 11 from the survey is the source of the percentages shown 

for each language. Question 11 is presented below: 

• Question 11. Please indicate below the respective- percentages of 
software development programs your organization has developed, or are in 
the process of developing in the last 24 months. 

_% Ada _% FORTRAN 

_% C++ _% COBOL 

_% C _% Other_ 

The column labeled "Use ext. Lib." is based on survey question 4. 
Question 4 asks, "What is the software repository system(s) that you are 
utilizing?" For this core question, it was not important to know which system 
they were using. We were only interested to see if they presently subscribe to 
any external service. 

2. Analysis 

In Group A, the MIS domain, there is a significant investment in 4GL 
languages. Programs written in 4GLs are not typically well suited for reuse [Ref. 
8]. Investing time and effort into incorporating 4GLs into the library would not 
produce a good return on the investment required. If the NSRS desires to place 
4GL software components into the repository then they might place these RSCs 
into a system similar to a BBS. The C programming language has the next 
highest concentration of use in this domain. C is an object-oriented language 
and would be well suited to reuse. All respondents that used C within this 
domain use external libraries and have a repository of their own. Only one of 


34 






the three expressed a willingness to donate their RSCs to a central repository 
If a respondent is not willing to donate, this does not mean that they would not 
be interested in retrieving components from a repository. This lack of 
willingness to donate indicates that the library may have some trouble in 
acquiring RSCs from software developers. We would recommend that NCTS 
Washington include C components into their library if they are going to 
specialize in the MIS domain. 

Group B, which composed of respondents that developed applications 
in both domains, paralleled the MIS domain. We recommend that if the NSRS is 
going to focus on this cross-domain group then they should incorporate 
components written in C into their library. 

Only Group C, CC/Tactical, has a large concentration in the use of 
FORTRAN. All four of the respondents within this group that had significant 
investments in FORTRAN were willing to donate their RSCs to a central 
repository. These four respondents were evenly spit on their use of external 
libraries and ownership of an internal library system. This would indicate a lower 
level of software reuse activity but a higher interest in a centralized library 
concept. FORTRAN has been evolving over the years into a language that has 
begun to take on many of the same traits of Ada. The maturity of the language 
and the apparent significant support for it would make it a strong candidate for 
inclusion into the library if the CC/Tactical Domain was to be targeted. 


35 






D. CORE QUESTION 4 


Core Question 4 was: "What incentives would be required in order to 
motivate an organization to donate RSCs?" It took several survey questions to 
answer the core question. We have arranged the survey data into tabular form. 
The table reflects the respective answers to the survey questions from each 
respondent. We decided to use the same groupings as in Core Question 2 so 
that it would be possible to understand more about the groups and possibly gain 
further insights. Survey questions 3 and 5 which were used to segregate the 
groups are not repeated in the table. Table 2 should be referred to if the reader 
cares to see the results of survey questions 3 and 5. 

1. Organization of Data 

The data are segregated into three groups on the basis of survey 
questions 3 and 5 (Table 4). Group A represents people that indicated they 
would prefer to donate their software assets to a central agency and presently 
had a library system of their own. Group B represents the respondents that 
indicated that they preferred to donate their software assets to a central 
repository, but did not possess a library system. Group C consists of the people 
that indicated they would prefer to maintain their own system independent of a 
central activity. Survey respondent number 5 was included into this group. The 
purpose of question 5 was to identify people that would consider donating 


36 







TABLE 4. CORE QUESTION 4 ANALYSIS TABLE. 



37 











































































































































software to a central authority. Since it appears that survey respondent number 
5 is not interested in doing so, he/she also fell into Group C. 


Questions 3 and 5 were used to segregate the respondents into the 
various groups and are listed below: 

• Question 3. Do you currently have a library of reusable components of 
your own? (Y/N) 

• Question 5. Would you prefer to maintain your own library system allowing 
others to have access, or turn your library over to a centralized library. 

1) Maintain your own library with all maintenance responsibilities. 

2) Turn over reusable software assets to a centralized repository, with the 
library assuming the storage and maintenance responsibilities. 

3) Would not consider either 

Totals were tallied for each motivator/incentive, and we also counted 
the number of responses with a "6’’ or a ”1". A "6" would indicate that this is the 
most desirable idea of the list and a "1" indicated that this is the least favorable 
idea. Identifying the number of ones and sixes served to further gauge the 
support and the level of controversy surrounding the idea. 

Survey questions 7 and 7A were the sources for this core question. 
Questions 7 and 7A are listed below; 

• Question 7. In your opinion what would be the most effective means or 
incentives that would ensure a sufficiently populated software repository 
system. Please rank with a 6 being the highest and 1 being the lowest. 




_ Incentive credits towards free access to the library and customer 

support with respect to the amount donated, (i.e., For a large donation, 
unlimited access for a year, or, one-for-one credit). 

_ A mandated DoD policy requiring all government software developers 

to donate their software components to a repository. 

_Feedback from library customers regarding your donated RSCs (i.e., 

ways they have improved upon your RSC) 

_Donors gaining exposure to other development activities, (i.e., If a 

development activity sees that you have done a large amount of work 
in a particular area they may subcontract out to you instead of 
attempting to build from your components.) 

_ Royalties paid to the donor activity when the RSC is used. 

_ Free extraction of re-engineered components derived from your 

donated RSC. 

• Question 7A. Please list any other incentives or policies that are not 

presented in the previous question, that would significantly motivate 

developers to donate components to the library system. 

We graphed the Group averages and overall totals to better show the 
relationships between them. Figures 3, 4, and 5 are for Groups A, B and C 
respectively. Figure 6 is a graph of the totals for all groups. Figure 7 and 8 
graphically compare the number of 6's and 1's given for each 
incentive/motivator. 

2. Analysis 

The advantage of gaining exposure to other software development 
activities proved to draw the highest overall response (Figure 6). When you look 
at the relationship between the number of 6’s and Ts (Figures 7 & 8), exposure 


39 



40 






















Figure 5. Group C Averages for motivators/incentives. 



Figure S. Totals for each Motivatior/Incentive for all Groups. 


41 






























enjoys a seven to two ratio in favor of those that regard it as the best idea. Of 
the six possible choices available in the survey question, exposure is the 
motivator/incentive that would have the best impact for the repository. Along 
with having the highest score, providing exposure would also be the easiest for 
the NSRS to implement. 

Royalties being paid to the donor of the RSC got the second highest 
score overall (Figure 6). When we look at the number of 6s received and the 
number of 1 s, it does not come out as strong (Figures 7 & 8). Royalties received 
three 6s and a single 1. This would indicate that people generally felt good 
about it, but it was not a key motivator or incentive. 

The third runner up was the mandated policy that would require all 
DoD software developers to donate RSCs to the repository. A mandated policy 
elicited the greatest number of extreme responses (Figures 7 & 8). The total 
number of 6s was nine and the total number of 1 s was seven. This indicates 
that it is a controversial idea and would need to be carefully considered before it 
was implemented. 

Core Question 2 investigates whether the NSRS should concentrate 
their efforts towards incorporating software assets into one central system or if 
they should attempt to network with existing libraries. The two groups with 
library systems already established, Groups A and C, had similar responses to 
the list of incentives/motivators (Figures 3 & 5). 


42 





Figure 7. Number of "6"s Overall, 


f 

Free Extraction 

Royalties 

Exposure 

Feedback 

Policy 

Incentive 

V_ 


Figure 8, Number of "1"s Overall. 


Free Extrac. 


Royaltie 


Expt»sure 


Feed Back 




MS 










Incentive 




43 
















Exposure and royalties received the best responses. The difference 
between them is the degree to which "Exposure" won out in Group C, those who 
would not be willing to donate to a central repository. This would appear to be a 
motivator/incentive that may change the minds of these individuals, and bring 
them around to donating their a'^sets to a central library. 

We did not try and order the lower three by the motivator/incentive 
data provided since the differences were not significant enough to break them 
out. The conclusion that can be drawn about these three is that none of them 
could be expected to provide a strong enough incentive or motivation to make 
someone donate their RSCs. The one that proved to actually be a disincentive 
was the feedback provided back to the donator. The donating activity might view 
this as being graded by another agency. 

We consolidated ail of the responses given to question 7A into one 
list. We did not group them or segregate them as was done for Table 4. We 
examined the answers looking for repeating themes. The list of answers are 
provided below; 

An§yy?r? to. QyestiaiilA 

• Reduced IRM project funding as penalty for not using repository system(s). 

• Need clear policy for contractors on who owns RSC, contractor or Gov.. 

• Designation that is clear on (1) who is the central repository for a specific 
business area and (2) an enforcement of use/sharing. 

• Yearly award for the "most reused asset". 


44 




• Quarterly reports on where the assets were used. When, in what systems 
and at what dollar savings. 

• Quarterly reports on how one agency's/ individuals donations compared in 
the total number of donated assets for the period. 

• An easy to use access to the system. 

• An easy to find S/W method employed in the system. 

• Knowledge that all Navy was using this system. 

• Knowledge that all Navy agencies that were producing domain specific S/W 
were also using the system (using = contributing to the repository). 

• Ease of access. 

• Newsletters that describe new and old RSCs. The Army has a newsletter 
called "The Army Reuse Center News". 

• Free! 

• Sorry I view my library as my competitive edge and I have no intention on 
donating it. Jobs are at stake. 

• Easy Search engines. 

The theme that was mentioned the most was that the repository must 
be easy to use and access. Building a system that is easy to use is a crucial 
ingredient to any new system. We echo these suggestions and cannot 
overemphasize its importance. 

A clearly stated DoD policy was the second most often mentioned 
theme that emerged. From reviewing the Navy Reuse Implementation Guide 
and the DoD Software Reuse Vision and Strategy documents this is being 
addressed by the DoD. What is missing is the bridge between policy and 


45 





practice. The documents state that there is no one way to implement reuse 
throughout DoD. The documents fail to provide specifics on how to determine 
the best method for a domain. We feel the documents are a good start but they 
need more substance and more specific policies to be effective. 

A newsletter or some form of reporting mechanism was a concern of 
two respondents. We agree with this suggestion and feel it could be a valuable 
addition to the library service. 


46 





E. CORE QUESTION 5 


Core Question 5 asks: "How much business should you expect from an 
individual customer?" It took several survey questions to answer the core 
question. We have arranged the survey data into tabular form The table 
reflects the respective answers to the survey questions from each respondent 
We decided to use the same groupings as in Core Question 2. Survey 
questions 3 and 5 which were used to segregate the groups is not repeated in 
the table. Table 2 should be referred to if the reader cares to see the results of 
questions 3 and 5. 

1. Organization of Data 

The data are segregated into three groups on the basis of survey 
questions 3 and 5 (Table 5). Group A represents people that indicated they 
would prefer to donate their software assets to a central agency and presently 
had a library system of their own. Group B represents the respondents that 
indicated that they preferred to donate their software assets to a central 
repository, but did not possess a library system. Group C consists of the people 
that indicated they would prefer to maintain their own system independent of a 
central activity. Survey respondent number 5 was included into this group. The 
purpose of question 5 was to identify people that would consider donating 
software to a central authority. Since it appears that survey respondent number 
5 is not interested in doing so, he/she also fell into Group C. 


47 








TABLE 5. CORE QUESTION 5 ANALYSIS TABLE 


Survey QUESTION 12 | | 

« AflfiOfiy ADAlC»-blci CTBAN l OTHER l I Q3 Q5 


NCTS 


FNOC 


FNOC 


Uof 

Tenn. 


DSR 


NCTS 


FNOC 1 







GROUP 

B 

W/0 
own 
library 
willingt o 
donate 




GROUP 

C 

Own 
lib. not 
willing 
to 

donate 






TELOG 2 


OASD 


17 

SPAWAR 

18 

NCTS 

19 

NCTS 




^ •if c- v’V ^ 



NCTS 


NCCOS 


Mnt. Net 


NCTS 


NCTS 



48 



































































Questions 3 and 5 were used to segregate the respondents into the 
various groups and are listed below; 

• Question 3. Do you currently have a library of reusable components of 
your own? (Y/N) 

• Question 5. Would you prefer to maintain your own library system allowing 
others to have access, or turn your library over to a centralized library. 

1) Maintain your own library with ail maintenance responsibilities. 

2) Turn over reusable software assets to a centralized repository, with the 
library assuming the storage and maintenance responsibilities. 

3) Would not consider either. 

Question 12 is used in the analysis of this core question. It makes a 
reference to question 11 but only question 12 was needed in the analysis. 
Question 12 asks each respondent to provide some level of program 
development. We listed question 11 along with 12 for the purpose of 
clarification. 


• Question 11. Please indicate below the respective percentages of 
software development programs your organization has developed, or are in 
the process of developing in the last 24 months. 

_% Ada _% FORTRAN 

_% C++ _% COBOL 

% C % Other_ 


• Question 12 What are the respective lines of code for the software 
programs listed in question 11 ? Check the appropriate level using the key 
provided below; 


49 






key; [A] = 1 to 10 KLOC 

[B] = 11 to 100 KLOC 

[C] = 101 to 1000 KLOC 

[D] = Greater than 1000 KLOC 

[A] [B] [C] [D] Ada [A] [B] [C] [D] FORTRAN 

[A] [B] [C] [D] C ++ [A] [B] [C] [D] COBOL 

[A] [B] [C] [D] C [A] [B] [C] [D] Other_ 

In order to transfer the survey question into a tabular form, the letter 
codes of [A] to [D] were translated to a value of 1 to 4. An answer of [A] for Ada 
would be indicated with a 1 in the Ada column for that survey respondent. If the 
answer was [B] for Ada then a 2 would be placed in the respective column and 
so on. 

2. Analysis 

There were several survey participants that fit the mold of being 
receptive to reuse and in the process of developing large applications. 
However, we did not feel that the data gathered was sufficient enough to 
determine an expected level of business as we had hoped to do. 

Further research into this subject area after the survey was 
constructed revealed that many more factors significantly affect the level of 
interaction with and participation with a reuse facility. It would take individual 
interviews with activity representatives and a more detailed analysis of their 
practices to arrive at an accurate level. 


50 







r 


A future study into this question would require that the activity's history 
of reuse practices be examined. The level of activity with current repositories 
and what percentage of their current applications contain modules that have 
been reused would need to be determined. The fit between the repository and 
the activity would need to be explored. Do the services and modules contained 
within the library fit that of the activity? This question can not be answered 
satisfactorily until an in-depth study takes into account these factors on an 
individual activity basis. 


51 








F. CORE QUESTION 6 


Core Question 6 asks; "What level of documentation do the customers want 
before they will consider using an RSC?” It took several survey questions to 
answer the core question. We have arranged the survey data into tabular form 
The table reflects the respective answers to the survey questions from each 
respondent. 

1. Organization of Data 

We decided to make our analysis without segregating the survey 
responses into separate groups. The answers provided for question 8 were 
placed into tabular form (Table 6). We looked at the responses as one 
population since the question was one that cut equally across all domains. It 
was expected that the CC/Tactical domain would require a higher level of 
documentation than the MIS developers. CC/Tactical systems are generally 
more life critical systems and the tolerances are normally higher for them as 
compared to MIS applications. The data did not support our expectations, so we 
decided to treat the responses as one population. 


52 



TABLE 6. CORE QUESTION 6 ANALYSIS TABLE. 



53 




















































































Question 8 from the survey formed the basis for Core Question 6 and 


is presented below; 


• Question 8 A module within the library will be classified at one of four 
levels. How would the level of classification affect whether or not you would 
consider using an RSC? Please use the table below to indicate your 
answer. An explanation of each level is listed below the table. 


Levels 

Would not 
consider 

Unlikely 

May 

consider 

Strongly 

consider 

1 





2 





3 





4 






Level 1. As-is; immediate demand components; no additional testing or 
documentation; may not be complete or correct. 

Level 2. Reviewed for quality; Metrics reported; Completeness has been 
determined; Has been compiled. 

Level 3; Complies with CSRO Certification criteria and documentation 
guidelines; Approved test suites are provided. 

Level 4: Complies with CSRO Certification criteria and documentation 
guidelines; Approved test suites and documentation. 


The levels listed above are from the DoD Software Reuse Initiative 
and are used to classify components within the repository. The CSRO 
abbreviation stands for 'The Center for Software Reuse Operations" and the 
CSRO has overall responsibility for the Defense Software Reuse System 
(DSRS). The NSRS is a Navy version of the DSRS and falls under the 
jurisdiction of the CSRO. 


54 
















The matrix provided on the survey was transposed to make Table 6 
The various levels became columns instead of rows and the choices of, "Would 
not consider", "Unlikely", "May consider" and "Strongly consider" took on the 
respective values of 1,2,3 and 4. Figure 10 provides an example of this 
conversion. An average of all responses for each level was calculated and the 


value was placed along the bottom of the table. 



Figure 10. Survey to Table conversion. 

2. Analysis 


The greatest jump in the responses occurs from level 1 to level 2 
This would indicate that the time invested in bringing an RSC from level 1 to 2 
will yield the greatest payback. The flip side of this would be, what is required to 
bring a level 1 RSC up to level 2? This could only be answered on a case by 
case basis and would have to be balanced against available resources. The 
population that we surveyed does seem to support considerable investment on 
the part of the library in bringing an RSC up to Level 2. 


55 





















The jump for the level 2 to 3 upgrade is also significant especially 
when you compare it to the jump for the level 3 to 4 upgrade. The added feature 
of test suites does seem important enough to warrant some additional 
investment. 

The data indicates that the library is best served by populating the 
library with RSCs that meet level 2 certification or higher. We realize that as a 
library is starting out it may have to settle for RSCs that are only at level 1. As 
the library matures it should focus on weeding these out in favor of level 2 or 
higher. We do not feel that there is adequate support for additional effort for 
bringing assets up to level 4 from level 3. The added documentation provided 
by this higher level does not seem to be of great importance to the respondents. 
The main concern is whether the code compiles and whether some evaluation 
data is provided. The level 2 certification requires that the code pass a compiler 
and this fact provides some basic level of quality assurance to the user. 


56 



G. CORE QUESTION 7 


Core Question 7 asks: "What will the impact of fee for service be on NCTS? 
What can NCTS do to prepare for fee for service?" It took several survey 
questions to answer the core question. We have arranged the survey data into 
tabular form. The table reflects the respective answers to the survey questions 
from each respondent. We decided to use the same groupings as in Core 
Question 1 so that we can better understand the characteristics and attitudes of 
each group and possibly gain further insights into their expectations 
1. Organization of Data 

The survey respondents have been divided into four general groups, 
depending on the respondents' domain of activities (Table 7). Group A consists 
of the respondents that could be deemed as coming predominately from the MIS 
field. Group B consists of respondents who are equally or almost equally split 
between MIS and CC domains. Group C is categorized as coming 
predominately from the CC field. The final group, Group D, fits people that are 
strictly higher level administrators and do not do any software development. 


57 









TABLE 7. CORE QUESTION 7 ANALYSIS TABLE. 




GROUP 

B 

(OTHER) 




3 

0 

GROUP 

4 

0 

c 

8 

1 

(CC/ 

10 

0 

Tactical) 

11 

1 


17 

0 





GROUPD 

(N/A) 


Average 


14 

0 

0 

5 

5 

1 

15 

0 

0 

25 

25 

2 


1. Indicated that they were equally split between choice 1 & 2. 

2. Indicated that they would prefer a Bulletin Board service. 


58 




































































































































We used survey questions 9 ai.J 10 to determine the domain of the 
person or agency. Responses are shown in the analysis table using the ordinal 
number corresponding to certain percentage values as specified in questions 9 
and 10. If a respondent checked 100% for question 9, and 0% for question 10, 
then a 5 would be entered into table column Q9 and a 0 for column Q10 
Questions 9 and 10 are listed below: 


• Question 9. What percentage of your software development projects would 
you categorize as being in the Information Systems domain? 

5) 100% 

4) 70% to 99% 

3) 50% to 69% 

2) 20% to 49% 

1) Less than 20% 

0 ) 0 % 

• Question 10. What percentage of your software development projects 
would you categorize as being in the Command and Control or Tactical 
domain? 

5) 100% 

4) 70% to 99% 

3) 50% to 69% 

2) 20% to 49% 

1) Less than 20% 

0 ) 0 % 


We used survey questions 14 and 15 to gauge the value that the 
participants placed on the RSCs. For both questions a level 3 RSC was used. It 
was felt that a level 3 RSC with its test suites and documentation would probably 
represent the top end of the market. We did not choose a level 4, since there 


59 







are so few of them available and we did not feel that the added documentation 
would significantly impact the value placed on the RSC The percents selected 
by the respondents are summarized in table 7 If 3% was selected for either 
question, it would be shown as a 3 in the table. Questions 14 and 15 are 
presented below: 


• Question 14 . In a few years a fee for service program may be instituted 
for all Software Repository Systems. Under the fee for service structure 
what percentage of the projected development costs would you be willing to 
pay for a component? For example, (tf a module is projected to take 2 
months to develop, test and document at an estimated cost of $20,000, I 
would only be willing to pay a maximum of 10% or $2,000.) 

Note; For all cases assume a level 3 component and it would require only 
minor modifications to meet the module requirements. 


o 

1% 

o 

CM 

O 

30% 

o 

3% 

o 

15% 

O 

35% 

o 

5% 

o 

18% 

o 

40% 

o 

7% 

o 

20% 

o 

50% 

o 

10% 

o 

25% 

o 

75% 


• Question 15. Assuming that you have donated a level three module to a 
reuse library, what would be the minimum royalty that you would be willing 
to accept for the use of the module by another party? The fee would need 
to offset the added costs that you would need to incur in order to prepare 
the module for level three certification. 

The fee would not however need to cover all of the development costs 
since the module was developed as a result of an earlier effort. 


o 

1% 

o 

12% 

o 

30% 

o 

3% 

o 

15% 

o 

35% 

o 

5% 

o 

18% 

o 

40% 

o 

7% 

o 

20% 

o 

50% 

o 

10% 

o 

25% 

o 

75% 


60 







Question 6 was added to this table in an effort to see if there was any 
connection between the type of access mode preferred and the value a 
customer would place on the RSCs. The first, second and third selections were 
represented with a 1, 2 or a 3 respectively. Question 6 is presented below: 


• Question 6 . Assuming a centralized library system, what primary mode of 
access would you prefer? An access mode where the user would primarily 
access the library via remote logon or primarily via a CD-ROM generated by 
the library. For the CD mode, the CDs would be distributed to the 
subscribers on a scheduled basis (quarterly / annually). The CDs would 
be targeted towards a particular domain so as to minimize the number of 
irrelevant assets. 

1) Remote Logon 

2) CD access 

3) Neither, would prefer (please specify) 

2. Analysis 

We calculated the averages for questions 14 and 15 for those that 
provided responses. We only did this for the overall sample population The 
values were so scattered, we did not feel that a sub-average for each category 
would be useful. A write-in comment on questions 14 and 15 that is worth 
mentioning is that our scale did not go low enough. This comment suggested 
that the fee should be 0.1% to 0.5%. The reason for this reduced fee was that it 
would only take 100 reuses at 1% to recoup all costs. In addition, the RSCs 
were more likely not manufactured to turn a profit. Whatever funds that were 
generated from the reuse of the module would be profit. We agree with this 
statement and feel that the fees charged should not be to recoup all costs of 


61 



developing the software and documentation The averages of 15 29% and 
15.31% seem very high when you consider the earlier discussion. For both 
questions 14 and 15, less than half gave an answer that was 5% or less This 
would indicate a significant gap between what a library should charge and what 
potential customers are willing to pay. 

On the demand side of the equation, the numbers look extremely 
favorable. It could be surmised that if the library had a fee structure that 
charged no more than one percent of the projected cost of development, then 
you could expect that developers would be willing to pay this fee. 

The supply side of this question is very interesting. The overall 
percentage for what the respondents wanted as compensation for their RSC 
being used by someone else was approximately even to what they were willing 
to pay. A closer look at the numbers shows that three respondents wanted a 
higher percentage compensation for what they donated than what they used 
from the library. This could be interpreted to mean that they felt the components 
that they held were of a higher value than what could be found in a repository. 
This mind set was not peculiar to a particular domain either. The opposite was 
also true. Four respondents selected a lower percentage compensation for what 
they donated than what they used from the library. These people were willing to 
pay more for what they pulled out of the repository than what they were going to 
put in. At first glance this would not seem to make any sense. The reasoning 


62 






behind this could be that if a developer could find an RSC that fit his/ her needs 
at a fraction of the cost then they would be saving money and time. If a 
developer gets any compensation for an already existing component then they 
are creating additional revenue at little or no cost 

In our opinion, we feel that the latter group is being more realistic and 
demonstrating a good business sense. We included question 6 in an attempt to 
see if the mode of interaction played a role in the fees that a customer would be 
willing to pay. We did not see any connection and do not feel that the method of 
access will have a direct impact on the fee structure. We feel that offering 
alternative methods of access should increase the customer base but the 
relative value of the RSCs would be the same. 

If a fee for service is instituted at the NSRS, then the fee to be 
charged is going to have to be a low percentage of the projected development 
costs. We feel that it should not be any higher than 5%. From core question 
four we learned that customers want a clear policy concerning reuse and this 
would apply to the subject of the fee structure. NCTS will need to go to great 
lengths to ensure that their policy for charging and collecting is clearly 
understood by all the users. The policy must also be easy to understand, since 
a complicated policy would serve to hinder the emerging concept of reuse. 
Programmers wili not spend a lot of time trying to figure out what something will 


63 








cost if they can go to a relatively free BBS style repository and get a similar 
product. 

A quarterly subscription rate based on the level of service and access 
would be a possible method of charging users. If a customer wanted CDs sent 
to them then that would be added to the subscription rate. Each module in the 
repository could have a contract section within it that stated the compensation 
expected back to the developer in the same way shareware is handled. If the 
user tries the module and likes it, then they send a check to the owner of the 
module. 

The Institute for Defense Analysis is presently doing research into this 
area. They caution against the repository getting into the field of setting the 
prices for the components. The lessons of economics have shown that it should 
be the market that sets the prices, not some agency. The IDA also recommends 
that some tolerance for cheating be allowed. It would not be cost effective to 
attempt to police everyone to ensure full compliance with a fee system. [Ref. 4] 


64 








H. CORE QUESTION 8 


Core Question 8 asks; "What is the preferred mode of access for 
organizations that currently have their own library system?" It took several 
survey questions to answer the core question. We have arranged the survey 
data into tabular form. The table reflects the respective answers to the survey 
questions from each respondent. We decided to use the same groupings as in 
Core Question 1 so that we can better understand the characteristics and 
attitudes of each group and possibly gain further insights and gain further 
insights into their expectations. 

1. Organization of Data 

The data are segregated into three groups on the basis of survey 
questions 3 and 5 (Table 8). Group A represents people that indicated they 
would prefer to donate their software assets to a central agency and presently 
had a library system of their own. Group B represents the respondents that 
indicated that they preferred to donate their software assets to a central 
repository, but did not possess a library system. Group C consists of the people 
that indicated they would prefer to maintain their own system independent of a 
central activity. Survey respondent number 5 was included into this group. The 
purpose of question 5 was to identify people that would consider donating 
software to a central authority. Since it appears that survey number 5 is not 
interested in doing so, he/she also fell into Group C. 


65 






TABLE 8. CORE QUESTION 8 ANALYSIS TABLE 



GROUP 

B 

W/0 

own 

library 



N 

2 

N 

2 

N 

2 

N 

2 

N 

2 

N 


N 

2 




5 

GROUP 

C 

6 

9 

Own 

10 

library, not 
willing to 
donate 

12 

20 


22 



3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1.5’ 

1 

2 

1 

1 

1 

3' 

1 

1 


1. Indicated that they were equally split between choice 1 & 2. 

2. Indicated that they would prefer a BBS style library service. 


66 































































































Questions 3 and 5 are represented in the Analysis table in the same 
fashion as in table 1. Questions 3 and 5 are listed below: 

• Question 3. Do you currently have a library of reusable components of 
your own? (Y/N) 

• Question 5. Would you prefer to maintain your own library system allowing 
others to have access, or turn your library over to a centralized library. 

1) Maintain your own library with all maintenance responsibilities. 

2) Turn over reusable software assets to a centralized repository, with the 
library assuming the storage and maintenance responsibilities. 

3) Would not consider either 

Question 6 was added to Table 8 to identify a unique trait of library 
owners. Survey Question is presented below; 

• Question 6. Assuming a centralized library system, what primary mode of 
access would you prefer? An access mode where the user would primarily 
access the library via remote logon or primarily via a CD-ROM generated by 
the library. For the CD mode, the CDs would be distributed to the 
subscribers on a scheduled basis (quarterly / annually). The CDs would be 
targeted towards a particular domain so as to minimize the number of 
irrelevant assets. 

1) Remote Logon 

2) CD access 

3) Neither, would prefer (please specify) 


2. Analysis 

Core Question 4 has addressed the motivators/incentives that work 
best for the groups with libraries. For this analysis we will direct our attention 
towards Survey Question # 6. 


67 





Group A had six of the eight responses that indicated that they would 
prefer to receive a CD with the RSCs on them instead of an on-line service It 
would appear that this group might use the CDs as a means to augment their 
own library. This group clearly displays support for a CD subscription service 

Group C, respondents with a library but did not want to donate their 
RSCs, did not show a strong support for the CD distribution concept. We 
concluded that offering a CD distribution service would not be enough to 
convince the people within this group to hand over their RSCs to the NSRS 
Group B had only two respondents indicate that they were interested in the idea 
of the CD access. This group has less involvement with reuse in general and it 
is not surprising that they did not show much interest in receiving a CD with 
RSCs on them. Given the results of Groups A and C, offering a CD distribution 
service could be a service offered along with an on-line service that could attract 
additional users. 


68 






IV. CONCLUSION 


A. SUMMARY OF CORE QUESTIONS 

We were able to ascertain a clear conclusion for seven of the eight core 
questions. These conclusions lead us to recommendations that for the most part 
are completely within the control of NCTS Washington. This section is 
subdivided into eight summary conclusions for each of the Core Questions. 

1. Core Question 1 

The MIS domain as a whole would be highly likely to consider the 
services of the NSRS but they would probably be less likely to become heavy 
users. The NSRS will need to adjust its operating practices in order to lure this 
group into becoming substantial customers. We feel that the CC/Tactical 
domain will need to be taken on a more case by case basis. There is support 
within this qrrup for donating software components, but they are divided as far 
as their le r reuse involvement. It appears that each activity within this 
domain would need to be approached separately. Training in the field of reuse 
would need to offered to each activity and would probably be required to make 
them viable users. We recommend that the NSRS focus on one of the domains 
and not attempt to please all of them. 


69 




2. Core Question 2 


Our data did not show a majority of support for either a centralized 
library system or a more networked one. The overhead involved in linking up 
many libraries would be more extensive than incorporating various components 
into one central system. If you factor in the overhead costs, then the centralized 
concept would probably hold a slight edge. The significant portion of the 
software development community that already has libraries of their own will need 
some additional incentives if they are going to donate their software assets 

3. Core Question 3 

We analyzed the data by domain to determine that, if the repository 
was to focus on a particular domain, which language should be included into the 
library. For the MIS domain, we recommended that the programming language 
C should be included into the repository. The group that developed applications 
in both domains paralleled the MIS domain. We made the same 
recommendation for this group as the MIS domain. The CC/Tactical domain 
showed strong use of FORTRAN in addition to Ada. If the NSRS is going to 
focus on this domain, we recommended that the repository include FORTRAN 
into the repository. 

4. Core Question 4 

The advantage of gaining exposure to other software development 
activities proved to draw the highest overall response. Along with having the 


70 






highest score, providing exposure would also be the easiest for the NSRS to 
implement. 

Royalties being paid to the donor of the RSC got the second highest 
score overall. The analysis showed that people generally felt good about it, but 
it was not a key motivator or incentive. The third runner up was the mandated 
policy that would require all DoD software developers to donate RSCs to the 
repository. The data indicated that a mandated policy is a controversial idea 
and would need to be carefully considered before it was implemented. 

5. Core Question 5 

Further research into this subject area after the survey was 
constructed revealed that many more factors significantly affect the level of 
interaction with and participation with a reuse facility. It would take individual 
interviews with activity representatives and a more detailed analysis of their 
practices to arrive at an accurate level. 

6. Core Question 6 

The data indicates that the library is best served by populating the 
library with RSCs that meet level 2 certification or higher. We realize that as a 
library is starting out it may have to settle for RSCs that are only level 1. As the 
library matures it should focus on weeding these out in favor of level 2 or higher 
We do not feel that there is adequate support for additional effort for bringing 


71 




assets up to level 4 from level 3. The added documentation provided by this 
higher level does not seem to be of great importance to the reuse community 

7. Core Question 7 

If a fee for service is instituted at the NSRS, then the fee that is 
charged is going to have to be a low percentage of the projected development 
costs. We feel that it should not be any higher than 5%. From Core Question 4 
we learned that customers want a clear policy concerning reuse and this would 
apply to the subject of the fee structure. NCTS will need to go to great lengths to 
ensure that their policy for charging and collecting is clearly understood by all 
the users. The policy must also be easy to understand, since a complicated 
policy would serve to hinder the emerging concept of reuse. Programmers will 
not spend a lot of time trying to figure out what something will cost if they can go 
to a relatively free BBS style repository and get a similar product. 

8. Core Question 8 

Since Core Question 4 had already addressed the aspect of 
motivators and incentives, we concentrated on the concept of CD-ROM 
distribution service. This is where the RSCs would be distributed to the users 
via a CD. We concluded that offering a CD distribution service should be a 
service offered along with an on-line service. There is not enough wide spread 
support to completely replace the on-line method of RSC retrieval and library 


72 












interaction. There was enough interest in the CD distribution idea that it could 
add significant value to the library services to make it a worthwhile investment. 

B. SUMMARY COMMENTS 

The NSRS needs to advertise in as many government software related 
periodicals as possible. The previously mentioned recommendations will have 
an effect only if the NSRS is known to the general development community 
Articles to publications such as Federal Computer Weekly and CHIPS should be 
submitted at least quarterly. Subject matter for the articles could range from 
discussions of services offered to recent experience with a particular user. 

The NSRS has had some exposure already and has recently completed a 
cooperative effort with the Marine Corps Tactical Systems Support Activity 
(MCTSSA). The program was successful and reuse was an integral part of the 
development [Ref. 9], The NSRS should make the most of this initial 
experience. Every facet of this project should be studied and a comprehensive 
set of lessons learned should be formulated. The Lessons learned should be 
derived from the combined input of the entire NSRS staff and key 
representatives from the MCTSSA. Software reuse is in its initial stages of 
understanding and it should be expected that some mistakes will be made. 
These mistakes along with the desires of software developers concerning 
software reuse need to be identified and dealt with before software reuse can 
truly mature as an accepted practice. 


73 






APPENDIX A 


Software Repository Market Survey 

1 ) Do you or your organization have a policy for utilizing reusable software 
components in development projects? 

o Yes 

o No (go to question 5) 

2. ) Is this policy practiced by you and your staff? 

o Yes 
o No 

3. ) Do you currently have a library of reusable components of your own? 

o Yes 
o No 

4. ) What is the software repository system(s) that you are utilizing? 


O ASSET 

O NTSC 

OCRSS 

O DSRS 

O SIMTEL 20 

O COSMIC 

O CARDS 

o Ada Net 

O Ada Software Repository 

o Public Ada Library 
o Other 

o AdaSAGE 

O Do not utilize a repository sys 


5.) Would you prefer to maintain your own library system allowing others to have 
access, or turn your library over to a centralized library. 

o Maintain your own library with all maintenance responsibilities. 

o Turn over reusable software assets to a centralized repository, with the library 
assuming the storage and maintenance responsibilities. 

o Would not consider either 












6.) Assuming a centralized library system, what primary mode of access would you 
prefer? An access mode where the user would primarily access the library via remote 
logon or primarily via CDs generated by the library For the CD mode, the CDs would 
be distributed to the subscribers on a scheduled basis (quarterly / annually). The CDs 
would be targeted towards a particular domain so as to minimize the number of 
irrelevant assets, 
o Remote Logon 
o CD access 

o Neither, would prefer (please specify)_ 


7.) In your opinion what would be the most effective means or incentives that would 
ensure a sufficiently populated software repository system. Please rank with a 6 being 
the highest and 1 being the lowest. 

_Incentive credits towards free access to the library and customer support with 

respect to the amount donated, {i.e. For a large donation, unlimited access for a 
year, or, one-for-one credit). 

_A mandated DoD policy requiring all government software developers to 

donate their software components to a repository. 

_Feedback from library customers regarding your donated RSCs. {i.e. ways they 

have improved upon your RSC) 

_Donors gaining exposure to other development activities, (i.e. If a development 

activity sees that you have done a large amount of work in a particular area they 
may subcontract out to you instead of attempting to build from your 
components.) 

_ Royalties paid to the donor activity when the RSC is used. 

_Free extraction of re-engineered components derived from your donated RSC. 


7A.) Please list any other incentives or policies that are not presented in the previous 
question, that would significantly motivate developers to donate components to the 
library system. 


75 









8.) A module within the library will be classified at one of four levels How would the 
level of classification affect whether or not you would consider using an RSC? Please 
use the table below to indicate your answer An explanation of each level is listed 
below the table 


Levels 

Would not 
consider 

Unlikely 

May 

consider 

Strongly j 
consider 

1 





2 





3 





4 

— 





Level 1; As-is; immediate demand components; no additional testing or 
documentation; may not be complete or correct. 

Level 2: Reviewed for quality; Metrics reported; Completeness has been 
determined; Has been compiled. 

Level 3. Complies with CSRO Certification criteria and documentation 
guidelines; Approved test suites are provided. 

Level 4; Complies with CSRO Certification criteria and documentation 
guidelines; Approved test suites and documentation. 

9. ) What percentage of your software development projects would you categorize 

as being in the Information Systems domain? (see attached domain chart) 

o 100% 

O 70% to 99% 
o 50% to 69% 

O 20% to 49% 
o Less than 20% 
o 0% 

10. ) What percentage of your software development projects would you 

categorize as being in the Command and Control or Tactical domain? (see attached 
domain chart) 

O 100% 
o 70% to 99% 

O 50% to 69% 

O 20% to 49% 
o Less than 20% 
o 0% 


76 













11.) Please indicate below the respective percentages of software development 
programs your organization has developed, or are in the process of developing in the 
last 24 months. 

_% Ada _% FORTRAN 

_% C++ _% COBOL 

% C % Other_ 


12.) What are the respective lines of code (LOC.) for the software programs listed 
above? Check the appropriate level using the key provided below: 

key: [A] = 1 to 10 KLOC 

[B] = 11 to 100 KLOC 

[C] = 101 to 1000 KLOC 

[D] = Greater than 1000 KLOC 

[A] [B] [C] [D] Ada [A] [B] [C] [D] FORTRAN 

[A] [B] [C] [D] C ++ [A] [B] [C] [D] COBOL 

[A] [B] [C] [D] C [A] [B] [C] [D] Other 


13.) Are you familiar with Fee for Service?_yes _no 

If no see attached sheet title "Fee for Service" 


14.) In a few years a fee for service program may be instituted for all Software 
Repository Systems. Under the fee for service structure what percentage of the 
projected development costs would you be willing to pay for a component? For 
example. (If a module is projected to take 2 months to develop, test and document at 
an estimated cost of $20,000, I would only be willing to pay a maximum of 10% or 
$ 2 , 000 . ) 

Note. For all cases sume a level 3 component and it would require only 
minor modifications to meet the module requirements. 


o 1% 

O 12% 

O 30% 

o 3% 

O 15% 

O 35% 

O 5% 

O 18% 

O 40% 

O 7% 

O 20% 

O 50% 

o 10% 

O 25% 

O 75% 


77 






15.) Assuming that you have donated a level three module to a reuse library, what 
would be the minimum royalty that you would be willing to accept for the use of the 
module by another party? The fee would need to offset the added costs that you would 
need to incur in order to prepare the module for level three certification 
The fee would not however need to cover all of the development costs since the 
module was developed as a result of an earlier effort. 


o 1 % 0 12% 0 30% 

O 3% O 15% O 35% 

O 5% O 18% O 40% 

O 7% O 20% O 50% 

O 10% 0 25% 0 75% 


78 








APPENDIX B 


Tabulated survey results. 



a. Actual answer given was a range of 5% to 25%, a middle value of 15% was used as the 
answer. 


79 







































































































































80 

































































































































Answers to Question 7A 


Survey 

S Suggestions 

#5 

- Reduced IRM project funding as penalty for not using repository system(s) 

- Need clear policy for contractors on who owns RSC - contractor or Gov 

#6 

- Designation that is clear on (1) who is the central repository for a specific 
business area and (2) an enforcement of use/sharing. 

#7 

- Yearly award for the "most reused asset". 

- Quarterly reports on where the assets were used - by. When and in what systems 
and at what dollar savings. 

- Quarterly reports on how one agency’s / individuals donations compared in 
the total number of donated assets for the period. 

#8 

- An easy to use access to the system. 

- An easy to find SAA/ method employed in the system. 

- Knowledge that all NAVY was using this system. 

- Knowledge that all NAVY agencies that were producing domain specific SA/V were 
also using the system (using = contributing to the repository). 

#9 

- Ease of access 

- Newsletters that describe new and old RSCs. The Army has a newsletter called 
"The Army Reuse Center News". 

- Free! 

#10 

-Sorry I view my library as my competitive edge and I have no intention on donating 
it. Jobs are at stake. 


82 





83 














































































84 

































































85 



















































LIST OF REFERENCES 


[1] Central Archive for Reusable Defense Software, Building a Software 
Reuse Infrastructure,1993. 

[2] Government Accounting Office, Software Reuse Major Issues Need to be 
resolved before Benefits can be Achieved, January 1993. 

[3] Information Mission Area, Software Reuse: A Strategic Alternative, Reuse 
Tutorial from the Software Technology Conference, April 1993, 

[4] Institute for Defense Analysis, Economics of Software Reuse 
Repositories, Progress Briefing, August 1993. 

[5] Interview between Mike Haggerty, Fleet Numeric and Oceanographic 
Center, and the author, 5 November 1993 

[6] Richard Conn, Public Ada Library FAQ, Internet, 8 Sep 1993 

[7] Prieto«Diaz, Ruben, A Software Classification Scheme, PhD. 

Dissertation, Department of Information and Computer Science, Univ. of 
California, 1985. 

[8] Sommerville, Ian, Software Engineering, pp. 309-326, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, 1992. 

[9] Telephone conversation between Mr. Jim Wheeler, NCTS Washington, 
DC., and the author, 2 February 1994. 

[10] The Navy Reuse Center, Naval Computer & Telecommunications Station, 
Information booklet. 

[11] US. Department of the Navy, Naval Information Systems Management 
Center, Software Reuse Guide, February 1993 

[12] US. Department of Defense, Software Reuse Initiative Vision and 
Strategy, July 1992. 


86 













[13] US. Department of Defense, Software Reuse Initiative, Center for 
Information Management, November 1992 

[14] US. Department of Defense, Programmer's User Guide *or the Defense 
Software Repository System, V3 5, Center for Software Reuse 
Operations, February 1992. 



INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 


1. Defense Technical Information Center 
Cameron Station 

Alexandria, Virginia 22304-6145 

2. Library. Code 52 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5101 

3. DR Myung Suh, Code SM/SU 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5101 

4. CDR William Short, Code SM/Sh 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5101 

5. Navy Reuse Center 

Naval Computers and Telecommunications Station, Washington 
NAVCOMDET Cheltenham 
9190 Commo Road 
Washington, DC 20397-5520 

6. George S. Coker 

Software Reuse Program Management Office 
Center for Information Management 
500 North Washington Street 
Suite 200 

Falls Church, Virginia 22046 

7 LT Edward Bryant 
Training Officer 
USS New Orleans (LPH 11) 

Fleet Post Office AP 96627-1650 











1 


8 Joan McGarity, Code N222B 
Computer Specialist 

Naval Computer and Telecommunications Command 
4401 Massachusetts Avenue 
Washington, DC 20394-5000 


89 








