m Software 


Further Improvement in 
3DGRAPE 

“ 3D GRAPE /AL:V2” denotes version 2 
of the Three -Dimensional Grids About 
Anything by Poisson’s Equation with 
Upgrades from Ames and Langley com- 
puter program. The preceding version, 
3DGRAPE/AL, was described in “Im- 
proved 3DGRAPE” (ARC-14069) NASA 
Tech Briefs , Vol. 21, No. 5 (May 1997), 
page 66. These programs are so named 
because they generate volume grids by 
iteratively solving Poisson’s Equation in 
three dimensions. The grids generated 
by the various versions of 3D GRAPE 
have been used in computational fluid 
dynamics (CFD). The main novel fea- 
ture of 3DGRAPE/AL:V2 is the incor- 
poration of an optional scheme in 
which anisotropic Lagrange-based 
trans-finite interpolation (ALBTFI) is 
coupled with exponential decay func- 
tions to compute and blend interior 
source terms. In the input to 
3DGRAPE/AL:V2 the user can specify 
whether or not to invoke ALBTFI in 
combination with exponential-decay 
controls, angles, and cell size for con- 
trolling the character of grid lines. Of 
the known programs that solve elliptic 
partial differential equations for gener- 
ating grids, 3DGRAPE/AL:V2 is the 
only code that offers a combination of 
speed and versatility with most options 
for controlling the densities and other 
characteristics of grids for CFD. 

This program was written by Stephen Alter 
of Langley Research Center. Further infor- 
mation is contained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 
LAR-16415 


Ground Support Software for 

Spaceborne 

Instrumentation 

ION is a system of ground support soft- 
ware for the ion and neutral mass spec- 
trometer (INMS) instrument aboard the 
Cassini spacecraft. By incorporating 
commercial off-the-shelf database, Web 
server, and Java application components, 
ION offers considerably more ground- 
support-service capability than was avail- 
able previously. A member of the team 
that operates the INMS or a scientist 
who uses the data collected by the INMS 
can gain access to most of the services 
provided by ION via a standard point- 
and click hyperlink interface generated 


by almost any Web-browser program 
running in almost any operating system 
on almost any computer. Data are stored 
in one central location in a relational 
database in a non-proprietary format, 
are accessible in many combinations and 
formats, and can be combined with data 
from other instruments and spacecraft. 
The use of the Java programming lan- 
guage as a system-interface language 
offers numerous capabilities for ob- 
ject-oriented programming and for 
making the database accessible to par- 
ticipants using a variety of computer 
hardware and software. 

This program was written by Vincent Ani- 
cich, Rob Thorpe, Greg Fletcher, Hunter 
Waite, Julia Xu, Erin Walter, Kristie Frick, 
Greg Farris, Dave Gell, Jufy Furman, Butch 
Carruth, and John Parejko of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Fur- 
ther information is contained in a TSP (see 
page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-40282. 


© MER SPICE Interface 

MER SPICE Interface is a software 
module for use in conjunction with the 
Mars Exploration Rover (MER) mission 
and the SPICE software system of the 
Navigation and Ancillary Information Fa- 
cility (NAIF) at NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. (SPICE is used to acquire, 
record, and disseminate engineering, 
navigational, and other ancillary data de- 
scribing circumstances under which data 
were acquired by spaceborne scientific in- 
struments.) Given a Spacecraft Clock 
value, MER SPICE Interface extracts 
MER-specific data from SPICE kernels 
(essentially, raw data files) and calculates 
values for Planet Day Number, Local 
Solar Longitude, Local Solar Elevation, 
Local Solar Azimuth, and Local Solar 
Time (UTC). MER SPICE Interface was 
adapted from a subroutine, denoted 
m98SpiceIF written by Payam Zamani, 
that was intended to calculate SPICE val- 
ues for the Mars Polar Lander. The main 
difference between MER SPICE Interface 
and m98SpiceIf is that MER SPICE Inter- 
face does not explicitly call CHRONOS, a 
time-conversion program that is part of a 
library of utility subprograms within 
SPICE. Instead, MER SPICE Interface 
mimics some portions of the CHRONOS 


code, the advantage being that it exe- 
cutes much faster and can efficiently be 
called from a pipeline of events in a par- 
allel processing environment. 

This program was written by Elias Sayfi of 
Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labo- 
ratory. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1 ).. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-40314. 


Simulating Operation 
of a Planetary Rover 

Rover Analysis, Modeling, and Simula- 
tions (ROAMS) is a computer program 
that simulates the operation of a robotic 
vehicle (rover) engaged in exploration 
of a remote planet. ROAMS is a rover- 
specific extension of the DARTS and 
Dshell programs, described in prior 
NASA Tech Briefs articles, which afford ca- 
pabilities for mathematical modeling of 
the dynamics of a spacecraft as a whole 
and of its instruments, actuators, and 
other subsystems. ROAMS incorporates 
mathematical models of kinematics and 
dynamics of rover mechanical subsys- 
tems, sensors, interactions with terrain, 
solar panels and batteries, and onboard 
navigation and locomotion-control soft- 
ware. ROAMS provides a modular simu- 
lation framework that can be used for 
analysis, design, development, testing, 
and operation of rovers. ROAMS can be 
used alone for system performance and 
trade studies. Alternatively, ROAMS can 
be used in an operator-in-the-loop or 
flight-software closed-loop environment. 
ROAMS can also be embedded within 
other software for use in analysis and de- 
velopment of algorithms, or for Monte 
Carlo studies, using a variety of terrain 
models, to generate performance statis- 
tics. Moreover, taking advantage of real- 
time features of the underlying 
DARTS/Dshell simulation software, 
ROAMS can also be used for real-time 
simulations. 

This program was written by Abhinandan 
Jain, Jeng Yen, Garrett Sohl, Robert Steele, 
and J. Balaram of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30722. 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2004 


13 


