NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
Monterey, California 



THESIS 


A SIMULATION TO DETERMINE THE EFFECT THAT 

THE ARMY BASIC OFFICER LEADERSHIP COURSE 

WILL HAVE ON ACCESSION TRAINING 

by 


Erik K. Hovda 


June 2002 


Thesis Advisor: Paul 

Second Reader: Dave 

Sanchez 

Olwell 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 






REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved OMB No. 
0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per 
response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of 
information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection 
of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington headquarters 
Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 
1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction 
Project (0704-0188) Washington DC 20503. 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave 
blank) 

2. REPORT DATE 

June 2002 

3. 

REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Master's Thesis 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE A Simulation to Determine The Effect That 
The Army Basic Officer Leadership Course Will Have on Accession 
Training 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

6. AUTHOR (S) Erik K. Hovda 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
Naval Postgraduate School 

Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES The views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not 
reflect the official policy or position of the U.S. Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. 

12a. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 

The United States Army is currently considering a significant change in the way 
they train newly commissioned officers. The Army's Training and Doctrine Command 
(TRADOC) plans to add a course to accession training called the Basic Officer 
Leadership Course (BOLC), which would teach officers of all Army Competitive Category 
(ACC) branches core leadership and common skills requirements at three Army 
installations in the United States. This thesis develops a simulation that explores 
the length of time newly commissioned officers spend training once TRADOC implements 
BOLC and establishes training policies for the new course. The model is implemented 
in the Java programming language, with Simkit as the simulation package. The 
simulation output is a list of 225,000 simulated officers with their training time 
recorded, which I aggregate into mean and variance measurements for each design point. 
Upon this aggregated data I execute a regression analysis, which feeds into a loss 
function that penalizes excess time spent in accession training. Minimizing the loss 
function returns optimal policy settings for BOLC's implementation. This analysis 
shows that the most significant policies in the accession training system are the 
maximum and minimum class size for a BOLC class and the ratio of ROTC officers who 
receive immediate active duty status upon commissioning. My analysis also shows that 
placing BOLC into the simulated accession training system caused an increase of 
approximately 23 days in training time. 

14. SUBJECT TERMS Simulation, Manpower Modeling, Simkit, Scheduling, 15. NUMBER OF 
Basic Officer Leadership Course, Robust Experiment Design, Gridded PAGES 

Factorial Experiment Design, Regression 136 


17. SECURITY 18. SECURITY 19. SECURITY 20. LIMITATION 

CLASSIFICATION CLASSIFICATION OF THIS CLASSIFICATION OF OF ABSTRACT 

OF REPORT PAGE ABSTRACT 

Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified UL 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18 


1 



























THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


11 



Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


A SIMULATION TO DETERMINE THE EFFECT THAT THE ARMY BASIC 
OFFICER LEADERSHIP COURSE WILL HAVE ON ACCESSION TRAINING 


Erik K. Hovda 

Captain, United States Army 
B.S., United States Military Academy, 1993 

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 


MASTER OF SCIENCE IN OPERATIONS RESEARCH 

from the 

NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
June 2002 


Author: 


Erik Kristian Hovda 


Approved by: Paul Sanchez 

Thesis Advisor 


Dave dwell 
Second Reader 


James N. Eagle 

Chairman, Department of Operations Research 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


IV 



ABSTRACT 


The United States Army is currently considering a 
significant change in the way they train newly commissioned 
officers. The Army's Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) 
plans to add a course to accession training called the 
Basic Officer Leadership Course (BOLC), which would teach 
officers of all Army Competitive Category (ACC) branches 
core leadership and common skills requirements at three 
Army installations in the United States. This thesis 
develops a simulation that explores the length of time 
newly commissioned officers spend training once TRADOC 
implements BOLC and establishes training policies for the 
new course. The model is implemented in the Java 

programming language, with Simkit as the simulation 
package. The simulation output is a list of 225,000 

simulated officers with their training time recorded, which 
I aggregate into mean and variance measurements for each 
design point. Upon this aggregated data I execute a 
regression analysis, which feeds into a loss function that 
penalizes excess time spent in accession training. 
Minimizing the loss function returns optimal policy 
settings for BOLC's implementation. This analysis shows 
that the most significant policies in the accession 
training system are the maximum and minimum class size for 
a BOLC class and the ratio of ROTC officers who receive 
immediate active duty status upon commissioning. My 
analysis also shows that placing BOLC into the simulated 
accession training system caused an increase of 
approximately 23 days in training time. 


v 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


vi 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I. INTRODUCTION . 1 

A. CURRENT ACCESSION TRAINING . 1 

B. PROPOSED CHANGES TO ACCESSION TRAINING . 2 

C. THE EFFECT OF THE BASIC OFFICER LEADERSHIP COURSE 

ON ACCESSION TRAINING . 6 

1. The Importance of the Transient, Holdee and 

Student Account . 7 

2. Modeling Approach . 9 

D. RELATED RESEARCH . 10 

II. MODEL. 15 

A. PROBLEM STATEMENT. 15 

B. EVENT GRAPHS. 15 

C. ACCESSION TRAINING EVENT GRAPHS AND DISCUSSION ... 18 

1. Accession. 20 

2. BOLC. 27 

3. OBC. 33 

4. Operational Assignment. 36 

D. SIMULATION VALIDATION . 36 

E. ASSUMPTIONS. 39 

III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN . 41 

A. EXPERIMENT FACTORS AND LEVELS . 41 

1. BOLC Branch Ratio Restriction . 41 

2. Minimum OBC Course Size Requirement. 42 

3. BOLC Minimum Course Size or Difference 
Between Maximum and Minimum BOLC Class Size . 42 

4. BOLC Maximum Class Size. 43 

5. Immediate Active Duty Ratio. 44 

B. REGRESSION EQUATION . 46 

C. GRIDDED FACTORIAL EXPERIMENT DESIGNS . 47 

D. ROBUST EXPERIMENT DESIGN . 49 

E. USE OF RANDOM NUMBERS. 53 

IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND RESPONSE SURFACE ANALYSIS . 55 

A. INITIAL REGRESSION RESULTS . 55 

1. Grand Mean Regression Analysis . 55 

2. Variance Regression Analysis . 62 

B. RESPONSE SURFACE ANALYSIS . 69 

1. BOLC Branch Ratio. 70 

2. Min OBC Course Size Requirement. 71 

3. Max BOLC Class Size, Min BOLC Class Size, 

and Immediate Active Duty Ratio. 71 

vii 





































C. RUNNING BASELINE SIMULATION AT OPTIMAL POLICY 

SETTINGS. 77 

V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS . 81 

A. CONCLUSIONS. 81 

B. RECOMMENDATIONS. 81 

C. FURTHER RESEARCH . 82 

1. Improving the Simulation. 82 

2 . Cost Analysis. 83 

3. Changes to Current Analysis . 84 

APPENDIX A. ACCESSION INPUT DATA . 91 

WEST POINT INPUT DATA. 91 

ROTC INPUT DATA. 93 

OCS INPUT DATA. 95 

APPENDIX B. BOLC INPUT DATA. 97 

APPENDIX C. OBC INPUT DATA. 99 

APPENDIX D. EXPERIMENT DESIGN POINTS . 105 

APPENDIX E. MEAN ACCESSION TIME REGRESSION RESULTS . 107 

APPENDIX F. VARIANCE REGRESSION RESULTS . 109 

APPENDIX G. FORMULATION OF LOSS FUNCTION MINIMIZATION .... Ill 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST . 113 


viii 





















LIST OF FIGURES 


Figure 1. Accession Training System with BOLC Implemented ... 5 

Figure 2. A General Event Graph for Explanation . 17 

Figure 3. Simulation Breakdown . 18 

Figure 4. Accession Event Graph . 21 

Figure 5. BOLC Event Graph. 27 

Figure 6. OBC Event Graph. 33 

Figure 7. Scatterplots of Variables and Mean Accession 

Training Time. 56 

Figure 8. Grand Mean Scatterplots Minus Outliers . 57 

Figure 9. Predicted vs. Residuals in Grand Mean Regression . 61 

Figure 10. Scatterplots of Variables and Variance . 63 

Figure 11. Predicted Variance vs. Residuals Plot with 

Max BOLC Class Size as the Predictor Variable .... 64 
Figure 12. Predicted vs. Residuals in Variance 

Regression. 66 

Figure 13. Predicted vs. Residuals in Transformed 

Variance. 68 

Figure 14. Graph of Loss Function. 73 

Figure 15. Loss Function Values at Each Design Point ... 76 














THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


x 



LIST OF TABLES 


Table 1. Validation Model Results . 38 

Table 2. Summary of Controllable Factors and Their Levels . 45 

Table 3. Results of Simulation at Optimal Policy Settings . 74 

Table 4. Design Points with Low Loss Function Values . 77 

Table 5. Baseline Model Run at Optimal BOLC Policy 

Settings. 78 

Table 6. West Point Branch Graduation Rates . 91 

Table 7. West Point Graduation Dates and Class Size . 92 

Table 8. Ratios of Graduation Delay for West Point 

Graduating Classes . 92 

Table 9. ROTC Branch Graduation Rates. 93 

Table 10. Ratio of ROTC Graduates Categorized Immediate 

Active Duty. 93 

Table 11. ROTC Graduation Dates and Graduating Class Size .. 94 

Table 12. ROTC Graduation Delay Data (Days) . 94 

Table 13. OCS Branch Graduation Rates. 95 

Table 14. OCS Graduation Delay Data (Days) . 95 

Table 15. OCS Graduation Dates and Graduating Class Size ... 96 

Table 16. General BOLC Input Data. 97 

Table 17. BOLC Attrition and Recycle Rates. 97 

Table 18. BOLC Scheduled Start Dates by Installation . 98 

Table 19. OBC Travel Data. 99 

Table 20. OBC Attrition and Recycle Rates by Branch . 100 

Table 21. OBC Course Length, Minimum and Maximum Sizes .... 101 

Table 22. Air Defense OBC Schedule. 101 

Table 23. Adjutant General OBC Schedule. 101 

Table 24. Armor OBC Schedule. 102 

Table 25. Aviation OBC Schedule. 102 

Table 26. Chemical OBC Schedule. 102 

Table 27. Engineer OBC Schedule. 102 

Table 28. Field Artillery OBC Schedule. 102 

Table 29. Finance OBC Schedule. 103 

Table 30. Infantry OBC Schedule. 103 

Table 31. Military Intelligence OBC Schedule . 103 

Table 32. Military Police OBC Schedule. 103 

Table 33. Ordnance OBC Schedule. 103 

Table 34. Quartermaster OBC Schedule. 104 

Table 35. Signal Corps OBC Schedule. 104 

Table 36. Transportation OBC Schedule. 104 


xi 


































THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 



LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 


2LT 

ACC 

Avg 

BOLC 

CDF 

Est 

Ft. 

GMRE 

IA 

IOBC 

Loc 

Max 

MFSAD 

Min 

OBC 

OCS 

ODP 

OP STR 
PCS 

PERSCOM 

Req 

ROTC 

THS 

TTT 

Var (TTT) 
TRADOC 
vs . 


Second Lieutenant 

Army Competitive Category 

Average 

Basic Officer Leadership Course 
Cumulative Distribution Function 
Estimated 
Fort 

Grand Mean Regression Equation 
Immediate Active Duty 
Infantry Officer Basic Course 
Location 
Maximum 

Military Forecasting and Strength 
Analysis Division 

Minimum 

Officer Basic Course 
Officer Candidate School 
Officer Distribution Plan 
Operational Strength 
Permanent Change of Station 
Army Personnel Command 
Requirement 

Reserve Officer Training Corps 
Transient, Holdee and Student 
Total Training Time 
Variance of Total Training Time 
Training and Doctrine Command 
Versus 

Variance Regression Equation 

xiii 


VRE 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


xiv 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


I would like to thank the Deputy Chief of Staff, Army 
G-l, Military Forecasting and Strength Analysis Division 
for providing an interesting topic, financial support for 
my thesis travel, and their unflagging patience as I worked 
through this thesis. Specifically, LTC Matuszewski, MAJ 
Yamada and MAJ Ratliff were unfailing and proactive in 
their support. I am truly appreciative. 

My advisors Professors Paul Sanchez and Dave dwell 
had the patience to bear with me as I "brute-forced" my way 
through this thesis. They have my gratitude for suffering 
my incessant questions and for their excellent mentorship 
and guidance. 

Professor Sam Buttrey's expertise in S-PLUS was 
critical to the analysis of the simulation output. I could 
not have completed the analysis portion without his help. 
Borrowing from one of Professor Buttrey's own sayings, "He 
is the man...or at least one of the men." 

Professor Susan Sanchez's help with the robust 
experiment design and corresponding analysis significantly 
improved my thesis. I appreciate her willingness to answer 
my questions whenever I "knocked on her door". 

Finally, I thank my wife, Alison, and my sons Kristian 
and Kolin for their unwavering support and love. 


xv 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


xvi 



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


The Army is considering implementing a significant 
change to its standing accession training. Training and 
Doctrine Command (TRADOC), responsible for all formal 
training schools within in the Army, plans to introduce a 
new course to the accession training scheme called the 
Basic Officer Leadership Course (BOLC). This new course 
will train newly commissioned second lieutenants (2LT) in 
the common core points of instruction (POI); these POIs 
include such tasks as land navigation and basic rifle 
marksmanship. 

With BOLC's implementation, the traditional officer 
basic courses (OBC) for each of the Army Competitive 
Category (ACC) branches will reduce the length of their 
respective courses. Since initial plans for BOLC show a 
course length of 35 training days, TRADOC requires the OBCs 
to reduce their course length by a similar amount. 

Military Forecasting and Strength Analysis Division 
(MFSAD) of the Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l has concerns 
with respect to the introduction in BOLC. As the primary 
analysts responsible for the management of the Transient, 
Holdee and Student (THS) Account, they want to know the 
impact that this change to the accession training system 
will have on the time it requires to train 2LTs. 

The THS account is a database that contains all 
soldiers in the Army who are not assigned to an operational 
unit. That is to say, they are not in "foxholes" 
performing Army missions. The greater the size of the THS 
account, the less capable the Army is of meeting mission 



requirements. Officers participating in accession training 
are an explicit piece of the THS account. Any changes to 
the accession training system will have an impact on the 
size of the THS account. 

However, TRADOC has not officially published many of 
the policies for BOLC's implementation. Some of these 
policies are the maximum/minimum BOLC class size and 
whether they will impose any constraints on a BOLC class 
consistency. 

To determine the effect that BOLC and TRADOC's 
policies for its implementation will have on the THS 
account, this thesis develops a simulation written in Java 
using a simulation package called Simkit. The simulation 
replicates the accession training environment after BOLC's 
implementation by breaking the accession training system 
into four modules. Accession, BOLC, OBC and Operational 
Assignment. 

This thesis includes an experiment design that governs 
the use of the simulation in its exploration of BOLC's 
effects on the THS account. The specific factors included 
in the experiment and adjusted as parameters in the 
simulation are the maximum BOLC course size, the difference 
between the maximum and minimum BOLC course size, the BOLC 
Army branch ratio policy for class consistency, whether or 
not there is a minimum course size requirement for OBC, and 
the immediate active duty ratio for 2LTs from the Reserve 
Officer Training Corps (ROTC) . 

After running the simulation according to the 
experiment design and building a response surface model on 
the output, the TRADOC policies that have the most impact 

xviii 



on the THS account are the maximum and minimum BOLC course 
sizes. The immediate active duty ratio for ROTC officers 
is also extremely important to the size of the THS account. 

I used the regression model in an optimization where 
the policies in them were set to levels to minimize THS 
account size due to accession training time. With these 
optimal policies, I ran a simulation that emulates the 
current accession training system, that is without BOLC. 
The simulation with BOLC which I ran at the optimal policy 
settings returned an average accession training time per 
officer approximately 23 days higher than the simulation 
without BOLC. 


xix 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


xx 



INTRODUCTION 


I. 

A. CURRENT ACCESSION TRAINING 

The Army commissions Army Competitive Category (ACC) 
second lieutenants (2LT) primarily from three main sources: 
The United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, 
colleges that have a Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC), 
and the Officer Candidate School (OCS) at Fort Benning, 
Georgia. Army Competitive Category officers are all those 
in the Army excluding Chaplains, Judge Advocate General 
Corps, Nurse Corps, Medical Service Corps, and Veterinarian 
Corps officers. Upon graduation from one of these three 
programs, officers begin their accession training, which 
for the purpose of this thesis I loosely define as all 
training programs and schools that newly commissioned 
officers attend and complete prior to arrival at their 
first operational assignment. 

Once commissioned, the majority of the second 
lieutenants take an authorized delay before reporting for 
their first training assignment. After their leave, 
officers arrive at their first training site. This might 
be at one of the Army's military training courses, such as 
Airborne or Air Assault School. The second lieutenant may 
also go directly to their Officer Basic Course (OBC) 
without attending a military training course. 

The Officer Basic Course provides officers their first 
glimpse into the aspects of their specialty in the Army. 
The course instructs second lieutenants on things such as 
customs and courtesies in the service, land navigation, 
rifle marksmanship and the technical points of instruction 


1 



for their specialty. There is an OBC for each branch of 
the Army, and twelve different installations host 15 ACC 
Officer Basic Courses. Officer Basic Courses average about 
17 or 18 weeks in length, with Aviation OBC lasting the 
longest at 22 weeks, and Finance the shortest at eleven 
weeks. 

After completing OBC, officers can then attend 
military training if they require it, or they can attend 
other specialty schools. For example. Adjutant General 
officers are responsible for the Army's postal system. 
Second Lieutenants assigned to a postal unit for their 
first assignment would spend two to three weeks at a postal 
school following OBC. Other branches have similar follow- 
on courses to their basic courses. 

Using this system, the Army trains newly accessed 
second lieutenants in approximately eight months. This 
varies among the different branches of the Army, with 

Aviation Officers requiring the longest amount of time 

(around 18 months) . The above training does not include 
additional time if officers attend training other than 
their OBC, such as Airborne School, Air Assault School or 
Ranger School. 

B. PROPOSED CHANGES TO ACCESSION TRAINING 

The Commander of the Army Training and Doctrine 
Command (TRADOC) has directed a change to the current 

accession training system. The proposal introduces what 

TRADOC calls the Basic Officer Leadership Course (BOLC), 
which will replace the Officer Basic Course. 


2 



The BOLC has two phases. The first phase, called BOLC 
I, will teach officers from all branches of the Army the 
common core requirements of Accession Training. This 
includes subjects such as Army customs and courtesy, rifle 
marksmanship, land navigation, and common survival tasks 
required of all soldiers in the Army. BOLC I will take 
place at three locations: Forts Benning and Sill, and 
probably Fort Bliss. TRADOC currently plans to have BOLC I 
last 35 training days. 

Phase One of BOLC is still in its planning stage, but 
throughout the course of my thesis development, TRADOC has 
distributed more information and shed light on some issues 
where I have had to make assumptions. TRADOC plans for 35 
BOLC I offerings among the three different installations, 
approximately twelve at each site. Current plans show BOLC 
I with a max class size of 200 officers, and a minimum of 
100 active duty officers per class. 

After completion of BOLC I, second lieutenants will 
then proceed to Phase Two, aptly called BOLC II. This 
phase instructs officers on the same technical or branch 
specific training completed by the Officer Basic Courses. 
BOLC II will be held at the same installations that 
currently host the Officer Basic Courses, and the same 
cadre responsible for the branch specific OBCs will be 
responsible for BOLC II. In essence, BOLC II is just a new 
name for the Officer Basic Course; it is just shorter in 
duration. 

The length of the different BOLC II courses in most 
cases will be equal to the length of the corresponding 
Officer Basic Course less six weeks. Aviation BOLC II only 


3 



reduced the length of their technical training by two 
weeks, and Finance BOLC II, having an original OBC length 
of eleven weeks, could not reduce the course length by more 
than two weeks either. 

Since this information from the different officer 
basic courses is dynamic, I have centralized the 
simulation's input parameters, which increases its 
flexibility. The simulation takes almost all of its input 
from one file; manipulating a single element in this file 
will change the use of that parameter throughout the 
simulation. 

If Finance BOLC II, TRADOC or any other agency 
readjusts any of their policies regarding BOLC, a simple, 
corresponding field manipulation in one file of the 
simulation will reflect the policy change throughout the 
simulation. 

The figure on the following page captures TRADOC's 
proposed accession training program with BOLC's 
implementation. 


4 




Figure 1. Accession Training System with BOLC Implemented 


5 


(fuiVm, At) (AnV>m. At) 



















C. THE EFFECT OF THE BASIC OFFICER LEADERSHIP COURSE ON 

ACCESSION TRAINING 

The manning of the Army falls under the staff 
supervision of the Deputy Chief of Staff, G-l. Army G-l 
would like to determine the expected length of time 
officers from each branch spend in the Transient, Holdee, 
and Student (THS) account in a year, once BOLC is 
implemented. With the implementation of BOLC, there is 
concern that officers may have to wait longer for training 
to start. The unofficial term that the Army uses for 
officers who arrive early to a training site is 
"snowbirding". Snowbird time does not include the travel 
time between installations. If snowbird time increases for 
officers, then the THS time will also increase. 

The primary goal of my thesis is to determine the 
effect that the addition of BOLC to the accession training 
system will have on the Army's THS account. I will also 
explore the effects that different proposed TRADOC policies 
relating to BOLC's implementation will have on THS. 

As with any large organization, the Army's resources 
(dollars, manpower, time) are constrained. Any new 

initiative, such as BOLC, requires analysis to determine 
the cost associated with implementation. TRADOC asserts 
THS levels (a manpower resource) will not increase under 
BOLC (as compared to the current training system in place). 
Due to perceived scheduling inefficiencies, analysts within 
Army G-l reject this notion, but need a tool to assist in 
analyzing the expected THS growth. To answer why THS 
growth is important, it is necessary to fully explain why 
the THS account is important. 


6 



1. The Importance of the Transient, Holdee and 
Student Account 

The Army's divides its total strength into two sub¬ 
accounts - THS and Operational Strength (OP STR) . The OP 
STR consists of all soldiers who are available to fill 
authorized unit positions, or "fill the foxholes", so to 
speak. By contrast, the THS account consists of the 

soldiers who, for various reasons, are unable to fill these 
positions. The Army has a congressionally mandated 

strength limit of 480,000 soldiers. Therefore, as THS 

grows, OP STR must decrease, resulting in a unit manning 
decrease as well. 

The following categories or statuses define officers 
in the THS Account (Sweetser, 2000): 

Officer Accession Students - includes officer 
basic courses and all initial skill and 
proficiency training taken before travel to the 

officer's first permanent duty assignment. This 
includes the new BOLC requirement. 

Transient - loosely defined as officers who are 

moving between duty assignments. 

Holdee - officers that are dropped from the 

assigned strength of a force structure unit and 

attached to a "holding" facility because of 
medical, disciplinary or pre-separation non¬ 
availability . 

Student - officers that are attending non-initial 
entry courses of instruction in a permanent 


7 



change of station (PCS) status or in a temporary 
duty (TDY) status in conjunction with a PCS. 

The Military Strength Analysis and Forecasting 
Division of the Army G-l is responsible for capturing THS 
data and providing THS forecasts. On the last day of each 
month, the Army takes a statistical snapshot of the 
personnel database and records the duty status and 

demographic characteristics of each individual on active 
duty. This monthly record becomes another data point in 
the THS analysis the strength analysis team of DCSPER has 
refined and improved over several decades. The Army's THS 
model, also called the Individual Account model, is based 
on historical behavior of Army personnel in the THS 
account(Sweetser, 2000). 

Army G-l utilizes exponential smoothing as a time- 
series forecast technique to provide an aggregate forecast 
(officer, warrant officer and enlisted) over the four 

categories mentioned above (Officer Accession Students, 
Transient, Holdee and Student) (Military Forecasting and 
Strength Analysis Division, May 2002) . While factors such 
as course lengths and permanent change of station (PCS) 

budgets affect THS behavior, they are not parts of the THS 
model, per se. As these factors change the data that 
drives the model, analysts incorporate them into its 
output. There are several drawbacks to this model. First, 
the model does not get into the grade or rank level of 

detail. Second, when policy decisions are made that will 
affect the size of the THS account, such as a change in the 
accession training system, it is difficult to adjust model 
results to capture these effects. 



The size of the THS account is a factor in the 
formulation of many Army personnel policies. One example 
is the plan that distributes officers to the force, or the 
Officer Distribution Plan (ODP). The analysis team that 
publishes the ODP uses the projected THS account strengths 
to help determine the number of officers available to 
assign to the major commands throughout the Army in 
upcoming years. 

The Deputy Chief of Staff, G-3 and Army G-l co-chair a 
task force named the Operating Strength Steering Committee, 


which dedicates 

itself to 

reducing the size of the 

THS 

account. 

The 

fact that 

two 

Lieutenant 

Generals 

have 

dedicated 

their 

time to 

THS 

gives some 

idea of 

its 


importance. 

For the reasons above, THS modeling is an extremely 
important tool for Army personnel management. The 

introduction of a seven-week course into the officer 
training system will have an effect on the THS account. 
Quantifying this effect and translating the effect on 
manning the force is important in Army manpower management. 

2. Modeling Approach 

This thesis develops a simulation as analysis tool for 
the Strength Analysis Staff of Deputy Chief of Staff, G-l. 
I have implemented the model using Java and Simkit. The 
simulation runs for a specified number of accession years 
and captures every officer's attributes, to include the 
time they spend in the simulation's accession training 
system. Running the model will provide 4500 officer data 


9 



elements per simulated accession year on which to conduct 
regression analysis. 

The simulation model creates an accession training 
environment for newly commissioned second lieutenants to 
navigate prior to their first operational assignment. 
During the course of their training, officers are subject 
to attrition and recycling, and can conduct military 
training (Airborne or Air Assault School). Data for 
historical graduation rates and the projected accession 
training schedule are input into a simple text editor. 

The output is a simple list of all the officers 
created by the system, with a record of their training as 
they completed the simulation. I export this list of 
officers to a Microsoft EXCEL spreadsheet, where a pivot 
table can organize the officers into different categories 
as necessary for further analysis. For more detailed 
statistical analysis, I export the EXCEL to a more powerful 
data analysis tool called S-PLUS. 

Army G-l can use the simulation results with their own 
on-going analysis to determine BOLC's effect on the THS 
account and how it might affect certain specialties of 
officers. 

D. RELATED RESEARCH 

The fruits of my research determined that many more 
analysts use methods of optimization over simulation to 
solve this type of problem. 

Hall (Hall, 1999) develops a mixed integer program to 
plan monthly training schedules for Army Basic Combat 


10 



Training, One Station Unit Training, and Advanced 
Individual Training. Her model maximizes the efficiency of 
the training schedule by minimizing the number of recruits 
held over, minimizes the annual soldier training 
requirements not met, and aspires to optimally fill all the 
courses. The output from the mixed integer program is a 
schedule for the courses listed above. Implementation of 
the schedule would result in an improvement of 1800 
soldier-years in holdover time for soldiers. This is the 
equivalent of creating a brigade's worth of manpower for 
the Army at no additional cost. 

Grant (Grant, 2000) develops another linear program 
developed to decrease the time Marine officers wait for 
their military occupational schools to start. Rather than 
optimizing a schedule, as Hall did above. Grant's model 
optimally distributes military occupational specialty 
quotas to all fiscal year Basic School companies. The 
quota distribution proposed by his model provides maximum 
equity of opportunity for all officers to seek any of the 
Marine's twenty-one military occupational specialties and 
yields a total training time reduction as high as 45 man- 
years . 

Chilson (Chilson, 1998) creates a mixed integer linear 
program to produce a schedule that reduces the time needed 
to assign newly commissioned ROTC cadets to their accession 
training locations. Implementation of the schedule for 
ROTC officers would result in a possible temporary duty 
cost reduction of $15 million. 

Brown (Brown, 2002) is currently developing an 
optimization model that will determine the best seat 


11 



allocation policy for enlisted soldiers in the Army 
Reserves attending active duty Initial Entry Training 
Courses. 

Ulrich, assigned to the Distribution Development and 
Programs Branch of the Total Army Personnel Command 
(PERSCOM), (Ulrich, 2002) has developed and is currently 
using a manpower simulation to project inventory levels, by 
grade, over a thirty year planning horizon. The 

simulation has variable inputs such as attrition rates, 
promotion rates, promotion points and the number of 
accessions, which enable analysts to examine the possible 
effects of officer policy initiatives with an associated 
degree of certainty. The simulation is a spreadsheet, 
formulated and changed in EXCEL; it runs stochastically 
with an additional software extension (@RISK from 
Palisade). Typically, the simulation runs in approximately 
ten minutes while iterating 10,000 - 15,000 times. The 

output is the projected inventory, associated with 
different confidence levels, for each grade based on the 
model inputs and assumptions. Initially, the primary use 
of this model was to determine the available inventory used 
in the officer distribution process. With a thirty-year 
projection capability and stochastic inputs, analysts use 
this model more frequently to examine the effects of 
officer policy initiatives. 

I have chosen simulation over optimization as the 
method to address this problem for one reason. Because 
TRADOC has not finalized many of the policies regarding 
BOLC' s implementation, I need the flexibility a simulation 
gives to design an experiment specifically around the key. 


12 



unknown policies and determine how they might individually 
or in combination impact accession training time. 

Optimization would be a better option for this thesis 
had TRADOC distributed firm policies regarding the changes 
to accession training. The uncertain nature of TRADOC's 
policies gives no hint to the best functional 
representation of this system. My lack of foresight into 
the new accession training system coupled with the need to 
thoroughly explore wide ranges of policy implementations 
lead me to believe that simulation is the better 
alternative for this problem. 

With the completion of this thesis, I will be able to 
model the system using response surface models. Once the 
functional form is known, then any follow-on analysis could 
use optimization to recommend optimal policy settings to 
TRADOC. 


13 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


14 



II. MODEL 


A. PROBLEM STATEMENT 

The Military Strength Analysis and Forecasting 
Division of the Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l needs an 
analytical tool to help determine the effect that TRADOC's 
implementation of BOLC will have on the THS account. 


B. EVENT GRAPHS 

My simulation is built around an event graph. Event 
graphs are a way of graphically representing discrete-event 
simulation models (Schruben, 1983). The event graph 
provides the logical and algorithmic skeleton around which 
a discrete event simulation is built. To understand the 
Accession Training simulation model, one must understand 
its underlying event graph. For the rest of this section, 
I will borrow heavily from the ideas presented in "Basic 
Event Graph Modeling" (Buss, April 2001) to familiarize the 
reader with event graphs. 

My simulation uses Simkit, software developed at the 
Naval Postgraduate School (Buss, November 2001). Simkit is 
a set of JAVA packages that support the construction of 
discrete-event models. There are three fundamental 
components to a discrete event simulation, a set of state 
variables, a set of events, and a list of pending events. 

The measures of performance for the simulation are 
functions of the state, which is represented 
programmatically as a set of state variables. As the 
simulation progresses in time, it generates the state 


15 



trajectories, or the time history of successive values of 
the system's state variables. 

State trajectories are piecewise constant in discrete 
event models. Events in the simulation occur at points of 
time when at least one state variable changes value or an 
event gets scheduled. An event in the discrete event 
simulation is instantaneous; no simulated time passes when 
an event occurs, only between the occurrence of events. 

The timing for the occurrence of these events is 
controlled by the event list. Think of the event list as a 
"to-do" list of scheduled events. Whenever the simulation 
schedules an event, it is placed on the event list with two 
pieces of information. The first is the identification of 
the event. The second is the time at which the event is 
scheduled to occur. The event list determines the event 
with the lowest scheduled time. Events that occur 
simultaneously are prioritized in some logical manner 
determined by the model designer's knowledge of the real 
system. The SIMKIT software manages the event list and the 
state trajectories for the programmer. 


16 



Event graphs are a way of representing the event logic 
for the discrete-event simulation. An event graph consists 
of nodes and directed edges. Nodes correspond to events or 
state transitions, and edges correspond to the scheduling 
of other events. Figure 2 below depicts a basic event 
graph. 


i 


t 


V 



Figure 2. A General Event Graph for Explanation 




The interpretation of the event graph in Figure 2 is 
that the occurrence of Event A causes the scheduling of 

Event B after a time delay of t, providing condition i is 
true after the simulation performs the state transitions 

for Event A. Event A also creates and passes a value v to 
Event B. Event B uses the value to set a parameter p, and 
incorporates it by the logic defined within the event. 

By convention, the time delay t is indicated toward 
the tail and above the scheduling edge. If the event graph 

does not specify a delay, it is zero. The value that is 

passed is identified below the edge, directly under the 
time delay and placed in a square, and the edge condition 
is shown just above the wavy line through the middle of the 
edge. 

The value v on the scheduling edge is resolved at the 
time Event A occurs. In Event B, p is actually a formal 

parameter. Think of the value as a "time capsule", or a 

17 



means of passing information about the current state of the 
model to a future event. 

With these basic concepts of event graphs explained, I 
will proceed to the events graphs specific to my model. 
These event graphs subscribe to the conventions described 
above excluding the edge conditions. I explain the edge 
conditions fully in the text; removing them from the event 
graphs improves their readability and simplicity and also 
reduces redundant information for the reader. 

C. ACCESSION TRAINING EVENT GRAPHS AND DISCUSSION 

The model for my simulation breaks accession training 
into four distinct areas: Accession, BOLC, OBC, and 
Operational Assignment. I will describe each of these four 
areas as a whole, and then in separate sections detail the 
specific events in the simulation that fall under each of 
the above four categories. 



Figure 3. Simulation Breakdown 


As stated above and seen in Figure 3, I have divided 
accession training into four distinct areas. Although a 
newly commissioned officer can do many different types of 
training, those listed are the most important to the 
officer and the only ones used in the model. 

Figure 3 also shows how the parts of the simulation 
interact with each other. According to the figure, the 


18 







BOLC portion of the simulation "listens" to the Accession 
portion; "listening" is another way of saying that BOLC 
waits for Accession to schedule an event that has exactly 
the same name as one of its own events. If Accession 
schedules an event that it and BOLC both share, they both 
will act on the event call as the logic within their own 
events dictate. Just as BOLC listens to Accession, OBC 
listens to BOLC and Operational Assignment listens to OBC. 
This creates a modular design for the software. 

Accession is the point where an officer enters Army. 
The Army gets almost all of its ACC officers from three 
primary sources: The United States Military Academy, the 
Reserve Officer Training Corps, and the Officer Candidate 
School. The Accession portion of the simulation creates 
officers on specific historically based "graduation" dates. 
After the model generates the officers, they are ready to 
move to their first training assignment, BOLC. 

The Basic Officer Leadership Course is the change to 
the training system that I am studying. Fort Benning, Fort 
Sill and Fort Bliss will host BOLC in the simulation. 
While at the course, officers may undergo attrition or 
recycle to the next start date of BOLC. Once officers have 
completed the BOLC portion of the simulation, they proceed 
to OBC. 

I have refrained from using TRADOC's new phrase for 
OBC. TRADOC now calls the Officer Basic Course "BOLC Phase 
Two", or BOLC II. To keep the names of the courses 
distinct, I will use OBC instead of BOLC II. This naming 
convention made the program code more distinct between the 
different training areas, and I believe easier for the 


19 



reader to distinguish between the BOLC phases in my 
discussion. 

The Officer Basic Course section of the simulation is 
where officers receive their technical training. I have 
reduced the course lengths of the OBCs to reflect each 
individual school's projected course length upon BOLC's 
implementation. As in BOLC, an officer may suffer 
attrition or have to recycle to a later course offering. 
Once OBC is complete, officers in this simulation proceed 
to their operational assignment. 

For potential expansion of the simulation, I 
explicitly created this last portion, the Operational 
Assignment. I could have stopped the simulation once an 
officer completed OBC and mathematically received the same 
output. However, forcing officers to arrive at their 
operational assignment without delay will allow me to add 
training events to the simulation. 

For example, if I wanted to add Airborne School as a 
distinct and separate portion of this model, I can leave 
open the possibility that an officer would go to Airborne 
training after OBC. After leaving OBC and then completing 
Airborne School, the officer would then travel to the 
Operational Assignment portion of the simulation. This 
modeling strategy forces all officers, excluding those who 
suffer attrition, to end in the same part of the 
simulation. Furthermore, it allows me to easily expand the 
model. 

1. Accession 

As alluded to in previous sections, the model begins 
with Accession. This section creates the officers that 


20 



will later pass through the events further in the 
simulation. The actual event graph for Accession is in 
Figure 4 below. 



Figure 4. Accession Event Graph 


The simulation starts with the first event called 
Run() . With this event, the model schedules the 

graduations for West Point, ROTC and OCS. The graduation 
data, to include graduation dates, branch commissioning 
ratios and graduation delay rates are listed explicitly in 
Appendix A. The Run() event takes the graduations dates 
from the three sources of commissioning and places them on 
the simulation schedule. This event schedules graduations 
for a certain number of years as directed by the user. 

After the Run() event has placed the accession dates 
on the event list, the simulation will move to the first 
graduation event. It may be one of three graduation 


21 



events, either a West Point, ROTC or OCS graduation, 
depending upon which graduation is the first on the event 
list. As the simulation progresses, it will continue to 
conduct the graduation events as dictated by the schedule. 

The OCS Access () and the ROTC Access () events are 
identical, with their input parameters the only difference. 
I received the input parameters for OCS graduations from 
Accessions Branch of PERSCOM (Rolland, 2001) and the ROTC 
input data from the Accessions Branch (Lindeman, 2001), 
ROTC Cadet Command (ROTC Cadet Command, 2001) and the 
Officer Strength Analysis Staff, Deputy Chief of Staff, 

Army G-l (Military Forecasting and Strength Analysis 
Division, March 2002) . 

For the upcoming paragraphs, I will discuss the OCS 

Access () event with the knowledge that the same logic and 

reasoning applies to the ROTC Access () event. 

The input for OCS graduations includes historical data 
on the minimum percentage of officers from OCS that 

graduate into certain branches of the Army in a fiscal 
year. The OCS Access () event multiplies this minimum 

percentage for each branch to the total number of graduates 
for that scheduled OCS graduation. The result is the 
minimum number of officers from each branch of the Army 
that will graduate upon the completion of OCS. 

With the minimum branch assignments calculated for the 
graduation, the simulation will need to assign the 
remaining officers a branch based on the same historical 
data. The number of remaining officers for each branch is 
not deterministic; instead, historical data shows that the 


22 



percentage of officers going to different branches varies 
from graduation to graduation and from year to year. 

The simulation embraces the variable nature of 
graduation branch assignments and includes it in the model. 
The historical data also includes a possible maximum 
percentage for each branch of a graduation. The OCS 
Access () event takes this maximum possible percentage for 
each branch and multiplies it to the number of officers 
that will graduate in the OCS course. This value is the 
maximum possible number of officers that can graduate from 
each of the fifteen branches. 

Subtracting the minimum number of officers from each 
branch that the simulation calculated earlier from this 
maximum number of officers gives the greatest number of 
officers for each of the branches that could be in the 
remaining number of officers not assigned a branch. 
Scaling this difference between the maximum and minimum 
officers for each branch by the total number of remaining 
officers who need a branch assignment, results in a 
probability that any one officer in the remainder will be 
from a certain branch. 

With these probabilities, the simulation iterates 
through the officers not assigned a branch. With each 
iteration, the simulation calculates the probability of 
assignment to each of the fifteen branches, and creates a 
cumulative distribution function (CDF). After the CDF is 
in place, the simulation generates a uniform random number 
between zero and one, and where that random number falls 
into the CDF dictates what branch the officer will receive. 


23 



Knowing the branch for the officer, the model creates 
a new officer, recording the accession date and fiscal 
year, the branch, the source of commission, and initially 
assigns them to a BOLC location based on minimizing its 
distance from the BOLC location to the officers'' OBC. 

When the simulation creates the officer, one 
characteristic it must determine is whether or not the 
officer receives an immediate active duty (IA) commission. 
West Point and OCS graduates automatically receive IA 
commissions, which means they count against the THS account 
immediately upon graduation. Graduates from an ROTC 
program do not automatically receive an IA commission; in 
fact, only approximately half of them receive immediate 
active duty status. An ROTC graduate who does not receive 
an IA commission does not receive pay or count against the 
THS account until they arrive at their first training site 
in the accession training system. 

To determine the IA status of newly commissioned 
officers, the simulation notes the source of the officer's 
graduation. By default, the simulation assumes the officer 
is an immediate active duty officer. If the check reveals 
that the officer is a ROTC graduate, the simulation draws a 
uniform random number between zero and one. The model 
assigns the ROTC officer and IA commission if the random 
number drawn is less than the ratio of ROTC officers who 
receive an IA commission. If the officer does not receive 
the IA flag, its THS clock will not start until they arrive 
at their first training location. 

With this officer instantiated, the simulation 
schedules the next event on the Accession event graph 



called Pick BOLC() . The officer with all recorded data is 
passed as a parameter to the Pick BOLC() event with a 
random delay time based on historical data. The simulation 
then recalculates the branch probabilities, subtracting one 
from every branch's denominator (the total remaining 

officers needing a branch assignment) and subtracting one 
from the numerator of the branch that just had an officer 
receive an assignment to its specialty. This process 
continues until all of the officers without an initial 
branch assignment receive one and get scheduled for the 
Pick BOLC () event. 

With the remaining officers assigned to branches and 
scheduled for the Pick BOLC() event, the simulation now 
must create the officers that had previously been 

identified for meeting the minimum branch requirements for 
the graduation. The model, in a random order among all of 
the branches, creates these minimum number of officers for 
each branch in the same manner mentioned above and 
schedules them with the random delay times for Pick BOLC(). 

The West Point Access () event differs from the OCS 

Access () and ROTC Access () events only in the way the 

simulation assigns the delay times after commissioning. 
Where OCS and ROTC grads have an almost continuous and wide 
spread delay time. West Point graduates typically have four 
different categories of delay. Graduating West Point 
cadets have the option to take 30, 60 or zero days of 

leave. Some graduates also serve as assistants to one of 
the West Point varsity athletic teams for 180 days. The 
30, 60 and zero categories translate into actual graduation 

delays of 15, 45 and 75 days, due to travel time to their 


25 



first training event. The West Point S-l provided the West 
Point graduation delay information (Vonasek, 2002) . The 
West Point liaison to the Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l 
provided the remaining historical West Point graduation 
data for the simulation (Beans, 2001) . Using the 
graduation delay data, I created a triangle distribution 
representing the minimum, maximum and average percentages 
of the West Point classes that take any of the four 
different types of leave after graduation. 

The West Point Access () event uses the same approach 
to assign West Point officers their delay as the simulation 
uses to assign all officers their branch specialties. The 
paragraphs that discuss the ROTC Access () method cover this 
approach thoroughly. The West Point Access () method first 
insures that the minimum requirements for each category of 
delay are met by multiplying the graduating class size by 
the minimum percentages in each of the different categories 
of delay. The result is the minimum number of West Point 
officers from that graduating class that will assume each 
category of delay. The model completes the same 
calculation using the maximum percentage for each category. 
The result is the maximum possible number of West Point 
officers that can assume a certain category of delay. 

The simulation then subtracts the minimum number of 
officers from the maximum number, and constructs a CDF for 
each iteration through the officers not assigned a category 
of delay. The simulation stores the calculated categories 
of delay in a random order in a list and removes them one 
at a time as it creates officers in the West Point Access() 
event. 


26 



Inside the Accession portion of the simulation. Pick 
BOLC() is an "empty event", which means there is no code in 
the event other than to identify it. However, the event's 
presence is the trigger that starts the next step of the 
simulation, BOLC. 

2. BOLC 

The BOLC portion of the simulations holds all of the 
events associated with the Basic Officer Leader Course, 
Phase One. The event graph for BOLC is below in Figure 5. 
Note that this event graph shows the events for only one 
BOLC. The event graph would look exactly the same for all 
installations hosting BOLC; for simplicity I created one. 


^schedule 



Figure 5. BOLC Event Graph 


27 



The Run() event in BOLC actually takes place at the 
same time as the Run() event in the Accession portion of 
the simulation. When the simulation starts, SIMKIT 

searches all portions of the simulation for Run() events 
and executes those first. This allows the programmer to 
set initial conditions for the simulation. 

In the case of BOLC, the Run() event places all of the 
BOLC start dates for each of installations on the event 
list out for the number of years directed by the user. The 
BOLC schedules and all other BOLC data are in Appendix B. 

After the Run() event, there is no activity in the 
BOLC portion of the model until an officer is scheduled for 
the Pick BOLC() event in the Accession portion. Since the 
BOLC portion of the simulation is waiting for the Pick 
BOLC() cue from the Accession portion, it immediately takes 
the officer parameter passed to it and continues with the 
simulation. 

The Pick BOLC() event receives the officer parameter 
and prepares to permanently assign a BOLC. When the 
Accession portion created the officer, it initially 
assigned the officer to a BOLC based on the installation 
that is closest to the officer's OBC location. This 
strategy will help minimize travel time and costs. 
However, this tentative assignment might change for the 
officer based on two constraints. 

The first constraint the officer must meet relates to 
the class size of the BOLC that they want to attend. 
TRADOC has not formalized their plans regarding maximum 
class sizes for BOLC, and I will explore this policy in my 
model. Before the officer can actually go to the BOLC to 


28 



which they were initially assigned, the course must be less 
than the value set in the experiment design. 

The second constraint that must be met is the time 
until the start date of the BOLC. The officer's BOLC start 
date must be less than thirty days from the time the 
officer ends graduation delay. Otherwise the officer would 
incur a large amount of snowbird time. 

If the officer's initially assigned BOLC satisfies the 
above constraints, the model creates an Arrive BOLC() event 
for the officer. 

There is the case in which the initially assigned BOLC 
does not meet the above two constraints. In such cases, 
the model searches the next three earliest BOLCs on the 
event list, and checks them for the same constraints. The 
officer is sent to the earliest of the three BOLCs to meet 
the above to criteria. 


If one 

of 

the three 

BOLCs 

satisfy 

the 

class 

size 

constraint 

but 

fails the 

time 

until 

the 

start 

date 

constraint, 

the 

simulation 

assigns the 

officer to 

the 


partially satisfying BOLC but sends the officer to a Thirty 
Day Training () event first. The Thirty Day Training() 

event aggregates all additional training an officer might 
attend while conducting Accession Training. This additional 
training might include Airborne or Air Assault School. 
This event allows officers to take some beneficial training 
rather than sit around at the BOLC installation waiting for 
the next course start. The officer will "train"/delay for 
thirty days before entering the queue at the Arrive BOLC() 
event. 


29 



The Arrive BOLC() event receives officers from the 

Pick BOLC() event, the Thirty Day Training () event, or the 
Recycle () event. Once the officer arrives, the model 
places the 2LT in the queue and records the time the 
officer arrived. The simulation places an officer arriving 
from the Recycle () event at the front of the queue. Other 
wise, the model adds officers to the end of the queue until 
the next event. Start BOLC(). 

A schedule created before the start of the simulation 
determines the actual start times for the Start BOLC() 
events. As stated above, these events were placed on the 
event list in the Run() event at the start of the 
simulation according to that schedule. The Start BOLC() 
event will not begin until the simulation reaches its 
predetermined start time. 

The Start BOLC() immediately queries its queue from 
the Arrive BOLC() event to determine the number of officers 
waiting. If there are none, the course is cancelled 
without any statistics or state variables altered. 

If the queue size is less than the minimum BOLC course 
size, the model will reschedule the Start BOLC() event for 
a time seven days in the future with the hopes that more 
officers will arrive in the queue. After the simulation 
reschedules the BOLC twice without meeting the minimum 
course size constraints, it cancels the course and the 
officers snowbird until the next Start BOLC() event on the 
event list. 

If the queue size meets the minimum course 
requirements, the model takes up to the maximum course size 


30 



out of the queue. The simulation then generates a recycle 
rate and an attrition rate. 

I talked to individuals in the training staff at all 
fifteen Army Competitive Category Officer Basic Course 
schools. These personnel provided their estimates on the 
maximum, average and minimum recycle and attrition rates 
for their specific OBC. I transformed their data into 
triangle distributions. Since TRADOC has not yet 
implemented BOLC, I assumed that its recycle and attrition 
rates would be that same as those of the Infantry Officer 
Basic Course. 

Using the Infantry Officer Basic Course (IOBC) rates, 
I scaled these values down to reflect the fact that BOLC is 
35 days long, where IOBC is 112 days long. 

Using these scaled attrition and recycle rates in a 
triangle distribution, the simulation generated an 
attrition and a recycle rate for that specific course. For 
each officer taken from the queue, the simulation generated 
an independent pseudo-random number from a uniform 
distribution between zero and one. If the uniform random 
number was less than the generated recycle rate, the 
simulation scheduled the officer for the Recycle () event. 
Since the officer may be recycled at any time in the 
course, the simulation generates another uniform random 
number between zero and one and multiplies it by the course 
length of BOLC. After rounding the number to an integer 
value, the model delays the officer for this length of time 
before actually putting Recycle () on the event list. 

The Army would rather recycle an officer than release 
him or her from service. Since the model checks the 


31 



recycle rate first, it gives recycling priority over 
attrition. 

If the uniform random number passes the recycle rate 
test, the simulation tests the same random number against 
the sum of the attrition rate and the recycle rate. If the 
uniform number is less than that sum, the model schedules 
the officer for the Attrition () event, generating delay in 
the same manner as the Recycle () event. 

If the uniform random number is higher than both the 
recycle and attrition rates, the simulation records the 
start time for that officer before passing it as a 
parameter to the Finish BOLC() event after a delay equal to 
the course length of BOLC. 

As stated above, an officer may have to recycle. In 
the Recycle () event, the simulation records the recycling, 
and then schedules the Arrive BOLC() event where the 
officers enters the front of the queue. 

In the Attrition () event, the model records the 
attrition, its time, and the total time the officer spent 
in the Accession Training system. 

After passing through the Start BOLC() event without 
suffering attrition or recycling, the officer arrives at 
the Finish BOLC() event. This event schedules the officer 
for the Choose OBC() event, with a delay equal to the 
travel time between the BOLC installation, and the 
officer's OBC installation. 

Inside the BOLC portion of the simulation. Choose 
OBC() is an "empty event", which means there is no code in 
the event other than to identify it. However, the event's 


32 



presence is the trigger that starts the next step of the 
simulation, OBC. 


3. OBC 





The OBC portion of 

the simulation 

holds all 

of the 

events associated 

with 

Phase II of 

the Basic 

Officer 

Leadership Course. 

The 

OBC event graph 

is below in 

Figure 


5. As in the BOLC event graph, I present one event graph 
to represent the event graphs for the fifteen different 
OBCs in the Accession Training System. The events for all 
fifteen of the OBCs are exactly the same; for ease of 
presentation I will show one event graph. 



Figure 6. OBC Event Graph 


The OBC portion of the simulation is almost identical 

to the BOLC in terms of event logic and officer flow. 

33 



There is a Run() event in OBC that places the start dates 
for all of the officer basic courses on the event list at 
the very beginning of the simulation. These times 

represent the points in the simulation where the Start 
OBC() events will occur. The Start OBC() event will not 
run until the times designated by the Run() event. The 
start dates for OBC courses and all OBC data for the 

simulation is in Appendix C. 

Since the OBC portion listens to the BOLC portion, it 
runs the Choose OBC() event when BOLC sends an officer 

parameter to the Choose OBC() event in its portion. In the 

OBC part, the Choose OBC() event looks at the officer 
parameter passed to it and identifies its branch of the 

Army. With this identification, the simulation knows to 
which OBC it must go. 

Before it schedules the Arrive OBC() event for that 
particular officer's branch, it checks the event list to 
determine when that officer's OBC will start. If the start 
time is more than thirty days away in the simulation, the 

Choose OBC() event places a Thirty Day Training () event on 
the event list, and the officer goes there with zero delay. 
If the start time is thirty days or less away, the 
simulation schedules the officer for its branch's Arrive 
OBC() event with zero delay. 

The Thirty Day Training () event serves the same 
purpose and has identical logic in the OBC portion of the 
simulation as it does in the BOLC portion. 

The Arrive OBC() event can receive an officer 
parameter from one of three events: the Choose OBC() event, 
the Thirty Day Training () event, and the Recycle () event. 


34 



If the officer parameter comes from the Recycle () event, 
the simulation places the officer at the front of the 
queue. Otherwise, the officer will go to the end of the 
queue. In all cases, the Arrive OBC() event records the 
time of arrival for that officer parameter. 

At the appropriate time in the event list, the Start 
OBC() event initiates. This event queries the size of its 
particular queue. If there are no officers waiting to take 
the course, the simulation cancels the course with no state 
variables altered. 

If there is at least one officer, but less than the 
number required to start the course, the Start OBC() event 
will place another Start OBC() event on the event list with 
a seven-day delay. The simulation will reschedule an OBC 
at most three times before canceling it. The officers in 
the queue will snowbird until the next course offering. 

Once an OBC meets the minimum course size requirement, 
the Start OBC() event removes from the queue the number of 
officers up to its maximum course size. If the number of 
officers in the queue is greater than the max course size, 
the extra will wait until the next course offering. 

The Start OBC() event schedules Recycle () and 
Attrition () events in the exact same manner as the Start 
BOLC() event in the BOLC portion of the simulation. The 
only difference is each of the fifteen OBCs has a distinct 
recycle and attrition rate. Furthermore, the Recycle () and 
Attrition () events themselves are logically equivalent in 
both portions. 


35 



If an officer does not recycle or suffer attrition, 

the model notes the OBC start date, delays the officer for 
a time equal to the length of the OBC, and passes the 

officer as a parameter to the Finish OBC() event. 

The Finish OBC() event receives the officer parameter, 
notes the time the officer completes OBC training, and 
schedules an Arrive First Assignment () event for the 

officer with zero delay. 

The Arrive First Assignment () in the OBC portion of 
the simulation is an empty event. There is a similarly 
named event in the Operational Assignment portion of the 
simulation that is listening to the OBC portion. This 
event is the link for the officer between the OBC and 

Operational Assignment sections of the model. 

4. Operational Assignment 

This portion of the simulation has one event, and the 
event graph is trivial. The single event in this section 
is the Arrive First Assignment () event, and it receives the 
officer parameter from the OBC portion. 

With the reception of the officer parameter, the 
Arrive First Assignment () annotates the time the officer 
arrived and records all of state manipulations that 
occurred for the officer throughout the course of the 
simulation. 

D. SIMULATION VALIDATION 

Military Strength Analysis and Forecasting Division of 
the Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l validated my model. I 


36 



provided them the event graphs and their logic from this 
chapter. Their approval of my model design validates the 
simulation and the results I obtain through it. (Yamada, 8 
May 2002) . 

For further validation, I created a simulation 
separate from the event graph methodology developed above 
that represents the current accession training system, 
which is without BOLC's implementation. The logic of the 
Accession and OBC portions was the same, but the input 
parameters for OBC were different as they reflected course 
lengths for an accession training system without BOLC. I 
ran the simulation and noted the time officers spent in the 
THS account. 

I sent this data to Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l 
Military Forecasting and Strength Analysis Division to 
insure this output was comparable to the values they see 
when they conduct their analysis of the current Accession 
Training system. 

The results of the validation model are in Table 1 
below. This output met the approval of the aforementioned 
analysis agency (Yamada, 24 April 2002) . 


37 



Table 1. Validation Model Results 


Officer Branch 

Average days 

Standard 


of THS time 

Deviation 

All Officers 

186. 02 

39.93 

Adjutant General Officers 

174.88 

36.02 

Finance Officers 

164.07 

49.11 

Infantry Officers 

183.04 

34.76 

Field Artillery Officers 

214.77 

38.60 

Armor Officers 

184.12 

46.70 

Air Defense Officers 

204.50 

47.58 

Aviation Officers 

230.01 

53.40 

Engineer Officers 

172.93 

40.84 

Military Police Officers 

166.67 

39.32 

Chemical Officers 

207.10 

42.17 

Military Intelligence Officers 

185.28 

28.56 

Signal Corps Officers 

172.59 

26.99 

Quartermaster Officers 

167.80 

33.23 

Ordnance Officers 

191.24 

38.77 

Transportation Officers 

171.28 

41.89 


38 





E. ASSUMPTIONS 

• Attrition and recycle rates for BOLC I will equal 
those from Infantry OBC. 

• Other Army resource requirements (cadre requirements, 
billeting for officers, money, etc.) are not a factor. 

• Fort Bliss will be the third installation hosting BOLC 
Phase One. 

• The probability of an officer suffering attrition or 
recycling is equal across all days of any specific 
course. 

• Recycle and attrition rates for a given course are 
directly proportional to its length. 

• Attrition rate is per officer. 

• Officers will not suffer attrition nor will they 
recycle during the Thirty Day Training () event. 


39 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


40 



III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 


With the model completed, I designed an experiment for 
the simulation that tests TRADOCS's uncertain policy 
decisions relating to the implementation of BOLC. In 
addition to the controlled factors, there are 
uncontrollable variables in the system, primarily dealing 
with officer attributes. Since they are uncontrollable, I 
do not consider them in the physical design, but I will try 
to account for the variability they may cause using a 
robust experiment design on the simulation output. 

I explain the controllable factors and their levels in 
the next section. I detail the specific experiment design 
using these factors in Section B. 

A. EXPERIMENT FACTORS AND LEVELS 

The following paragraphs describe the experiment's 
factors and their levels; they represent unpublished 
policies TRADOC might implement and one accession policy 
that I believe has an effect on the size of the THS 
account. 

1. BOLC Branch Ratio Restriction 

Training and Doctrine Command has not published a 
policy regarding any restrictions on the consistency of 
each BOLC class. Military Forecasting and Strength 
Analysis Division, Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l 
speculates that TRADOC will enforce a policy that 


41 



constrains the number of officers of any one branch that 
make up a BOLC class. 

For example, if a BOLC class had 150 officers, and 
TRADOC had a BOLC Branch Ratio Restriction policy of 0.5, 
then that class could at most have 75 officers from any one 
branch of the Army. The policy set at 0.85 is the high 
level for this factor setting. The low setting is 0.55. 

2. Minimum OBC Course Size Requirement 

Initial analysis released by TRADOC has shown that 
they are considering allowing OBCs to start a course 
without any restrictions on their minimum course size. The 
Military Forecasting and Strength Analysis Division feels 
this is an unrealistic relaxation of the problem. 

To determine the significance of this relaxation, my 
experiment design includes a binary factor where OBCs may 
start with as few as one active duty officer waiting in the 
queue. This is the low setting for the factor. The high 
setting places historical restrictions on the minimum 
number of officers needed to start a course. The 

traditional minimum course requirements of OBCs are in 
Appendix C. 

3. BOLC Minimum Course Size or Difference Between 
Maximum and Minimum BOLC Class Size 

Training and Doctrine Command plans to train 7000 
officers per fiscal year in BOLC. This number includes 
active duty. National Guard, Reserve and officers from 
other countries. Active duty officers make up 4500 of the 
total. With no historical data present, and no policy in 


42 



place, the experiment will explore the minimum number of 
active duty officers that must be present for a BOLC to 
begin. The experiment uses a minimum of 50 officers 
required to start a BOLC for the low setting, and it uses a 
minimum of 100 officers to start a BOLC for the high 
setting. 

During regression analysis, I will use this 
information in a factor called Difference Between Max and 
Min Course Size will provide more insight into the model 
than just the Min BOLC Class Size. The simulation design 
required a minimum class size for proper execution; the 
model will capture this information in the new factor. 

4. BOLC Maximum Class Size 

Training and Doctrine Command has released the fact 
that they plan to have a 200-officer maximum course size 
for BOLC. However, they go on to say that the course can 
surge to 250 officers if needed. The problem here again is 
that this number of officers includes National Guard, 
Reserve and foreign officers. Training and Doctrine 

Command has not addressed how active duty participation 
requirements, if any, will figure into this policy. 

The experiment explores the effect of this maximum 
course size on the total THS time. I have taken the ratio 
of active duty officers to total officers training in BOLC 
in a fiscal year, 4500/7000, and multiplied that value to 
TRADOC's planned normal capacity for a BOLC class, 200 
officers. The result is approximately 129, or the expected 
number of active duty officers in a BOLC class with a size 
of 200. This assumes that active duty officers are 


43 



uniformly distributed across all BOLCs 
reasonable. 


which is not 


To explore the effect that the factor of maximum BOLC 
class size will have on total THS time, the experiment 
establishes 150 officers as its low setting, and 250 as its 
high setting. 


5. Immediate Active Duty Ratio 

The immediate active duty ratio represents the 
percentage of a fiscal year's commissioned ROTC officers 
that receive active duty status immediately upon 
graduation. This factor is important because those ROTC 
graduates that do not receive IA status do not enter the 
THS account until they arrive to their first training site; 
officers with IA commissioning count against the THS 
account congruent with their accession date. 

The ratio of IA to those ROTC graduates not receiving 
an IA commission varies from year to year, but historically 
is around 50 percent. My experiment explores how this 
policy's setting effects total THS time. The two settings 
the experiment uses for the immediate active duty ratio are 
0.40 for the low, and 0.60 for the high. 

Of all of the factors listed above, this is the least 
controllable. There are many different types of 
information that ROTC Cadet Command takes into 
consideration when finalizing this policy for a fiscal 
year. Two of these are budget constraints and manpower 
goals. It is included as a controllable variable for this 
analysis to show its impact on the THS account and how 

important this policy is to the accession training system. 

44 





B. REGRESSION EQUATION 


The previous section described the factors whose 
effects on the THS account I wish to explore. Assuming 
that all of the factors and up to second order two-way 
interactions are potentially significant to the accession 
training time for 2LTs, my starting regression equation is 
the following, where TTT is the total training time: 

y = Mean(TTT) & Var(TTT)(explained in a later section) 
b# = constants/coefficients 
Xi = BOLC Branch Ratio 
X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
X 4 = Immediate Active Duty Ratio 
X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

E [y] = bo + biXx + b 2 X 2 + b 2 X 3 + b 4 X 4 + bsXs + bi 2 X 4 X 2 + 
bi3X 4 X3 + bi 4 X 4 X 4 + bisXiXs + b 2 3X 2 X3 + b 2 4X 2 X 4 + b 2 sX 2 Xs + 
b3 4 X3X 4 + bssXsXs + b 4 5X 4 X5 + buXi 2 + b 22 X 2 2 + b33X3 2 + b 44 X 4 2 

After completing the first regression analysis using 
the model above, I will remove those factors and/or 
interactions from the regression equation whose p-value is 
greater than .05. However, if a factor has a p-value 
greater than .05, but is part of an interaction with a p- 
value less than .05, then it will remain in the regression 
equation. To obtain data for the regression analysis, I 
used a gridded factorial experiment design (Box, Hunter and 
Hunter, 1978) . 


46 



c. 


GRIDDED FACTORIAL EXPERIMENT DESIGNS 


A full factorial experiment for this simulation would 
create a large number of design points. For example, I 
want to explore TRADOC's potential policy on the maximum 
BOLC class size. Each BOLC class size might be as high as 
250 officers, or as low as 150 officers. The range of this 
factor's setting alone (even if I select setting increments 
of five or ten officers apart) will drive the number of 

design points extremely high when coupled with other 
factors' levels. 

The strategy behind gridded factorial experiment 
designs is to specify some low and high values for each 
factor and a number value for each setting. The simplest 
of these would be a 2 k gridded factorial, where k is the 
number of factors, each set at two levels. This method is 
very efficient for detecting the main effects of an 
experiment. 

If we let a -1 represent the low setting of the 

factor, and 1 be the high setting of the factor, the number 
of design points needed for a full factorial experiment 
will be 2 k , with k again equal to the number of factors. 

The benefits of the gridded factorial design, besides 
the efficiency, are that with the low and high factor 

settings at -1 and 1, all of the factor vectors are 

orthogonal and uncorrelated. 

If there were a concern about possible quadratic 

effects in the system, the designer can extend the gridded 

factorial design and add center points. These center 

points correspond to factor settings equidistant from the 

high and low actual factor levels. In the gridded design, 

47 



the value 0 represents them. With high, center and low 
factor settings, an experiment designer can explore 
quadratic effects of a system with 3 k design points in a 
gridded factorial design. 

It is important to note that with the addition of the 
center point settings and the 0 value representation, the 
orthogonal and uncorrelated benefits still apply. 

I used a 2 x 3 4 gridded factorial experimental design, 
augmented by face points and the absolute center point in 
the four dimensions. I have one binary variable, which 
causes two separate runs of the experiment at the other 
four variables' high and low design points. To capture 
possible quadratic effects, I augmented the experiment 
design by using three of the four non-binary center (0 
setting) points. The fourth factor's levels were set to a 
level a/ 4 times the distance between the center setting and 
the high and low setting. In four dimensions, this 
projects a design point through the face of a hypercube to 
a point with the same leverage as the corner points that 
will help detect non-linear effects. 

This experiment setup will result in 50 design points, 
as seen in Appendix D. As stated earlier, these design 
points only include controllable factors; conspicuously 
absent from the design are many uncontrollable factors that 
vary through the execution of the simulation. Some 
examples of these are the number of officers graduated in 
each branch each fiscal year, the number of officers that 
suffer attrition and/or recycle during an accession year, 
or the number of officers that receive an immediate active 
duty status upon graduation. 


48 



These uncontrollable factors cause variability in the 
system. I would like to explore this variability, and a 
robust experimental design on the output will help account 
for it. 


D. ROBUST EXPERIMENT DESIGN 

From the gridded factorial design, I have 50 design 
points and a regression model that will allow exploration 
of the factors' effects on accession training time. 
However, the manner in which I use the output from these 
design points can help account for other sources of 
variability in the system. 

A robust experiment design is a powerful tool to help 
capture the effect of the uncontrollable factors' 
contribution to variability. Robust design is usually 
accomplished by crossing the desired design of 50 points 
with a simple design intended to probe the range of 
behaviors associated with the uncontrollable factors. This 
allows the estimation of not only the mean performance at 
each of the 50 design points, but also the variability of 
each design point resulting from the uncontrollable 
factors. Capturing the mean and variance of the 
simulation's measure of performance at each of the design 


points 

and 

incorporating 

it 

into 

a loss function 

can 

provide 

an 

idea of 

how 

consistent 

the behavior of 

the 

system 

is 

in the 

presence 

of 

uncontrollable factors 


(Sanchez, Sanchez and Ramberg, 1998). 

Another benefit to the robust design is that the 
regression analysis will identify factors that are not 
significant to the model. With this lack of significance 


49 



comes flexibility for the decision maker. If a factor 
associated with a policy or a decision is not significant, 
then the decision maker can set that factor to any level 
without repercussions to the outcome. It follows that the 
decision maker can set these policies that do not have 
significant effects on the measure of performance to the 
most cost efficient setting. This provides decision makers 
with flexibility and a means for identifying ways to 
conserve resources. 

Due to the characteristics of the accession training 
system and the methods used in coding the simulation, I 
cannot use the crossed design approach. However, one can 
estimate the variability in a simulation model by using 
replication, although doing so is usually less efficient 
than using a designed experiment. 

I will run the simulation 25 times at each design 
point, generating five fiscal years worth of graduating 
officers per simulation run. From each run, I will 
calculate the mean time that all officers spend in 
accession training. Upon completion of the experiment, I 
will have 25 mean accession times per design point, on 
which I can calculate the variance. The result is 25 mean 
accession training times and their variance at each of the 
50 design points. I can conduct two regression analyses on 
this output. The first regression will be on the 25 mean 
accession times per design point (1250 data points). The 
second regression will be on the variance of the mean 
accession training times at each design point (50 data 
points) . 


50 



Once 

the separate regressions 

are complete for 

the 

estimated 

mean and 

variance, 

I 

will incorporate 

the 

resulting 

regression 

equations 

into 

a squared error 

loss 


function. 

The equation below is a mathematical representation of 
squared error loss: 

Loss = (p - x) 2 

where p is the performance and X is some desirable target 
value. It follows: 

MRE = Mean Regression Equation 

VRE = Variance Regression Equation 

E [Loss] = (MRE - X) 2 + (VRE) 

To use this loss function in my analysis, I need to 
determine an appropriate desirable target. A perfect 
accession training system would have every day charged 
against the THS account be a training day; this would be 
the absolute best the Army can achieve. Quantitatively, 
this corresponds to an accession training system with 
training times equal to the minimum number of days that an 
officer would spend training in their courses, in this 
case, the sum of the number of training days in BOLC plus 
the number of training days in OBC. This minimum value is 


51 



different for officers of different branches, due to the 
fact that the branches' OBC lengths are different. 

To calculate a desirable target, I took the ratio of 
each branch to the total number of accessions in a fiscal 
year (4500) and multiplied that value by the minimum 
training time for each branch. The result is a desirable 
target, x, that is the expected minimum training time, 
derived by weighting each branches' minimum training time 
by the ratio of the officers in that branch to the total 
accessed for the fiscal year. 

Using this method I calculated a desirable target of 
117.78 days. In an ideal world, 117.78 days would be the 
average accession training time with no variance, i.e., a 
loss function value equal to zero. Although in reality it 
is impossible to achieve this goal, I will use the results 
of the regression equations to find and recommend policy 
settings for the factors that will minimize the loss 
function relative to the ideal target. Minimizing the loss 
function will yield BOLC implementation policies that 
consistently result in low accession times. 

Once I have determined the "best" policy settings, I 
will run the simulation at those policy settings 10 times. 
By varying the seeds used for random number generation, I 
will have 10 independent data points on which I can 
calculate a mean and a variance. I can use the results to 
confirm the expected performance of the policy 
recommendation. 


52 



E. USE OF RANDOM NUMBERS 

Careful use of random numbers is important in 
simulation and experiment design; proper use of random 
numbers results in easy replication of the simulation 
experiment for tighter confidence intervals and the ability 
to better classify alternative systems or system 
configurations as "best", "good" or "inferior". Smart use 
of random numbers also allows for better control, or 
guaranteeing that certain types of bias do not creep into 
the results. (Law and Kelton, 2000) . 

The random numbers generated in Java are pseudo-random 
numbers , which means that they are not actually random, but 
are generated using an algorithm. The algorithm has to 
start at some point to begin generating numbers; this point 
is called the seed. Using different seeds as start points 
for random number generators produces different streams of 
random numbers. However, these streams have a finite cycle 
length before they start repeating the same sequence of 
random numbers; the length of this stream depends on the 
quality of the algorithm behind the random number generator 
(Law and Kelton, 2000). 

The pooled random number generator in Simkit is a high 
quality number generator, and I used it in my simulation. 
The pooled generator guarantees that the cycle length of 
random numbers is the product of the two separate cycle 
lengths of the two underlying generators, as long as the 
two cycle lengths are relatively prime. The pooled 
generator in Simkit has a cycle length of approximately 
2 62 (Bratley, Fox and Schrage, 1987) . Simkit's long cycle 
length coupled with a simulation design that uses 


53 



relatively miniscule random number streams insures that 
cycle length is not an issue for my model. 

Furthermore, I am running the simulation 25 times at 
each design point, and I would like to insure that my use 
of random numbers does not cause dependency in my model. 
To insure independence between design points, the 
simulation randomly assigns seeds for the random number 
generators in each design point run. This random seed 
assignment will insure that my use of random numbers does 
not cause a dependency between the results of design point 
runs . 

One of the goals of this analysis is to determine 
optimal policy settings for BOLC's implementation that 
minimize THS account size due to time spent in accession 
training. Once I have discovered these optimal policies, I 
would like to compare the validation simulation to the 

simulation that includes BOLC. Recall that the validation 
model represents the current accession training system 
without the implementation of BOLC. Since I will compare 
two different systems, I will use common random number 
streams for each of the systems. If the streams were 
different, then there is the possibility that the different 
random numbers generated were the cause of any differences 

in the system. However, if the random number streams are 

the same for both systems during the execution of the 
simulation, then it follows that the occurrence of any 

differences between them result from unequal 
characteristics within the systems, and not from random 
number generation. 


54 



IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND RESPONSE SURFACE 

ANALYSIS 


A. INITIAL REGRESSION RESULTS 

S-PLUS is the software that I used to conduct 
regression analysis on the experiment output (MathSoft, 
Inc., 1999) . Recall the initial regression model from 
Chapter 3 : 

y = Mean(TTT) & Var(TTT) 

b# = constants/coefficients 

Xi = BOLC Branch Ratio 

X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Min BOLC Class Size 

X 4 = Immediate Active Duty Ratio 

X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

E [y] = bo + b]Xi + b 2 X 2 + b 3 X 3 + b 4 X 4 + bsXs + bi 2 X 4 X 2 + 

bi 3 x 4 x 3 + bi 4 x 4 x 4 + bisXiXs + b 23 x 2 x 3 + b 2 4x 2 x 4 + b 25 x 2 x 5 + 

b 34 X 3 X 4 + b 3 5X 3 X5 + b 4 5X 4 X5 + buXi 2 + b 22 X 2 2 + b 33 X 3 2 + b 44 X 4 2 

Since this is a robust experiment design with the loss 
function defined in Chapter 3, I must develop a regression 
equation for the mean and a separate regression equation 
for the variance. 

1. Grand Mean Regression Analysis 

Before executing the regression on the grand means, I 
created some plots of the data to see if I could make any 
observations that might help my analysis. 


55 



The figure below is a plot generated in S-PLUS that 
creates scatterplots of all variables in a data set versus 
all others. 



Figure 7. Scatterplots of Variables and Mean Accession 

Training Time 


The individual plots associated with mean accession 
training time, the response variable TTT, show that there 
are two design points that returned extremely high 
accession training times. These outliers correspond to 


design points 35 and 43, 

which 

both 

have 

Max BOLC 

Class 

Sizes of 

100 and Min BOLC 

Class 

Sizes 

of 

75 . 

The 

values 

returned 

by these design 

points 

are 

not 

in 

the area of 


56 
































interest for my analysis. I am more interested in the 
policy settings that will return low accession training 
times. Therefore, removing these two data points from the 
data set will not have a negative effect on my regression 
analysis. However, it is important to note that if these 
variables are set to values in this range, their influence 
is dominant. 

After removing the outlier data points, I created the 
scatterplots again in the figure below. 



Figure 8. Grand Mean Scatterplots Minus Outliers 


With the outliers removed from these plots, S-PLUS 
automatically changed the scale so that they are readable. 


57 



































Examining the figure above, the plot between TTT and 
MaxBOLC and the plot between TTT and BOLCDiff show a 
possible non-linear relationship, perhaps as high as a 
cubic relationship. The plot between TTT and IA Ratio 
shows a relationship that seems linear. 


Based 

on the graphs 

above. 

since 

two of my 

five 

factors show possible non 

-linear 

behavio 

r, I will 

add a 

cubic term 

for all of 

my continuous 

factors in my 

regression 

model for the 

mean. 

The new 

regression 

model 


with cubic terms is: 
y = Mean(TTT) 

b# = constants/coefficients 
Xi = BOLC Branch Ratio 
X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
X 4 = Immediate Active Duty Ratio 
X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

E [y] = bo + b]Xi + b 2 X 2 + b 3 X 3 + b 4 X 4 + bsXs + bi 2 X 4 X 2 + 

b 13 x 1 x 3 + bi 4 x 4 x 4 + bisXiXs + b 23 x 2 x 3 + b 2 4x 2 x 4 + b 25 x 2 x 5 + 

b3 4 X 3 X 4 + b35X 3 X5 + b 4 5X 4 X5 + buXi 2 + b 22 X 2 2 + b33X 3 2 + 
b 44 X 4 z + bmXi 3 + b 222 X 2 3 + b 3 33X3 3 + b 444 X 4 3 


With S-Plus and using the new regression model 
directly above, I conducted a regression analysis on the 25 
data points for each of the 48 design points, using the 
mean as the response variable. The results of this 
regression are in Appendix E. 

As described in Appendix E, the column farthest to the 
right of the output is the p-values of the terms used in 


58 



the regression model. I want to improve my response 
surface model by removing those terms from it that have p- 
values greater than .05. However, if a main effect has a 
p-value greater than .05, but is part of an interaction 
with a p-value less than .05, then I will keep it in the 
model. In this specific case, the BOLC Branch Ratio and 
the Min OBC Course Size Requirement factors have p-values 
greater that .05 associated with its main effect. However, 
they have interactions with other factors that have p- 
values lower than .05, which means that they will remain in 
the model as a main effect despite the high p-value. 

The results from the model show that there were a fair 
number of terms that were significant to the model. 
Interestingly, the cubic terms for Max BOLC Class Size and 
Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size were 
significant. The new regression model with the 

insignificant terms removed is: 

y = Mean(TTT) 

b# = constants/coefficients 
Xi = BOLC Branch Ratio 
X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
X 4 = Immediate Active Duty Ratio 
X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

E [y] = bo + biXi + b 2 X 2 + b 3 X 3 + b 4 X 4 + b 3 X 3 + bi 2 X 4 X 2 + 
b 23 X 2 X 3 + b 24 X 2 X 4 + b 2 5 X 2 X 5 + b 3 5 X 3 X 5 + b 22 X 2 2 + b 33 X 3 2 + 
b 222 X 2 3 + b 333 X 3 3 


59 



I ran the regression again, using the new model with 


only the significant terms, 
are: 


Coefficients: 


Value Std. Error 


(Intercept) 

354 

.5147 

3 

.2298 

BOLCRatio 

-1 

.3446 

0 

.7913 

BOLCDiff 

0 

.4270 

0 

.0095 

MaxBOLC 

-2 

.2355 

0 

.0496 

IARatio 

31 

.4461 

1 

.1870 

MinReq 

-0 

.8476 

0 

.2643 

I(BOLCDiff A 2) 

-0 

.0021 

0 

.0001 

I(MaxBOLC A 2) 

0 

.0093 

0 

.0002 

I(BOLCDiff A 3) 

0 

.0000 

0 

.0000 

I(MaxBOLC A 3) 

0 

.0000 

0 

.0000 

BOLCRatio:MaxBOLC 

0 

.0067 

0 

.0039 

BOLCDiff:MaxBOLC 

-0 

.0009 

0 

.0001 

BOLCDiff:MinReq 

-0 

.0049 

0 

.0019 

MaxBOLC:IARatio 

-0 

.0396 

0 

.0058 

MaxBOLC:MinReq 

-0 

.0073 

0 

.0022 


The results of this regression 


t value 

Pr(> 11 

1) 

109 

.7651 

0. 

O 

o 

00 

-1 

. 6991 

0. 

00 

o 

96 

45 

. 1846 

0. 

o 

o 

00 

-45 

.0740 

0. 

o 

o 

00 

26 

.4910 

0. 

o 

o 

00 

-3 

.2066 

0. 

o 

o 

14 

-34 

.3330 

0. 

o 

o 

00 

39 

. 1356 

0. 

o 

o 

00 

40 

. 6501 

0. 

o 

o 

00 

-32 

. 8202 

0. 

o 

o 

00 

1 

.7510 

0. 

00 

o 

02 

-11 

.0724 

0. 

o 

o 

00 

-2 

.5977 

0. 

o 

o 

95 

-6 

.8605 

0. 

o 

o 

00 

-3 

.3578 

0. 

o 

o 

08 


Residual standard error: 0.7994 on 1185 degrees of freedom 
Multiple R-Squared: 0.9757 

F-statistic: 3396 on 14 and 1185 degrees of freedom, the p-value is 0 


60 



The figure below shows the predicted values returned 


by the regression model versus the residuals. 


Figure 9. Predicted vs. Residuals in Grand Mean Regression 


mi 





-1-1-1-i- 

200 205 210 215 

This graph indicates that the model should be accurate 
in predicting accession times. The residuals are 

distributed evenly throughout the graph without any obvious 
patterns, indicating homoscedasticity. 

Placing the coefficients from the regression results 
above into the regression model returns: 

y = Mean(TTT) 

b# = constants/coefficients 

Xi = BOLC Branch Ratio 


61 










X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
X 4 = Immediate Active Duty Ratio 
X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

E[y] = 354.5147 - 1.3446Xi - 2.2355X 2 + 4270X 3 + 
31.4461X 4 - .847 6 X 5 + .0067XiX 2 - . 0009X 2 X 3 - . 0396X 2 X 4 - 
. 007 3X 2 X 5 - . 0049X 3 X5 + . 00 93X 2 2 - . 0021X 3 2 - 
. 00001198X 2 3 + . 000005892X 3 3 

2. Variance Regression Analysis 

Before conducting the variance portion of the 
regression, I will explore graphs to see if they show 
anything important. The figure below is the scatterplots 
of all of the variables versus the variance. 


62 



100 160 200 250 300 0.0 0.4 0.8 50 100 150 200 

. rJ-1- J, -1-U A -■-1-1-1. .i-1-1-1-1-4. -1 - I-1-1-- --1-1-—I-1 


BOLCRatio 

• • 

• • • 

• • 

• 

• • 

• • • 

• • 

• 

• • 

• • 

• • 

• • 


ft ft ft ft 

• ft ft • • 

ft ft ft ft 

ft 

ft 

• ♦ 

• • • 

• ft 

ft 

MaxBOLC 

* 

• • 

• • • 

• • 

..t 

• • 

• • 

• • 

• t 


• 

ft ft 

ft ft • 

ft ft 

ft 

-*- 

• ft 

• ft • 

• ft 

ft 

• 

ft • 

ft • ft 

ft ft 

• 

lARatio 

• • 

• • 

• • 

« • 


-«- 

ft • ft ft 

• ft • • • 

ft • • • 

i 

ft # ft * t 

• • • « • 

ft ft ft ft ft 

ft ft ft ft ft 

ft • ft ft • 

ft ft ft ft ft 

MinReq 

WHi 

« ••• • 


HI 

IB 

m 

V 

ft 

• ♦ 

: i 

11 

TTTVar 

m 

-ft- 

• ft 

• 

• ft 

ft ft • 

• • 

• 

• • 

-* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

-«- 

• • 

• 

• • 

• # • 

• • 

• 

• • 

_t_ 

• V 

ft ft 

ft ft 

• ft 

• ft 

ft ft 

ft ft 

ft ft 

ft_ft 


BOLCDiff 

o'a o!e ' o!s ' 1.0.o !3 o' a o!s ole o!?. 0.5 ilo i!s 2.0 


Figure 10. Scatterplots of Variables and Variance 


Although these scatterplots do not seem to show any 
obvious relationships between the variables, I will create 
a plot of predicted accession time variance versus the 
residuals using a regression with Max BOLC Class Size as 
the only predictor variable. The resulting graph is in the 
figure below. 


63 
































100 


150 


200 


250 


BE 


MaxBOLC 

Figure 11. Predicted Variance vs. Residuals Plot with 

Max BOLC Class Size as the Predictor Variable 

This figure indicates possible cubic behavior. To 
capture that possibility, I will include cubic terms for 
all factors in the regression model for variance. The new 
regression model for variance is: 


y = Var(TTT) 

b# = constants/coefficients 
Xi = BOLC Branch Ratio 
X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
X 4 = Immediate Active Duty Ratio 

64 



X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 


E [y] = fog + bgXi + bgX 2 + bgXg + b 4 X 4 + bgXg + bigXiXg + 

bi3XiX3 + bi4XiX4 + bisXiXs + b23^2X3 + b24X2X4 + b25X2Xs + 

b34X3X4 + b35X3X5 + b45X4Xs + buXi 2 + b22^2 2 + b33X3 2 + 

b 44 X 4 2 + bmXi J + b 222 ^ 2 3 + b 333 X 3 3 + b 4 44 X 4 3 

Again using S-PLUS, the regression model above, and 
the design points in Appendix E with the variance of the 
grand mean results as the response variable, I conducted 
the regression. The results of this regression are in 
Appendix F. 

Just as in the regression for the grand mean, I want 
to remove those terms from the model that are not 
significant. Removing the insignificant terms results in 
the following model: 

y = Var(TTT) 

b# = constants/coefficients 
Xi = BOLC Branch Ratio 
X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
X 4 = Immediate Active Duty Ratio 
X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

E[y] = bo + b 2 X 2 + b 3 X 3 + b 5 X 5 + b 2 sX 2 X 5 + b 22 ^ 2 2 + b 33 X 3 2 + 
b222^2 3 + b 333 X 3 3 


Running the regression again using this new model 
returned the following results: 


65 



Coefficients: 


(Intercept) 
MaxBOLC 
BOLCDiff 
MinReq 
I(MaxBOLC A 2) 
I (BOLCDiff A 2) 
I(MaxB0LC A 3) 
I (BOLCDif f A 3) 
MaxBOLC:MinReq 


Value Std. Error 


17 

.7080 

2 

.7538 

-0 

.2875 

0 

. 0537 

0 

.0916 

0 

. 0228 

-0 

.3915 

0 

.2998 

0 

.0013 

0 

. 0003 

-0 

.0007 

0 

. 0002 

0 

.0000 

0 

. 0000 

0 

.0000 

0 

. 0000 

0 

.0053 

0 

. 0015 


t value 

Pr (>|t|) 

6.4304 

0.0000 

-5.3564 

0.0000 

4.0245 

0.0002 

-1.3056 

0.1990 

4.6927 

0.0000 

-3.5506 

0.0010 

-4.2001 

0.0001 

3.2569 

0.0023 

3.6350 

0.0008 


Residual standard error: 0.2522 on 41 degrees of freedom 
Multiple R-Squared: 0.8227 

F-statistic: 23.78 on 8 and 41 degrees of freedom, the p-value is 4.311e-013 


This model returns a high R-Squared and the predicted 
variance versus residuals in the figure below: 



Figure 12. Predicted vs. Residuals in Variance 

Regression 

The figure above shows some heteroscedastic behavior 
which results in poor predictions by the regression 
equations. In an attempt to remove the heteroscedasticity, 
I conducted a transformation on the regression model by 


66 





making the natural log of the variance the response 
variable. The regression model with the tranformation is 
as follows: 

y = Variance 

b# = constants/coefficients 
X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

ln(E[y] ) = bo + b 2 X 2 + b 2 X 3 + bsXs + b 2 sX 2 Xs + b 22 X 2 2 + 

£> 33 X 3 ^ + b 222 X 2 3 + b333X 3 3 


Executing a regression on this transformed model 
yields the following results: 


Coefficients: 



Value 

Std 

. Error 

t 

value Pr (> 

11 | ) 

(Intercept) 

17 

.7527 

4 

.2778 

4 

. 1499 

0. 

0002 

MaxBOLC 

-0 

.3126 

0 

. 0834 

-3 

.7491 

0. 

0005 

BOLCDiff 

0 

.1380 

0 

. 0354 

3 

. 9020 

0. 

0003 

MinReq 

-0 

. 9376 

0 

.4658 

-2 

.0130 

0. 

0507 

I(MaxBOLC A 2) 

0 

.0013 

0 

. 0004 

3 

. 0377 

0. 

0041 

I (BOLCDiff A 2) 

-0 

.0011 

0 

. 0003 

-3 

.3979 

0. 

0015 

I(MaxBOLC^3) 

0 

.0000 

0 

. 0000 

-2 

.5453 

0. 

0148 

I (BOLCDif f^3) 

0 

.0000 

0 

. 0000 

3 

.0827 

0. 

0037 

MaxBOLC:MinReq 

0 

.0120 

0 

. 0023 

5 

.3088 

0. 

0000 

Residual standard 1 

error: 

0. 

3918 on 

41 

degrees 

of 

freedom 


Multiple R-Squared: 0.8763 

F-statistic: 36.29 on 8 and 41 degrees of freedom, the p-value is 3.331e-016 


The residual plot in the figure below shows a slight 
improvement over the previous model. 


67 




Variance 


I have tried various transformations on this model to 
try to reduce heteroscedasticity, and none of them returned 
an adequate fit against the residuals. I decided to keep 
the model with the log transformation, because regression 
is a very robust operation. Even though this variance 
model is returning residuals that are not homoscedsastic, I 
still can use it in the loss function to help predict 
policy settings that minimize accession training time. 


Using 

regression 

following 


the coefficients f 
for the variance 
regression equation: 


rom the 
regress 


natural log transform 
ion model returns the 


y = Variance 

b# = constants/coefficients 


68 






X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 

X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

E[in(y)] = 17.7527 - .3126X 2 + .1380X 3 - .9376X 5 + 

. 0120 X 2 X 5 + . 0013X 2 2 - .OOIIX 3 2 - . 000001821X 2 3 + 

. 000002629X 3 3 

B. RESPONSE SURFACE ANALYSIS 

The loss function provides some insight into the 
different controllable factors and how they effect the 
accession training time for officers. Recall the general 
form of the loss function: 

MRE = Grand Mean Regression Equation 

VRE = Variance Regression Equation 

E[Loss] = (MRE - T) 2 + (VRE) 

At this point in the loss function analysis, I need to 
properly scale the VRE so that it reflects the variance of 
one officer through the system. Currently, it reflects the 
variance of the mean accession time for all officers. 
Multiplying the VRE by the number of observations for each 
simulation run (22,500) will return a VRE with the 
appropriate scale. Recalling that the desirable target 
calculated earlier is equal to 117.78 days, the loss 
function becomes: 


69 



E[Loss] 


= (MRE - 117.78) 2 + 22500 (VRE) 

Using the equations from the results of the regression 
analyses above result in the following loss function: 

b# = constants/coefficients 
Xi = BOLC Branch Ratio 
X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X 3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
X 4 = Immediate Active Duty Ratio 
X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

E[Loss] = ((354.5147 - 1.3446X x - 2.2355X 2 + 4270X 3 + 
31.4461X 4 - .847 6 X 5 + .0067XiX 2 - . 0009X 2 X 3 - . 0396X 2 X 4 - 
. 007 3X 2 X 5 - . 0049X 3 X5 + . 0 0 93X 2 2 - . 0021X 3 2 - 
. 00001198X 2 3 + . 000005892X 3 3 ) - 117.78) 2 + 

22500 (e <17 ‘ 7527 - .3126X2 + .1380X3 - .9376X5 + .0120X2X5 + .0013X22 - 
.0011X32 - .000001821X23 + .000002629X33)^ 


The following sections describe how the five different 
factors in the regression model influence the accession 
training time. 

1. BOLC Branch Ratio 

The BOLC Branch Ratio factor has almost no 
significance to the loss function. The only reason that it 
remained in this loss function analysis is that it has a 
significant interaction with the Max BOLC Class Size 
factor. The reason for the BOLC Branch Ratio factor has 


70 



almost no significance is due in part to the flexibility of 
having three different installation hosting BOLC. 

If an officer from a particular branch cannot attend a 
BOLC because his or her addition to the course will violate 
the branch ratio there, an opportunity exists to attend an 
alternate BOLC at a different installation that more than 
likely starts approximately one week later. In the rare 
instance that the second BOLC has the ratio constraint 
problem, a third installation hosting a BOLC will follow 
shortly after the second attempted attendance. 

In essence, the flexibility three different BOLC 
installations provide to the accession training system 
negate the problems the branch ratio constraint might 
cause. 


2. Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

As in the BOLC Branch Ratio factor above, the Min OBC 
Course Size Requirement shows very little significance in 
the model. This factor is not significant alone, but has 
important interactions that have an impact on the accession 
training time. 

3. Max BOLC Class Size, Min BOLC Class Size, and 
Immediate Active Duty Ratio 

These three factors were very significant to the two 
regression analyses, and therefore are significant to the 
loss function. I would like to determine level settings 
for all of the factors that minimize the loss function; 
minimizing the loss function will in turn minimize the time 
spent in the THS account. 


71 



Recall the loss function derived from the regression 


analysis in Section A of this chapter: 


b# = constants/coefficients 
Xi = BOLC Branch Ratio 
X 2 = Max BOLC Class Size 

X3 = Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
X 4 = Immediate Active Duty Ratio 
X 5 = Min OBC Course Size Requirement 

E[Loss] = ((354.5147 - 1.3446Xi - 2.2355X 2 + 4270X 3 + 
31.4461X 4 - .847 6 X 5 + .0067X^2 - . 0009X 2 X 3 - , 0396X 2 X 4 - 
. 007 3X 2 X 5 - . 0049X 3 X5 + . 0 0 93X 2 2 - . 0021X 3 2 - 

. 00001198X 2 3 + . 000005892X 3 3 ) - 117.78) 2 + 

22500 (e <17 ‘ 7527 " - 3126x2 + - 1380 x 3 - .9376x5 + .0120x2x5 + .0013x22 - 

.0011X32 - .000001821X23 + .000002629X33)^ 


Using the loss function as an objective function, I 
formulated a simple optimization problem that would 
determine the optimal settings for the four factors. The 
complete formulation is in Appendix G. 

After implementing the formulation in Microsoft EXCEL 
Solver, the following factor settings minimized the loss 
function: 

BOLC Branch Ratio = .55 
Max BOLC Class Size = 250 

Difference Between Max/Min BOLC Class Size = 179.44 
Min OBC Course Size Requirement = Not Required 
Immediate Active Duty Ratio = 0.4 


72 



The predicted loss at this optimal solution is 8012.58 
days 2 , with mean portion of the loss function predicting a 
mean accession time of 201.17 days and a variance 
prediction of .04700 days 2 without scaling. 

I built a graph to insure that this optimal solution 
returned a global minimum for the loss function. Since 
there are three continuous variables, I varied the loss 
function value at each of these variables, while holding 
the others constant at the optimal settings. I will 
examine the graph to see if there is more than one 
stationary point in any dimension for which the EXCEL 
Solver might have returned an optimal policy solution. 



As seen in the figure above, over the interval defined 
by the highest and lowest settings for each of the 


73 






continuous variables, there is only one stationary point 
corresponding to a minimization of the loss function. 
Interestingly, the loss function values when varying the 
Difference Between the Max and Min BOLC Class Size show two 
stationary points in the interval I am exploring. 

Running the simulation ten times at these policy 
settings: 

• BOLC Branch Ratio -- .55 (optimal setting) 

• Min BOLC Class Size -- 71 (closest integer number 
to optimal setting) 

• Max BOLC Class Size -- 250 (optimal setting) 

• Immediate Active Duty Ratio -- 0.4 (optimal 

setting) 

• Min OBC Course Size Requirement -- Not Required 
(optimal setting) 


yielded the following results: 


Table 3. Results of Simulation at Optimal Policy Settings 


Run 

Mean Accession Time (Days) 

1 

202.20 

2 

202.15 

3 

202.63 

4 

201.98 

5 

201.85 

6 

202.67 

7 

202.31 

8 

202.29 


74 




9 

202.69 

10 

202.27 


The grand mean for this data is 202.30 days with a 
variance of .0864 days 2 . Scaling the variance appropriately 
results in a new variance measure of 1943.90 days 2 . Recall 
the general form of the loss function: 

E[Loss] = (MRE-117.78) 2 + 22500(VRE) 

Incorporating the grand mean above into the MRE 
portion of the loss function and the variance into the VRE 
part returns a value of 9087.87 days 2 . The predicted loss 
function value at these policy settings was 8012.02 days 2 . 
Simulation runs at the optimal policy settings returned 
accession training times close to the values predicted by 
the regression equations incorporated into the loss 
function. 

Recall from the regression outputs that the residual 
standard error from the mean regression was .7994 and the 
residual standard error from the variance regression was 
.3918 without scaling. Therefore, 95% confidence intervals 
for the predicted mean and variance of accession training 
time at the optimal settings are: 


Mean -- 201.17 + 1.5668 days 

Variance — .047000 + .7679 days 2 


75 




The grand mean and the variance without scaling of the 
simulation run at the optimal policy settings were 202.30 
days and .0864 days 2 respectively. Therefore, the 
simulation returned values for mean and variance of 
accession training time that were within the confidence 
intervals calculated above. 

Using the grand mean and variance from the simulation 
runs at each design point as input into the above loss 
function returns the following graph. 


Loss Function Values at Each Design Point 



□ Loss 
Function 
Values 


Design Points 


Figure 15. Loss Function Values at Each Design Point 


The design points on the extreme left of the graph 
above is the result from the optimal setting, 9087.87 days 2 . 
It is indeed an optimal setting when comparing its loss 
function value with the other design points. Other design 


76 

























































































































points and their settings that were close to the optimal 
are in the table below. 


Table 

4 . 

Design 

Points 

; with 

Low Loss 

Function Values 


isign Point BOLCRatio 

MaxBOLC 

lARatio 

MinReq 

BO LCD iff 

Var(TTT) 

Mean(TTT) 

Loss 

Function 

Value 

Optimal 

0.55 

250 

0.4 

0 

172 

1943.90 

202.3 

9087.87 

28 

0.55 

250 

0.4 

0 

200 

2151.00 

202.41 

9313.2369 

26 

0.55 

250 

0.4 

0 

150 

2664.00 

202.34 

9814.3936 

25 

0.55 

250 

0.6 

0 

150 

2022.53 

206.51 

9893.5129 

41 

0.7 

200 

0.3 

1 

125 

3523.50 

197.76 

9920.3004 

40 

1 

200 

0.5 

0 

125 

2225.25 

205.64 

9944.6296 


The first row of the table above is the loss function 
value at the optimal policy settings. Design point 28 
returns a loss function value of 9313.24 days". Comparing 
the policy settings from design point 28 with the optimal 
settings, we find that the only difference is the setting 
of the Difference Between the Max and Min BOLC Class Size 
factor. Note that design point 41 returns the minimum 
mean, but is not recommended due to its high variability. 

C. RUNNING BASELINE SIMULATION AT OPTIMAL POLICY SETTINGS 

Recall from Chapter 2 that I developed a separate 
simulation that emulated the accession training system 
without the implementation of BOLC. The input parameters 
for the validation were not optimized. I set the 

parameters to levels accurate in regard to the current 
accession training system. 

Since I would like to determine the effect that 
implementation of BOLC will have on the accession training 
system, and ultimately the THS account, I must find a way 


77 



to compare the baseline simulation results with the results 
of the optimal simulation runs with BOLC. Any comparisons 
between the two models as they stand now would not be 
valid, as the BOLC model has been optimized and the 
baseline model has not. 

Therefore, to make a valid comparison, I will run the 
baseline model at the policy settings derived from the 
optimization of the regression analyses on the output from 
the simulation with BOLC implemented. Running the two at 
the same policy same settings should provide a picture of 
the impact that BOLC will have on the accession training 
system. 

The table below shows the results of the running the 
baseline simulation at the BOLC optimal policy settings. 


Table 5. Baseline Model Run at Optimal BOLC Policy 

Settings 


Branch Baseline Mean 

Baseline Std Dev 

Optimal Mean 

Optimal Std Dev 

Difference 

TOTAL 

186.02 

39.93 

179.1 

37.36 

6.92 

Adjutant General 

174.88 

36.02 

170.73 

37.55 

4.15 

Finance 

164.07 

49.11 

155.34 

47.62 

8.73 

Infantry 

183.04 

34.76 

177.79 

35.61 

5.25 

Field Artillery 

214.77 

38.60 

208.64 

38.35 

6.13 

Armor 

184.12 

46.70 

178.45 

44.42 

5.67 

Air Defense 

204.5 

47.58 

200.61 

48.51 

3.89 

Aviation 

230.01 

53.40 

223.44 

55.22 

6.57 

Engineer 

172.93 

40.84 

166.99 

39.67 

5.94 

Military Police 

166.67 

39.32 

160.73 

39.89 

5.94 

Chemical 

207.1 

42.17 

200.65 

40.01 

6.45 

Military Intelligence 

185.28 

28.56 

178.43 

31.06 

6.85 

Signal Corps 

172.59 

26.99 

158.43 

27.24 

14.16 

Ordnance 

191.24 

38.77 

182.47 

38.72 

8.77 

Transportation 

171.28 

41.89 

165.38 

40.35 

5.9 

Quartermaster 

167.8 

33.23 

158.38 

34.29 

9.42 

This 

table 

shows that 

applying the optimal 

policy 


settings from the system with BOLC results in a decrease of 

78 



approximately seven accession training days per officer. 
All branches improved their average training time, with 
Signal Corps showing the greatest improvement and Adjutant 
General the least. 

Recall the mean accession training time returned from 
the simulation at the optimal policy settings is 202.30 
days. Running the baseline model at the optimal policy 
settings returns a mean accession time for all officers of 
179.10 days. Comparing the output from the two different 
models shows that adding BOLC to my simulated accession 
training system increased accession training time by 
approximately 23 days per officer. 


79 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


80 



V. 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


A. CONCLUSIONS 

Of the policies TRADOC has yet to publish, their 
decisions in regard to the maximum and minimum class sizes 
for a BOLC will have the greatest impact on the THS 

account. 

The model developed in this simulation is very 
sensitive to the immediate active duty ratio. The 

immediate active duty level should be set as low as 

feasibly possible. 

The BOLC branch ratio and the minimum OBC class size 
requirement are significant only in their interactions with 
other factors; alone they are not as important to the 
accession training system. 

When comparing the simulation output from the system 
without BOLC to the system with it, I found that 

implementing the new accession system added just over 23 
days of accession training time per officer to the 
simulated accession training system. It is important to 
note that this increase is based on a BOLC schedule that is 
uniformly distributed throughout the training year. It is 
possible that optimizing a schedule for the implementation 
of BOLC could create a significant decrease in the number 
of accession training days. 

B. RECOMMENDATIONS 

I recommend that the Military Forecasting and Strength 
Analysis Division, in their analysis and in their BOLC 


81 



planning and organization conferences with TRADOC, stress 
the importance of the maximum and minimum BOLC class sizes. 
As analysts from TRADOC and Army G-l explore policies 
regarding BOLC, they should give these policies extra 
consideration. Currently, TRADOC plans on class sizes of 
200; if training facilities permit, increasing class 
capacity as much as possible while keeping the minimum 
class quota for a BOLC to start would positively affect the 
THS account. 

I further recommend that before the implementation of 
BOLC, analysts optimize its schedule so that its impact on 
accession training time is minimal. An optimized schedule 
would handle the summer surge and the low traffic times 
better than the uniform schedule used in this model. 

C. FURTHER RESEARCH 

I have divided this section into three distinct 
subjects. In the first, I describe specific additions to 
the simulation that would more accurately represent the 
accession training system. In the next section, I discuss 
the transition of this problem from one of accession 
training time to an analysis of the cost versus the benefit 
of implementing optimal policies. Finally, I discuss 
changes to the analysis of this thesis that I would have 
liked to have implemented had time permitted. 

1. Improving the Simulation 

One significant area left for exploration in this 
problem is the addition of training areas to the 

simulation. As described in Chapter 2, 

82 


all accession 



training events are not equal. To simplify my model, I 
aggregated many of the possible training schools into the 
Thirty Day Training () event. This event simulated officers 
going to Airborne, Air Assault School and other courses. 
This is somewhat unrealistic, as these different schools 
have different recycle rates, different attrition rates, 
have varying travel times between their course and others, 
and have variable course lengths. 

I have designed the simulation code so that analysts 
can easily incorporate additional modules into the model. 
For example, one could easily incorporate a module for 

Ranger School. This training is important because a 
significant portion of combat arms officers attend the 

course prior to their arrival to their first operational 
assignment. Ranger School is a long, demanding course with 
high attrition and recycle rates. Explicitly including 
this course into the model would provide a more accurate 
picture of accession training time. 

Other modules that would help provide a more accurate 
reflection of accession training time are Airborne School 
and Air Assault School. Like Ranger School, a significant 
portion of officers from all branches attends these two 

schools. However, they are located at two different 

installations and have separate and distinct course sizes, 
recycle and attrition rates and course lengths. Conducting 
the appropriate research and incorporating a module for 
each of these schools individually would improve the model. 

2. Cost Analysis 


83 



Another important area of research would be in the 
area of cost analysis. This thesis has explored how 
different policy decisions affect the THS account. 
Extensions to this research would include comparisons of 
how many accession days a policy decision might save versus 
the cost of implementing the policy. Included in this 
analysis would be a study of the cost to the Army of having 
a 2LT in the accession training system for a single day. 
The product of this cost and the total number of man-days 
saved by a policy setting results in a measure of budget 
savings for the Army. Comparing this savings with the cost 
of implementing the policy is a natural extension of this 
problem. 

3. Changes to Current Analysis 

As I progressed through this problem, my analysis led 
me in some unexpected directions. Results from the 
simulation and from the response surface analysis pointed 
my efforts in other obvious directions that I wish I had 
time to pursue. 

The first of these areas would be a comparison by the 
different branches of the Army of the accession training 
time between the model with BOLC and without it. Recall 
that these are two separate simulations with different 
code. To streamline the simulation with BOLC, I removed 
the capability to easily distinguish between officers of 
different branches as they report their time spent in the 
accession training system. With additional time, I could 
return to the code and provide the capability to gather 
training time statistics based on branch. This additional 


84 



information could also provide insight into how the 
branches with a large number of officers per fiscal year 
effect the training system with BOLC. 

As I completed my response surface analysis, I found 
that a better response variable for my regression analysis 
would have been Days in Excess of Actual Training. This 
would include days spent in graduation delay, snowbird and 
travel time. This change would have made my loss function 
easier to understand: 

MDEATRE = Mean Days in Excess of Actual Training 
Regression Equation 

VDEATRE = Variance of Days in Excess of Actual 
Training Regression Equation 


E[Loss] = (MDEATRE - X) 2 + 22500(VDEATRE) 


The desirable target, x, in this case would be zero, as we 
would want no days of excess training. 

Changing the simulation code to capture this different 
response variable is a significant manipulation of the 
model. In the long run, the analysis might have been more 
descriptive of the cost to the THS account. However, 
changing the program to incorporate this change was not 
feasible in the time frame allotted to the thesis. 


85 



The final improvement to my analysis I alluded to in 
the text in Chapter 3. I decided to use a robust 
experiment design to capture the variance caused by 
uncontrollable variables in the system. However, when 
gathering parameter data about the Army's accession 
training system, I did not anticipate the use of a robust 
design. The robust design requires changing the input 
parameters of the uncontrollable variables to capture their 
effects on the variance of the response variable. 

Since I did not anticipate using a robust design when 
I wrote the simulation code, I failed to design flexibility 
for the uncontrollable factors into the simulation. Using 
replication made the robust analysis possible. However, 
had I made the code more flexible, I would have been able 
to specifically identify the degree to which each of the 
uncontrollable factors in the system affected the variance 
of the accession training time. 


86 



LIST OF REFERENCES 


Beans, Michael, "USMA Accession Data for ODCSPER BOLC 
Study ," paper presented at the Hoffman Building, 
Alexandria, Virginia, 20 November 2001. 

Binmore, K.G., Calculus, Cambridge University Press, 1983. 

Box, G.E.P, Hunter, W.G., and Hunter, J.S., Statistics for 
Experimenters, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1978. 

Bratley, P., Fox, B.L., and Schrage, L.E., A Guide to 
Simulation, 2d ed., Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 1987. 

Brown, S., "United States Army Reserve Training Seat 
Allocation Model," paper presented for Master's Thesis at 
the Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California, June 
2002 . 

Buss, Arnold, Simulation News Europe Issue 31, Basic Event 
Graph Modeling, pp. 1-6, April 2001. 

Buss, Arnold, Simulation News Europe Issue 32/33 Discrete 
Event Programming with Simkit, pp. 15-25, November 2001. 

Chilson, Clay S., Minimizing Army Cadet Temporary Duty, 

Master's Thesis, Master's Thesis, Naval Postgraduate 
School, Monterey, California, March 1998. 

Finney, R.L. and Thomas, G.B., Calculus, 2d ed., Addison- 
Wesley Publishing Company, 1994. 

Grant, J.M., Minimizing Time Awaiting Training For 

Graduates of the Basic School, Master's Thesis, Naval 

Postgraduate School, Monterey, California, March 2000. 

Hall, M.L., Optimal Scheduling of Army Initial Entry 
Training Courses, Master's Thesis, Naval Postgraduate 
School, Monterey, California, June 1999. 

Law, A.M. and Kelton, W.D., Simulation Modeling and 

Analysis, 3d ed.. The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 2000. 

Lindeman, Sara, Interview between Sara Lindeman, Accessions 
Branch, Army Personnel Command, Alexandria, Virginia and 
the author, 18 November 2001. 


87 



MathSoft Inc., S-PLUS 2000 Professional Release 1, Lucent 
Technologies Inc., 1999. 

Military Forecasting and Strength Analysis Division, Deputy 
Chief of Staff, Army G-l, Fiscal Year 2001 Gains Data, p. 
2, Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l, 5 March 2002. 

Military Forecasting and Strength Analysis Division, Deputy 
Chief of Staff, Army G-l, The Individuals Account Model, p. 
4, Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l, 22 May 2002. 

Rolland, C., "OCS Accession Data for ODCSPER BOLC Study," 
paper presented at the Hoffman Building, Alexandria, 
Virginia, 27 November 2001. 

Sanchez, S.M., P.J. Sanchez, and J.S. Ramberg, "A 
Simulation Framework for Robust System Design, " Concurrent 
Design of Products, Manufacturing Processes and Systems, 
edited by B. Wang, pp. 279-314, 1998. 

Schruben, L., "Simulation Modeling with Event Graphs," 
Communications of the ACM, v. 26, pp. 957-963, 1983. 

Sweetser, "Trainees, Transients, Holdees and Students(TTHS) 
Account," paper presented at the Hoffman Building, 
Alexandria, Virginia, 21 November 2000. 

Ulrich, J., telephone conversation between John Ulrich, 
Distribution Development and Programs Branch of the Total 
Army Personnel Command, and the author, 5 March 2002. 

Ulrich, J., telephone conversation between John Ulrich, 
Distribution Development and Programs Branch of the Total 
Army Personnel Command, and the author, 1 May 2002 

United States Army Cadet Command, ROTC "Class of 01" 
Accession Summary, pp 1-20, United States Army Cadet 
Command, 16 February 2001. 

Vonasek, D., email from Ms. Vonasek, Adjutant's Office, 
United States Military Academy, West Point, New York to the 
author regarding historical graduation delay data for West 
Point graduates, 5 March 2002. 



Yamada, Wade, email from Major Wade Yamada, Military 
Forecasting and Strength Analysis Division, Deputy Chief of 
Staff, Army G-l, Washington, D.C. to the author regarding 
model validation, 24 April 2002. 

Yamada Wade, email from Major Wade Yamada, Military 
Forecasting and Strength Analysis Division, Deputy Chief of 
Staff, Army G-l, Washington, D.C. to the author regarding 
model validation, 8 May 2002. 


89 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


90 



APPENDIX A. ACCESSION INPUT DATA 

This appendix contains tables that hold the i 
parameters used during the accession portion of 
simulation. 

WEST POINT INPUT DATA 


Table 6 


West Point Branch Graduation Rates 


Branch 

Min Rate 

Avg Rate 

Max Rate 

Infantry 

.190 

.220 

.250 

Armor 

. 128 

. 158 

.188 

Field Artillery 

.169 

.199 

.229 

Air Defense 

. 036 

.066 

.096 

Aviation 

.096 

. 126 

. 156 

Engineer 

.068 

.098 

. 128 

Signal Corps 

. 020 

. 035 

. 050 

Military Police 

.010 

. 020 

. 030 

Military Intelligence 

.010 

. 025 

. 040 

Chemical 

.001 

.003 

.005 

Adjutant General 

. 004 

.007 

.010 

Finance 

.001 

.002 

. 003 

Ordnance 

.005 

.011 

.017 

Transportation 

.010 

.017 

. 024 

Quartermaster 

. 007 

.012 

.017 





Table 7 . 


West Point Graduation Dates and Class Size 


Date 

Class Size 

22 December 

17 

2 June 

906 

27 June 

13 


Table 8. Ratios of Graduation Delay for West Point 

Graduating Classes 


Delay Category 

Min Ratio 

Avg Ratio 

Max Ratio 

Fifteen Days 

.0946 

.1067 

.1188 

Forty-five Days 

. 3256 

.3432 

.3608 

Seventy-five Days 

.4983 

. 5204 

. 5423 

Half-year Delay 

. 0220 

. 0297 

. 0374 

















OCS INPUT DATA 


Table 13. OCS Branch Graduation Rates 


Branch 

Min Rate 

Avg Rate 

Max Rate 

Infantry 

.193 

.223 

.253 

Armor 

.093 

. 123 

. 153 

Field Artillery 

. 071 

.101 

. 131 

Air Defense 

.080 

.110 

. 140 

Aviation 

.010 

.020 

.030 

Engineer 

.033 

.063 

.093 

Signal Corps 

. 046 

.076 

.106 

Military Police 

.012 

. 042 

. 072 

Military Intelligence 

.015 

. 033 

. 051 

Chemical 

. 057 

.087 

.117 

Adjutant General 

. 005 

.011 

.017 

Finance 

.001 

.003 

.005 

Ordnance 

.015 

.039 

. 053 

Transportation 

.013 

.043 

. 073 

Quartermaster 

.015 

.026 

.037 


Table 14. OCS Graduation Delay Data (Days) 


Min Delay 

Avg Delay 

Max Delay 

7 

14 

30 








APPENDIX B. BOLC INPUT DATA 


The appendix consists of tables that hold the input 
data used for the BOLC portion of the simulation. 


Table 16. General BOLC Input Data 


BOLC Course Length 

35 Days 

BOLC Min Class Size 

100 

BOLC Max Class Size 

150 


Table 17. BOLC Attrition and Recycle Rates 



Attrition 

Recycle 


Min 

Avg 

Max 

Min 

Avg 

Max 

Rates 

.0000 

.0016 

.0032 

.0000 

. 0050 

.0064 


97 





Table 18. 


BOLC Scheduled Start Dates by Installation 


Benning 

Sill 

Bliss 

27 December 

5 January 

23 January 

23 February 

2 March 

9 March 

16 March 

23 March 

10 April 

1 May 

14 May 

31 May 

11 June 

18 June 

25 June 

2 July 

9 July 

16 July 

23 July 

30 July 

6 August 

13 August 

20 August 

20 August 

20 August 

27 August 

3 September 

10 September 

17 September 

24 September 

1 October 

8 October 

15 October 

22 October 

8 November 



98 


APPENDIX C. OBC INPUT DATA 


Appendix C consists of tables that hold the input data 
for the OBC portion of the simulation. 


Table 19 


OBC Travel Data 


Branch 


Infantry 


Field Artillery 


Armor 


Aviation 


Engineers 


Air Defense 


Adjutant General 


Finance 


Signal Corps 
Military Police 


Chemical 


Ordnance 


Quartermaster 


Transportation 


Travel Days to... 

OBC Loc Ft. Benning Ft. Sill Ft. Bliss 


Benning 


Sill 


Knox 


Rucker 


Wood 


Bliss 


Jackson 


Jackson 


Gordon 


Wood 


Wood 


Military Intelligence Huachuca 


Aberdeen 


Eustis 



[SIS! 






Table 20. OBC Attrition and Recycle Rates by Branch 



Attrition Rates 

Recycle Rates 

Branch 

Min 

Avg 

Max 

Min 

Avg 

Max 

Infantry 

. 0000 

.0031 

.0063 

.0000 

.0094 

.0125 

Air Defense 

.0000 

.0056 

.0119 

.0000 

.0056 

.0119 

Adjutant General 

.0000 

.0000 

.0143 

.0000 

.0000 

.0143 

Armor 

.0000 

.0000 

.0108 

.0000 

. 0216 

. 0431 

Aviation 

.0000 

. 0395 

.0988 

.0000 

. 0395 

. 0790 

Chemical 

.0000 

.0000 

.0137 

.0000 

.0000 

.0068 

Engineer 

. 0000 

.0000 

. 0535 

.0000 

.0000 

. 0340 

Field Artillery 

.0000 

.0140 

. 0280 

.0000 

. 0280 

.0630 

Finance 

.0000 

.0000 

. 0545 

.0000 

.0000 

.0180 

Military Intelligence 

.0000 

.0000 

. 0317 

.0000 

.0159 

. 0370 

Military Police 

.0000 

.0167 

. 0333 

.0000 

.0027 

. 0476 

Ordnance 

.0000 

.0000 

.0196 

.0000 

.0000 

. 0392 

Quartermaster 

.0000 

.0000 

.0095 

.0000 

.0000 

. 0286 

Signal Corps 

.0000 

.0067 

. 0200 

.0000 

.0020 

.0040 

Transportation 

. 0000 

.0000 

.0032 

.0000 

.0000 

.0026 


100 














Table 24. Armor OBC Schedule 


22 January 

29 March 

22 April 

29 June 

15 July 

5 August 

30 August 

24 September 

19 October 

18 November 


Table 25. Aviation OBC Schedule 


3 October 

18 October 

1 November 

18 November 

3 December 

17 December 

14 January 

29 January 

12 February 

27 February 

14 March 

28 March 

9 May 

2 3 May 

9 June 

23 June 

8 July 

22 July 

5 August 

18 August 

3 September 

17 September 



Table 26. Chemical OBC Schedule 


3 January 

15 March 

31 May 

15 June 

2 August 

25 August 

14 September 

31 October 


Table 27. Engineer OBC Schedule 


3 January 

27 March 

24 April 

31 May 

12 July 

2 August 

28 August 

14 September 

11 October 

15 November 


Table 28. Field Artillery OBC Schedule 


6 January 

24 March 

2 0 May 

3 July 

10 August 

8 September 

11 October 



102 






Table 29. 


Finance OBC Schedule 


4 March 

1 August 

15 November 

Table 30. 

Infantry OBC 

Schedule 

14 January 

24 April 

15 July 

2 August 

7 September 

18 October 


Table 31. Military Intelligence OBC Schedule 


4 December 

8 March 

5 April 

10 May 

7 June 

4 July 

3 August 

8 September 

12 October 

15 November 


Table 32. Military Police OBC Schedule 


6 January 

27 March 

2 7 May 

16 June 

2 August 

14 September 

11 October 


Table 

33. Ordnance OBC Schedule 


6 December 

18 January 

20 March 

10 April 

17 May 

14 June 

19 July 

23 August 

22 September 

18 October 

15 November 



103 





Table 34. Quartermaster OBC Schedule 


29 November 

5 January 

21 March 

3 May 

5 July 

16 August 

18 October 



Table 35. Signal Corps OBC Schedule 


27 November 

5 January 

30 March 

13 May 

29 July 

25 August 

5 October 



Table 36. Transportation OBC Schedule 


1 December 

27 March 

13 July 

1 August 

28 August 

20 September 

25 October 



104 



APPENDIX D. EXPERIMENT DESIGN POINTS 


Appendix D contains a single table that depicts the ## 
different design points I use in the experiment. 


Desian Point BOLC Ratio 

Max BOLC Size 

Min BOLC Size 

IA Ratio 

Min Rea 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

1 

1 

1 

-1 

1 

3 

1 

1 

-1 

1 

1 

4 

1 

1 

-1 

-1 

1 

5 

1 

-1 

1 

1 

1 

6 

1 

-1 

1 

-1 

1 

7 

1 

-1 

-1 

1 

1 

8 

1 

-1 

-1 

-1 

1 

9 

-1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

10 

-1 

1 

1 

-1 

1 

11 

-1 

1 

-1 

1 

1 

12 

-1 

1 

-1 

-1 

1 

13 

-1 

-1 

1 

1 

1 

14 

-1 

-1 

1 

-1 

1 

15 

-1 

-1 

-1 

1 

1 

16 

-1 

-1 

-1 

-1 

1 

17 

1 

1 

1 

1 

-1 

18 

1 

1 

1 

-1 

-1 

19 

1 

1 

-1 

1 

-1 

20 

1 

1 

-1 

-1 

-1 

21 

1 

-1 

1 

1 

-1 

22 

1 

-1 

1 

-1 

-1 

23 

1 

-1 

-1 

1 

-1 

24 

1 

-1 

-1 

-1 

-1 

25 

-1 

1 

1 

1 

-1 

26 

-1 

1 

1 

-1 

-1 

27 

-1 

1 

-1 

1 

-1 

28 

-1 

1 

-1 

-1 

-1 

29 

-1 

-1 

1 

1 

-1 

30 

-1 

-1 

1 

-1 

-1 

31 

-1 

-1 

-1 

1 

-1 

32 

-1 

-1 

-1 

-1 

-1 

33 

0 

0 

0 

-a/4 

-1 

34 

0 

0 

0 

a/4 

-1 

35 

0 

0 

-a/4 

0 

-1 

36 

0 

0 

a/4 

0 

-1 

37 

0 

-a/4 

0 

0 

-1 

38 

0 

a/4 

0 

0 

-1 

39 

— a/4 

0 

0 

0 

-1 


105 



40 V4 0 

41 0 0 

42 0 0 

43 0 0 

44 0 0 

45 0 -a/4 

46 0 V4 

47 -V4 0 

48 V4 0 

49 0 0 

50 0 0 


0 0-1 

0 -a/4 1 

0 V4 1 

-a/4 0 1 

a/4 0 1 

0 0 1 

0 0 1 

0 0 1 

0 0 1 

0 0 1 

0 0-1 


106 



APPENDIX E 


MEAN ACCESSION TIME REGRESSION RESULTS 


The information below depicts the results of initial 
regression on the mean accession time. The first column is 
the list of factors and their levels, if any. The second 
column shows the coefficients associated with the factors 
and levels of the regression model. The final column is 
the resulting the p-values for all of the input variables. 
Highlighted rows are those terms that are significant to 
the model due to their corresponding p-value less than .05. 


Coefficients: 



Value 

Std. Error 

t value 

Pr (> 11 | ) 

(Intercept) 

353.6877 

4.3849 

80.6598 

0.0000 

BOLCRatio 

2.3220 

7.3972 

0.3139 

0.7536 

BOLCDiff 

0.4350 

0.0139 

31.3574 

0.0000 

MaxBOLC 

-2.2404 

0.0502 

-44.6648 

0.0000 

IARatio 

32.3183 

12.6704 

2.5507 

0.0109 

MinReq 

-0.7527 

0.4048 

-1.8593 

0.0632 

I(BOLCRatio A 2) 

-6.8143 

10.3748 

-0.6568 

0.5114 

I (BOLCDiff^2) 

-0.0021 

0.0001 

-29.5152 

0.0000 

I(MaxBOLC^2) 

0.0093 

0.0002 

38.8852 

0.0000 

I(IARatio A 2) 

0.7307 

24.9980 

0.0292 

0.9767 

I(BOLCRatio A 3) 

3.5283 

4.8865 

0.7220 

0.4704 

I (BOLCDif f^3) 

0.0000 

0.0000 

40.2954 

0.0000 

I(MaxBOLC A 3) 

0.0000 

0.0000 

-32.1701 

0.0000 

I(IARatio A 3) 

-0.9150 

16.5037 

-0.0554 

0.9558 

BOLCRatio:BOLCDiff 

-0.0125 

0.0077 

-1.6208 

0.1053 

BOLCRatio:MaxBOLC 

0.0198 

0.0088 

2.2409 

0.0252 

BOLCRatio:IARatio 

-1.1685 

1.9411 

-0.6020 

0.5473 

BOLCRatio:MinReq 

0.1062 

0.3140 

0.3381 

0.7354 

BOLCDiff:MaxBOLC 

-0.0009 

0.0001 

-7.7591 

0.0000 

BOLCDiff:IARatio 

0.0007 

0.0116 

0.0581 

0.9537 

BOLCDiff:MinReq 

-0.0050 

0.0019 

-2.6377 

0.0085 

MaxBOLC:IARatio 

-0.0395 

0.0133 

-2.9739 

0.0030 

MaxBOLC:MinReq 

-0.0071 

0.0022 

-3.2121 

0.0014 

IARatio:MinReq 

-0.4236 

0.4712 

-0.8991 

0.3688 


Residual standard error: 0.8009 on 1176 degrees of freedom 
Multiple R-Squared: 0.9758 

F-statistic: 2060 on 23 and 1176 degrees of freedom, the p-value is 0 


107 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


108 



APPENDIX F. VARIANCE REGRESSION RESULTS 


The information below depicts the results of initial 
regression on the variance of the grand mean. The first 
column is the list of factors and their levels, if any. 
The second column shows the coefficients associated with 
the factors and levels of the regression model. The final 
column is the resulting the p-values for all of the input 
variables. Highlighted rows are those terms that are 
significant to the model due to their corresponding p-value 
less than .05. 


Coefficients: 



Value 

Std. Error 

t value 

Pr(>|t | ) 

(Intercept) 

16.2346 

5.5671 

2.9162 

0.0070 

BOLCRatio 

1.2871 

4.0310 

0.3193 

0.7519 

MaxBOLC 

-0.3057 

0.0604 

-5.0610 

0.0000 

IARatio 

10.3076 

20.2818 

0.5082 

0.6154 

MinReq 

-1.2465 

0.6370 

-1.9568 

0.0608 

BOLCDiff 

0.1107 

0.0302 

3.6708 

0.0011 

I(BOLCRatio A 2) 

0.1414 

2.4197 

0.0584 

0.9538 

I(MaxBOLC^2) 

0.0014 

0.0003 

4.5574 

0.0001 

I(IARatio A 2) 

-19.0354 

39.9849 

-0.4761 

0.6379 

I (BOLCDiff^2) 

-0.0007 

0.0002 

-2.9184 

0.0070 

I(MaxBOLC A 3) 

0.0000 

0.0000 

-4.0939 

0.0003 

I (BOLCDif f^3) 

0.0000 

0.0000 

3.1745 

0.0037 

I(iARatio A 3) 

13.3448 

26.4083 

0.5053 

0.6174 

BOLCRatio:MaxBOLC 

-0.0108 

0.0136 

-0.7923 

0.4351 

BOLCRatio:IARatio 

-1.7823 

3.0494 

-0.5845 

0.5638 

BOLCRatio:MinReq 

0.1469 

0.4980 

0.2950 

0.7702 

BOLCRatio:BOLCDiff 

0.0125 

0.0122 

1.0257 

0.3141 

MaxBOLC:IARatio 

0.0148 

0.0205 

0.7257 

0.4742 

MaxBOLC:MinReq 

0.0112 

0.0033 

3.3668 

0.0023 

MaxBOLC:BOLCDiff 

-0.0001 

0.0002 

-0.8091 

0.4255 

IARatio:MinReq 

0.6115 

0.7469 

0.8186 

0.4202 

IARatio:BOLCDiff 

-0.0255 

0.0183 

-1.3935 

0.1748 

MinReq:BOLCDiff 

-0.0060 

0.0030 

-1.9926 

0.0565 


Residual standard error: 0.2587 on 27 degrees of freedom 
Multiple R-Squared: 0.8771 

F-statistic: 8.759 on 22 and 27 degrees of freedom, the p-value is 2.289e-007 


109 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


110 



APPENDIX G. FORMULATION OF LOSS FUNCTION 

MINIMIZATION 


Indicies - None 


Data 

bolcbrhi 

bolcbrlo 

maxbolchi 

maxbolclo 

minbolchi 

Minbolclo 

bolcdifhi 

bolcdiflo 

iaratiohi 

Iaratiolo 


- high setting used for the BOLC Branch 
Ratio factor (.85 [scalar]) 

- low setting used for the BOLC Branch 
Ratio factor (.55 [scalar]) 

- high setting used for the Max BOLC Class 
Size factor (250 officers) 

- low setting used for the Max BOLC Class 
Size factor (150 officers) 

- high setting used for the Min BOLC Class 
Size factor (100 officers) 

- low setting used for the Min BOLC Class 
Size factor (50 officers) 

- highest possible difference between max 
and min class size settings (200 officers) 
Size factor (100 officers) 

- lowest possible difference between max and 
min class size settings (50 officers) 

- high setting used for the Immediate Active 
Duty Ratio factor (.6 [scalar]) 

- low setting used for the Immediate Active 
Duty Ratio factor (.4 [scalar]) 


Variables 

Xi - BOLC Branch Ratio 

X 2 - Max BOLC Class Size [Continuous] (Officers) 

X 3 - Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size 


111 



[Continuous] (Officers) 

X 4 - Immediate Active Duty Ratio [Continuous] (Scalar) 

X 5 - Min OBC Course Size Requirement [Binary] 
Formulation 

Min ((354.5905 - 2.2755X2 + .4657X3 + 32.4646X 4 - 
.7491X5 - .OOO 9 X 2 X 3 - . 044 6 X 2 X 4 - .OIO 9 X 2 X 5 + . 0096X 2 2 - 
. 0025X 3 2 - . 00001245X 2 3 + . 00000 6855X 3 3 )-82.78 ) 2 + 

22500 (e <17- 7527 “ .3126X2 + .1380X3 - .9376X5 + .0120X2X5 + .0013X22 - 
.0011X32 - .000001821X23 + .000002629X33)^ 

Subject to 

X 4 > bolcbrlo (keep variable greater than low setting) 

X 4 < bolcbrhi (keep variable greater than high setting) 
X 2 > maxbolclo (keep variable greater than low setting) 
X 2 < maxbolchi (keep variable less than high seting) 

X3 > bolcdiflo (keep variable greater than low setting) 
X 3 < bolcdifhi (keep variable less than high setting) 

X 4 > iaratiolo (keep variable greater than low setting) 
X 4 < iaratiohi (keep variable less than high setting) 

X 2 - X 3 > minbolclo (*) 

X2 - X3 < minbolchi (**) 

X§ < minbolchi (keep variable less than high setting) 

X 5 element of {0,1} (keep variable binary) 

* Insure that the difference between the variable 
Maximum BOLC Class Size and the variable 
Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size is 
not less than the low setting for Min BOLC Class 
Size 


Insure that the difference between the variable 
Maximum BOLC Class Size and the variable 
Difference Between Max and Min BOLC Class Size is 
not greater than the high setting for Min BOLC 
Class Size 


112 



INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 


1. Defense Technical Information Center 
Ft. Belvoir, VA 

2. Dudley Knox Library 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 

3. MAJ Wade Yamada 

Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l 
Washington, DC 

4. LTC Doug Matuszewski 

Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l 
Washington, DC 

5. MAJ William Ratliff 

Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l 
Washington, DC 

6 . LTC Brett Floro 

Accessions Chief, Army Personnel Command 
Alexandria, VA 

7. MAJ John Ulrich 

Distribution Development and Programs Branch 
Alexandria, VA 

8 . Ms. Sara Lindeman 

Accessions Branch, Army Personnel Commmand 
Alexandria, VA 

9. CPT Erik Hovda 

Student, Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 

10. LTC Michael Beans 

West Point Liaison to Deputy Chief of Staff, 
Washington, D.C. 

11. Ms. Diane Vonasek 

Adjutant, United States Military Academy 
West Point, New York 


PERSCOM 


Army G-l 


113 



12. Professor Arnold Buss 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 

13. Colonel (Retired) Mark Lewis 
Director, DAPE-PR 

Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-l 
Washington, D.C. 

14. Professor Sam Buttrey 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 

15. Mr. Walter Hollis 
DUSA-OR 

Washington, D.C. 


114 



