® Automatic Rock Detection and Mapping from HiRISE Imagery 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


This system includes a C-code soft- 
ware program and a set of MATLAB 
software tools for statistical analysis and 
rock distribution mapping. The major 
functions include rock detection and 
rock detection validation. The rock de- 
tection code has been evolved into a 
production tool that can be used by en- 
gineers and geologists with minor 
training. 

The software takes as an input an 
image of a scene containing rocks and 
produces as output a description of the 
rock population and associated statistics. 
Each rock is described in terms of loca- 
tion, dimensions, and confidence of de- 
tection. The input parameters are the 
image resolution (ground sampling dis- 


tance, or the size of a pixel in centime- 
ters), the Sun incidence and azimuth 
angles for analysis of the shadows cast 
by rocks to derive individual rock mod- 
els, and a parameter than can be ad- 
justed to accommodate variations in 
image contrast. 

The software is able to process very 
large reconnaissance imagery using a 
standard desktop computer by automat- 
ically processing image blocks and col- 
lecting all output in a single rock popu- 
lation description file (RPDF). 
Processing time is in the order of min- 
utes for nominal HiRISE images cover- 
ing 6x12 km areas at 30 cm/pixel. 

The test option allows small portions 
of the large images to be selected and 


processed. Alternatively, a specific 
image window can be processed by in- 
dicating its coordinates and size. In this 
mode, visual results (detections over- 
laid on the images) are provided in ad- 
dition to the rock population file 
(RPDF). This option is useful to 
quickly allow verification of parameter 
settings, and the quality of the detec- 
tion results. 

This work was done by Andres Huertas, 
Douglas S. Adams, and Yang Cheng of Cal- 
tech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-45752 '. 


@ Parallel Computing for the Computed-Tomography Imaging 
Spectrometer 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


This software computes the tomo- 
graphic reconstruction of spatial-spec- 
tral data from raw detector images of the 
Computed-Tomography Imaging Spec- 
trometer (CTIS), which enables tran- 
sient-level, multi-spectral imaging by 
capturing spatial and spectral informa- 
tion in a single snapshot. The CTIS can 
be used for surveying planetary land- 
scapes through spectral imaging. It can 
also be used for battlefield surveillance 


and the spectral imaging of live tissues 
for disease detection. 

A Message Passing Interface Library 
(MPI) is used to parallelize the original 
serial version of the code without modi- 
fying its initial structure. By parallelizing 
the code, a speedup of up to 20 is 
reached by using 32 processors. The 
software does not use any third-party li- 
braries that require licenses. It is written 
in Fortran and MPI, and the storage of 


matrix elements is efficient, thus reduc- 
ing memory requirements. 

This work was done by Seungiuon Lee of 
Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
(see page 1). 

This software is available for commer- 
cial licensing. Please contact Karina Ed- 
monds of the California Institute of Tech- 
nology at (626) 395-2322. Refer to 
NPO-45831. 


Rock Segmentation Through Edge Regrouping 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Rockster is an algorithm that automati- 
cally identifies the locations and bound- 
aries of rocks imaged by the rover hazard 
cameras (hazcams), navigation cameras 
(navcams), or panoramic cameras (pan- 
cants). The software uses edge detection 
and edge regrouping to identify closed 
contours that separate the rocks from the 
background (see figure). The algorithm 
has applications both in ground-based 
data analysis, for example, to examine 
large quantities of images returned by the 
Mars Exploration Rovers, and in onboard 
(on-rover) opportunistic science applica- 


tions such as construction of rock maps 
during traverse, identification of unusual 
or otherwise high-value science targets 
that warrant additional investigation, and 
detection of certain types of geologic con- 
tact zones. 

The software uses gray-level intensity 
gradients to identify raw contours; these 
raw contours are then split into shorter, 
low-curvature fragments. New fragments 
are created where necessary to bridge 
areas of poor gradient information or 
poor image quality. The algorithm uses a 
flooding step to regroup the various 


fragments into closed contours. The al- 
gorithm is very fast with the C imple- 
mentation able to process (768x1024) 
images containing hundreds to thou- 
sands of rocks in approximately one sec- 
ond on a desktop workstation. 

The algorithm is particularly efficient at 
quickly detecting small- to medium-sized 
rocks with sufficient contrast (positive or 
negative) relative to the background. Full 
quantitative performance comparisons 
are not yet available; however, preliminary 
tests show that Rockster appears to detect 
a significantly larger fraction of rocks 


56 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2008 


