Cost Effective Measures to Reduce CO2 Emissions in the Air Freight Sector 



Magnus Blinge (Ph J).) 

TFK - Transport Research Institute, 

Vera Sandbergs Alle 8, 412 96 Goteborg, 

SWEDEN 

Tel: +46 31 772 51 65, Fax: +46 31 772 51 64, 
magnus.blinge(2ltfk:.se 



Abstract 



This paper presents cost effective measures to reduce CO2 emissions in the air freight sector. One 
door-to-door transport chain is studied in detail from a Scandinavian city to a city in southern 
Europe. The transport chain was selected by a group of representatives from the air freight sector 
in order to encompass general characteristics within the sector. 

Three different ways of shipping air cargo are studied, i.e., by air freighter, as belly freight (in 
passenger airaafts) and trucking. CO2 onissions are calculated for each part of the transport 
chain and its relative importance towards the total amount CO2 emitted during the whole 
transport chain is shown. It is confirmed that the most CO2 emitting part of the transport chain is 
the actual flight and that it is in the take-off and climbing phases that most ftiel are burned. It is 
also known that the technical development of aircraft impUes a reduction in fuel consumption for 
each new generation of aircraft. Thus, the aircraft manufacturers have an important role in this 
development 

Having confirmed these obsCTvations, this paper focuses on other factors that significantly affects 
the fiiel consumption. Analysed factors are, e.g., optimisation of speed and altitude, traffic 






managcmcni, ccngcsnon on and around &e airfields, tax^kering, "latest acceptance time" f< 
goods and improving the load factor. The different factors relative contribution to the total 
emission levels for the transport chain has been estimated. 



Keywords: C02, Air freight. Transport chain. Fuel consumption. Environment, Greenhouse 
effect 



Introduction 

Global warming is perhaps the most challenging task for our society to solve. In the Kyoto 
Protocol, under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), has 
most of the indxistrial coxmtries agreed to reduce their emissions of six greenhouse gases by 5 % 
from 1990 levels by 2008-2012. If this target shall be realised, it is likely that governments will 
put economic or legal pressure on the polluters. The aviation's share of the global CO2 emissions 
are still only 2-3 percent but it contributes to about 12 % of the worlds annual transport related 
CO2 emissions. Compared to the other means of transport is the air freight sector more exposed to 
ftiel price fluctuations. If there will be economic means of control in order to reduce the CO2 
emissions from the transportation sector it will influence the competitiveness of the air freight 
sector in a negative way. 

Fuel efficiency has traditionally been one of the most important issues for the aviation industry 
and impressive achievements has been made. Large resoxjrces are invested by aircraft 
manufacturers and research organisations to increase the fiiel efSciency even more in the ftiture. 
Due to the market forces is this development in fiill progress. There are, however, other parts in 
the transportation chain that can be improved. Many of these measures can be realised with better 
planning and improved information tools. Another barrier is the resistance against behavioural 
changes. The cost of these measures are often impossible to measure as the price for the 
transportation companies will be in terms of, e.g., lowered customer service levels. However, 
compared to the resources invested in technological improvements of the aircrafts fiael efficiency 
these behavioural and logistical measures are estimated to be low 

This paper aims at identifying cost effective measures to reduce CO2 emissions in the air freight 
sector. One door-to-door transport chain is studied in detail from a Scandinavian city to a city in 
southern Europe. With this method can the environmental "hot-spots" in the transport chain be 
identified. 

In spite of the fact that other factors, e.g., NOx, vapour and particulates are more aggressive 
greenhouse gases than CO2 is CO2 used as measurement for the global warming potential in this 
study. This is done as the primary scope of this paper is not to calculate the exact GWP for the 
transport chain, but to identify possible reduction possibilities. In most cases are the emissions of 
CO2 in the transportation chain proportional to the emissions of NOx and the other greenhouse 
gases. In the cases where there might be a coxmter effect, e.g., decreased fiiel consumption 
implies higher levels of NOx it will be discussed. 

Emission calculations are made in the PIANO-Harp model in cooperation with the Department of 
Aviation Environmental Research, FOI - The Swedish Defence Research Agency. Information 
about the logistic and terminal related issues was obtained by interviews of airport and air 
transport company personnel. 



Description of the transport chain 

One door-to-door transport chain is studied in detail from the city of Uddevalla in Sweden to 
Barcelona in Spain. The transport chain was selected by a groiq) of representatives from the air 
freight sector in order to encompass general characteristics within the sector. The same group 
defined the cargo characteristics for this study to 1 000 kg and 9.6 m3. The transport chain 
represent transportation by track, by freighter and by belly-hold in passenger aircrafts. 




The first segment of the transport chain is a truck transport in Sweden from Uddevalla to 
Goteborg. The truck has a maximum load weight of 26 ton and consumes 35 litres of diesel oil / 
1 00 km (2.86 km / 1). The load factor is assumed to be 70 % 

The second segment is an air fiidght transport fix)m Goteborg to Frankfint, Germany in a MD-1 1, 
frd^ter version. 



The third segment of the transport chain is from Frankfiirt to Barcelona, Spain. There are no 
flights with fireighters on this route; there are only passengers' flights that take the cargo by belly- 
hold. One of the most common aircraft operating this route is the Airbus 3 1 0. 



Table 1: 



Summary of C02 emissions from the studies transport chain 



Route 


Transport 


Vehicle/aircraft 


Load 


Distance 


Dur. 


C02/ton 


C02/tkm 


C02 




mode 




factor 


(km) 


time 
(min) 


(kg) 


(gram) 


total trip 
(kg) 


Uddevalla- 


Truck 


26 ton 


80% 


81 


60 


3 


0.04 


69 


Goteborg 
























60% 


81 


60 


4 


0.05 


64 


Goteborg - 


Air freighter 


MDll 


80% 


981 


83 


431 


0.44 


32 100 


Frankfiirt 
























60% 


981 


83 


531 


0.54 


29 600 


Frankfurt 


Passenger 


A310 


80% 


1 193 


99 


706 


0.59 


19 300 


Barcelona 


aircraft 






















60% 


1 193 


99 


908 


0.76 


18 600 


UddevaUa- 


Truck 


Max. load 26 


80% 


2 492 


2 340 


102 


0.04 


2 100 


Barcelona 




ton 




















60% 


2 492 


2 340 


127 


0.05 


2 000 



The calculations show that the fuel consumption increases if more cargo is loaded on the aircraft. 
However the environmental efficiency increases in terms of lowered CO2 emissions per 
transported ton cargo if the load rate increases and more cargo is transported in the same aircraft. 

It is also clear that a freighter is more efficient than belly cargo. This is however dependent on 
which allocation method that is used for the calculations. It can be argued that cargo transported 
in a passenger aircraft should only be allocated the emissions from burning the extra amoimt of 
fiiel consumed due to the extra weight of the cargo. This allocation model is called the marginal 
method. To highlight the methodological dilemma on how to allocate the total emissions from an 
aircraft transporting both passengers and cargo are the calculations above complemented with 
calculations on what the outcome would be when three different allocation methods are used; by 
weight, by volume and by the marginal method. 



C02EMrrrED BY SELECTED CARGO FROM UDDEVALLATOBARCELONADEPBfOINGON 

THE ALLOCATION METHQO, USMG TRUCK, MR FREIGHTBt M*D PASSBiGERS MR PLANE 

WTHETRF 



1986 



Ul ' 



O 




1444 




634 



BIO 




VOLUME {kg/m3) WBGHT (kg/ton) MARGNAL (kgrton) 
ALLOCATION METHOD 



D 60% LOAD FACTOR 



I 80% LOAD FACTOR 



Figure 1: CO2 from the studied transport chain, with the three allocation methods and 2 different load factors. 



The difference in results are significant and it stresses the importance of transparency when 
showing results from an emission analysis of a transport chain. It must be clearly defined what 
allocation method that is used and for what purpose the study is performed. 

If the emissions of CO2 fix)m air freight is compared to trucking it is clear that the truck shows the 
lowest figures. However, if a comparison is made in only the section Frankfint - Barcelona for 
the selected cargo with the marginal allocation method, some interesting figures come out to 
light. It can be noted fliat in this segment with an 80% load factor with 5ie marginal method there 
are 75 kg of CO2 produced per extra transported ton of cargo on an A310 passengers' aircraft on 
this route. On the other hand for the same segment using a truck with 80% load fector tiiere are 
55 kg of CO2 emitted. There is a difference of only 20 kg of CO2- With 60 % load factor on the 
truck is the corresponding figure 69 kg. What method to use in different analyses is a classical 
issue in LCA (Life Cycle Assessment) methodology and is not discussed in this paper. 

Some of the points that can be highHghted from the calculations are: 

• In the phases taxi out, take off, climb out and climb 2 are about 50% of the total CO2 
produced for the shorter route (981 km) and about 35 % for the longer (1 193 km). 

• The phase of cruise produces abut 40% respective 55 % of the CO2 . 

• The rest of the trip which is descent 2, ^>proach, landing and taxi in, produces about 10% 
of the CO2. 

• The 8 minutes of taxi for the MD-11 produces about 800 kg of CO2. Depending on air 
traffic, congestions on the airports, bad weather, and any kind of delays, the taxi times 
gena^y raise. According to some average taxi times (LFV, 2001) there is an average of 
26 minutes for tiie phases of taxi out and taxi in, which impHes about 2 500 kg of CO2. 



Measures to reduce CO. emissions 

There are two main areas of procrases in this logistic chain, there are activities outside and witiiin 
the airports. The first one, includes the delivery of goods fix>m the soider to the tmcking 
company if there is one, the transportation of the goods, and after tiiis the delivery to the airport 
tCTminal. The same would be on the other end of the transport chain, the pick up of goods from 
the airport terminal, is done directly by the receiver or by a trucking company, which later will 
deliver these goods to tiie receiver. 

The second area is the one in which all the activities are held inside the airport. Flights between 
origin and destiny airports, including loading and unloading of goods, handling and manoeuvring 
of the cargo, all tiie teclmical inspections and activities related to the maintenance of the aircrafts, 
flight operations, all the operations included in the turnaround, etc. 




Transport to the 
Airport terminal 



Area! 



HsmSutgatate 

AspoH 




Aspott 



Transport to tbe 
UJ receiver by L_> 
I I truck 

I t 



Receiver 



Area2 



Area! 



This paper is structured on what can be done in the different segments. 

Areal 

Beside the obvious measures of ensuring a high load factor on the distribution vehicles can the 
transport company and their customers affect the emissions of CO2 by supplying the air freight 
transporters with accurate information and time to plan the loading of the aircraft. This will 
reduce the risk of unbalanced and delayed freighters. 

Latest acceptance time 

The Latest Acceptance Time is the deadline that air transporters have to receive cargo from the 
customer. In modem logistics, where the forwarders offer their customers a high service level, 
there has been a trend towards short lead times and late acceptance time. It has become an 
important competition factor. Together with an increased security level on air traffic after 
September 11 this has put more stress on the terminal personnel. Nowadays some air 
transportation companies have 1 hour of Latest Acceptance Time for cargo but the ideal time 
needed in order to do an efficient balance and distribution is of 2 to 4 hours before departure. The 
shorter the Latest Acceptance Time, the less time to organize and distribute the cargo in an 
optimal way in the aircraft. The only way to correct this unbalance in the air is to compensate it 
by increased power on the engines. For the MD-1 1 studied in this paper there can be savings of 
up to 4 - 5 % of the total fiiel consxmiption. These figures varies from aircraft to aircraft but the 
principle is the same. 

Other reasons for imbalances are, e.g., the shape of the cargo or the container, special quahty 
demands on the cargo, inaccurate information from the customer about the volume or weight of 
the cargo. 

Delays 

The delays of air transportation causes extra emissions due to fiiel burned xmnecessarily. The 
delays can occur due to e.g., weather conditions, mechanical problems, late delivery of cargo. To 
give an idea of the impact of these delays in the amoxmt of emissions produced, it is estimated 
that German airports in 1999 burned 50,770 tons of fiiel due to delays which corresponds to about 
two percent of the fiiel bum of the entire Lufthansa Group fleet.. 

To get passengers and cargo to their destinations as punctually as possible and to avoid further 
delays, pilots often fly faster than the optimised cruise speed (see section Aircraft Cruise speed), 
which result in significantly higher fiiel consumption. Data on exact quantities has not been 
obtained. 



Area 2 

Handling at the airport 

Airport operatioiK in Sweden adds an extra 1.2 kg CO2 per passenger (LFV, 2001 ). This 
represents about 1-3 % of the total emitted CO2 depending on the flight routs. No data was 
available for the air freight sector separately but considering the facilities needed to supply 
service for passengers compared to handling the cargo it can be assumed that the additional CO2 
emissions for cargo handling at the airport is less than 1 %. 

Auxiliary power units (APUs) are engine-driven generators contained in the aircraft (usually in 
the tail) that provide the aircraft with necessary energy during the time the aircraft is at the gate. 
Part of the generated energy is used for air conditioning. As an alternative at airports, the required 
energy can be supplied by ground-based equipment that gains significant net saving of carbon 
emissions. Fuel used by APUs is only a relatively small part of the total fiiel use of an aircraft. 
British Airways estimates that the amount of fiiel used by an APU is less than 1 % of flie total 
fuel used by an aircraft. 

Taxi times 

The minimization of taxi times reduces the CO2 emissions. The taxi phases in most of the cases 
can be optimised by reducing its times and distances. It's been noticed that the normal taxi time 
can vary between 8 and 26 minutes, which means that there is a big area of opportunities to 
reduce the CO2 emissions. In the case of the freighter MD-1 1, for a load factor of 80%, the 
difference between making a taxi time of 8 and 26 minutes means 1,850 kg or about 5 % of CCh 
produced. This amount could be eliminated by having the appropriate systems for planning a 
shorter taxiing, by encouraging the control tower and the logistics personnel to make tiie shortest 
taxi routes for every operation. This taxi plan can be done in a more efficient way by designing 
appropriately from the beginning the airport, runwa>^ and the location of the gates and cargo 
terminals. 

Tankering 

Tankering is the extra quantity of fixel loaded into the airplane before the departure obeying to 
unexpected night circumstances. The obvious reason for this is safety. The pilot decides this 
amount basing this decision on his experience, load of the aircraft, weather conditions, 
destination, etc. Other factors that can affect fiiel costs and decisions on tankering include the 
following: 

• Genuine high fiiel costs because of expensive distribution infrastructure and local taxes 

• Fuel availability at some remote airports 

• Government-imposed fiiel pricing 

• Monopoly distribution of fiiel, which can involve cross-subsidies from large to small airports 
and expensive manpower practices 

• Concern over fiiel quality (e.g., water content) at particular locations 

• When limited aircraft turnaround time allows insuffidait time for refiielling, an aircraft may 
have to tanker to minimize the risk of losing slots. Problems in this area are enhanced at 
congested airports, where there may be linwtations in runway and/or terminal capacity. 



This extra fuel implies extra weight for the aircraft, which requires more fuel. Estimates from 
British Airways suggest that additional fuel bum as a result of tankering is on the order of 0.5 
percent of total aircraft fuel consumption. 

Aircraft 

One obvious factor that dramatically influence the CO2 emission is the technical standard of the 
aircraft. The oldest models in use consumes about twice as much fuel per passenger km as the 
most modem once. This development is ongoing and the aviation industry is continuously 
working on increasing the fiiel efficiency. The forecasts is that fuel efficiency will improve about 
40-50% more by the year 2050 (IPCC, 1 999). 

Flight altitude 

Even though the fuel consumption increases a couple of percent (4 % for a 1 500 km flight in a 
Boeing 737-800) when changing altitude from 37000 ft to 31000 ft, the total global warming 
potential (GWP) is likely to decrease due to less influence of NOx in ozone perturbations. Klug et 
al. (1996) claims an 80 % increase in GWP for flying on this altitude due to larger influence by 
NOx and vapour. 



Aircraft Cruise Speed 

A number of fuel-conscious airlines developed the concept of a long-range cruise (LRC) speed 
schedule. LRC was introduced as a compromise between maximum speed and the speed that 
provides the highest mileage in terms of km per kg of fuel burned in cruise (maximum range 
cruise, or MRC speed), taking some accoxmt of costs associated with flight time. LRC is defined 
as the fastest speed at which cruise fuel mileage is 99 percent of fiiel mileage at MRC. At the 
time LRC was introduced, it was not possible to fly at lower speeds, closer to MRC, because of 
the stability needs of the auto throttle and/or the autopilot. At speeds close to MRC, the auto 
throttle would continuously "hunt" which could give rise to an increase in fuel bum. 

Figure 7.6 shows the relationship between the difference in block time and the difference in fuel 
consumption for various cruise speed schedules such as constant Mach number, LRC, MRC, or 
ECON for the Boeing 747-400. Block time is the time between engine start at the airport of 
origin and engine stop at the airport of destination and thus block fuel is the fuel burned in this 
time. The data presented suggest that reduction of fuel use by further speed optimisation is likely 
to be small. 




5 10 15 20 

% Ddta Block Fad fhim LRC 



Figure 2: The effect of cruise speed dependent on block fuel and block time. ( ICAO, 1999). 



Improved Air Traffic Management 

There are congestion problems in some air routes. This occurs mainly because the distribution of 
the routes crossing the air spaces is not iq)dated and some of them are "great-circle roxites". It 
often happens that flie aircrafts do not fly in the shortest way to the destination, because they are 
obliged to follow the assigned route. Previous studies have calculated that inefBciencies in 
European Air Traffic Control, resulting in circuitous routings and sub-optimal flight levels, cause 
an increase in fuel bum and hence impact on the environment of between 6-12 pCTcent (AEA, 
2001), The solution for an improved global air navigation infrastructure is often known as the 
concept of integrating communications, navigation, and surveillance/air traffic management 
(CNS/ATM) systems. ATM systrais will tiierefore be developed and organized to overcome 
shortcomings previously discussed and to 
accommodate future growfli. 



Table 2: Projected fuel eflBciency improveinent in 2010 
from accelerated implementation of CNS/ATM systems. 
(ICAO Journal, 2001). 



Begiom 


Fuel 


NO^ 


COmaJMC 


Afiica 


6 


€ 


8-9 


Asia/Pacific 


6 


6 


17-19 


Europe 


10 


10 


14 


Latin America/Carftibean 


8 


8 


8 


MiddleEM* 


4 


4 


■ ■■j-_^- ■ .■ 


Nordi America 


10 


9 


16 


Global 


9 


8 


15-16 



The ineflBciendes that exist in aircraft operations around the airport teraiinal mean that aircraft 
spend significantly longer on the ^ound with their engines running than is necessary. It is 
estimated that at Heathrow alone there could be a saving in fiiel bum of 90,000 tonnes per annum 
through the introduction of advanced surface movement guidance and control system (A- 
SMGCS) and related ground management systems, such as improved surface management. This 
saving is roughly equivalent to one day of fiiel bum across the whole EC AC area (Arthur D 
Little, 2000), 

The projected fiiel efiBciency improvement in 2010 fix)m accelerated implementation of 
CNS/ATM worldwide is predicted to be about 9 percent. 



Discussion 

This pq>er aims at id^itifying cost effective measures to reduce the emissions of CO2 in the air 
frdght sector. It shows die results of an analysis of CO2 emissions for a transport chain based on 
air fi-dght. The calculations confirms that the most CO2 emitting part of the transport chain is the 
actual flight and that it is in the take-off and climbing phases that most fiiel are burned. It is also 
known that the technical development of airo^aft implies a reduction in fiiel consumption for each 
new generation of aircraft. The forecasts is that fiiel efficiency will improve about 40-50% more 
by the year 2050, Thus, the aircraft manufacturers have an important role in this development. 



There are also other strategies for mitigating the environmental impact of emissions ft^om aviation 
that could achieve environmental braefits through reduced fuel bum. These strategies include: 
optimising aircraft speed, reducing additional wdght, increasing the load factor, reducing 



nonessential fuel on board, limiting the use of auxiliary power units, and reducing taxiing. 
Airlines are already under strong pressure to optimise these parameters, largely because of 
economic considerations and requirement within the industry to minimise operational costs. The 
potential reduction in fuel bum by further optimisation of these operational measures is in the 
range of 2-6 percent, hnprovements in air traffic management could help to improve overall fuel 
efficiency by 6-12 percent. Other important factors identified are tankering and latest acceptance 
time which reduction potential are estimated to be about 5 % of the fuel consimiption for a trip. 

Most of the measures suggested are estimated to be comparably cost effective compared to the 
investments that are made to reduce the fuel efficiency of the aircraft and shoidd be regarded as a 
complement. Reliable data on costs for introducing these measures are lacking due to e.g., 
confidentiality, and vague connections between the direct costs and reduced market 
attractiveness due to lowered customer service level. , these measures can be realised with better 
planning and improved information tools. Another barrier is the resistance against behavioural 
changes. These issues are suggested to be addressed in future research. 

The analysis of the transport chain also shows the importance of choosing allocation method 
when emissions fi-om a passenger aircraft with belly-fi-eight shall be split between the passengers 
and the cargo. The result of a the study differs with a factor 3 between the different allocation 
methods. 



Acknowledgements 

I would like to thank the Master students Christian Larsson, Ernesto Vidaurri Gutierrez and 
Mauricio Perez Pena at Chabners University of Technology, Goteborg, Sweden who highly 
contributed to the empirical data collection for this paper. 



References 

AEA, 2001; Association of European Airlines Yearbook 2001, Brussels, Belgiimi, 2001 . 

Arthur D Little, 2000; Study into the Potential Impact of Changes in Technology on the Air 
Transport in the UK, Cambridge, UK. 

ICAO Journal, 1999; volume 54, number 7:1999. Demonstrated commitment to environmental 
protection is increasingly important for airlines, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, p 18,19,29. 

ICAO Journal, 2001; volume 56, number 4:2001. Operational measxires for minimizing aircraft 
fiiel consumption is of great importance to the world's airlines, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, p 
24,25,31. 

IPCC, 1999; IPCC Special report: Aviation and the Global Atmosphere, Report of IPCC 
Working Groups I and II. 



10 



Klug H. G. et al, 1996; CRYOPLANE - Quantitative Comparison of Contribution to 
Anthropogenic Greenhouse Effect of Liquid Hydrogen Aircraft versus Conventional Kerosene 
Aircraft, European Geophysical Society, XXI General Assembly, The Hague, The Netherlands, 
May 1996. 

LFV, 2001 - Luftfertsverket, Swedish Civil Aviation Administration, Norrkoping, Swedai 
www.lfv.se 



11 



