Configuration Management File Manager 
Developed for Numerical Propulsion 
System Simulation 

One of the objectives of the High Performance Computing and Communication Project's 
(HPCCP) Numerical Propulsion System Simulation (NPSS) is to provide a common and 
consistent way to manage applications, data, and engine simulations. The NPSS 
Configuration Management (CM) File Manager integrated with the Common Desktop 
Environment (CDE) window management system provides a common look and feel for 
the configuration management of data, applications, and engine simulations for U.S. 
engine companies. In addition, CM File Manager provides tools to manage a simulation. 
Features include managing input files, output files, textual notes, and any other material 
normally associated with simulation. The CM File Manager includes a generic 
configuration management Application Program Interface (API) that can be adapted for 
the configuration management repositories of any U.S. engine company. 

Guided by emerging desktop standards, a team consisting of NASA Lewis Research 
Center personnel and representatives from U.S. engine and airframe companies defined, 
developed, and implemented a standard graphical user interface windowing system for 
launching and administering simulations with configuration management access functions 
and file management tools. The NPSS CM File Manager contains a common windowing 
system based on CDE that contains the necessary tools an engineer requires for designing 
and analyzing engines. The software was developed following I. Jacobson's Object- 
Oriented Design methodology and was implemented in C++. 

In March and June of 1996, Lewis released beta versions of the NPSS CM File Manager. 
In September of 1996, Version 1.0, with documentation, was released to U.S. engine 
companies. 



Configuration Management ( CM) File Manager. (Application Program Interface, API.) 


The development of the NPSS CM File Manager provides U.S. aeropropulsion companies 
a common tool for creating and modifying engine simulations. Since the CM File Manager 
was built on a desktop standard (CDE), it is easy for engine companies to use, accept, and 
manage. In addition, U.S. engine companies could save millions of dollars by using 
standard analysis and design tools in precompetitive areas. 

During fiscal 1997, NPSS will accept enhancements and modifications to the CM File 
Manager. The modifications will be done by a third party that can provide long-term 
software support. 

Lewis contact: Gregory J. Follen, (216) 433-5193, gfollen@grc.nasa.gov 
Author: Gregory J. Follen 

Headquarters program office: OA (HPCCO) 



