REPORT DOCUMENTATION PA( 

Pubfic reporting burton for thli cohction oTMomolion k octinutod lo mngi 1 hourpor reoporto. IncUJng t» »m* lor 
noodod. «nd mo w ing Iho oolociion a «Hormtton San) commoret ragudng Mi burtwi ttsjlnus&s or my otfw oopoci o 
Hoadquortore Santa. Oiactorata lor Worniodon Cporebono and Rapom, 121S Jadaraon Dart Hearty. Suta 1204, Ai 
Monogwnont and Budgat. Woobmgwn, DC 20603. 


AD-A257 705 

I laaiaii n n... ___ 


WooNnpon 
0«eaoI 


33jraWIIS3gr 





August 1992 


TITLE AND SUBTITLE 


Ada Compiler Validation Procedures, Version 3.1 




7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESSES) 

Ada Joint Program Office 
The Pentagon, Rm 3E118 
Washington, DC 20301-3080 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESSEES) 

Ada Joint Program Office 
The Pentagon, Rm. 3E118 
Washington, D.C. 20301-3080 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY 
REPORT NUMBER 



13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

The certification body of the Ada certification system consists of the AJPO for overall direction, the Ada Validation 
Organization (AVO) and ACVC Maintenance Organization (AMO) for technical support, and the Ada Validation Facilities 
(AVFs) for performing validations. The Ada certification body operates in conjunction with the U.S. Department of 
Commerce, which has the responsibility of establishing and maintaining a certification system for the Federal Information 
Programming Standards (FIPS). The purpose of this executive summary is to provide only an overview of the Ada 
compiler validation process. Anyone who obtains services from the Ada certification body must understand the definition of 
terms and follow the more specific rules provided in the body of this document. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 


Ada programming language, Ada compiler Val. Capability, Val. Testing, Ada Val. Office, Ada 
Val. Facility, ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A, AJPO, Ada Compiler Validation Procedures, Ada 9X 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 
UNCLASSIFIED 


10. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

UNCLASSIFIED 


19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 
UNCLASSIFIED 


15 NUMBER OF PAGES 
1 


16. PRICE CODE 


20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

UNCLASSIFIED 


Standard Form 298, (Rev 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-128 


NSN 7540-01-280-550 





















Compiler Validation 
Procedures 


Version 3.1 
August 1992 




Ada Joint Program Office 
Room 3E114 
The Pentagon 

Washington, D.C. 20301-3081 






UNCLASSIFIED 


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


The purpose of this executive summary is to provide only an overview of the Ada com¬ 
piler validation process. Anyone who obtains services from the Ada certification body must 
understand the definition of terms and follow the more specific rules provided in the body 
of this document 

• Organization and Responsibilities 

The Ada certification body consists of the Ada Joint Program Office, (AJPO), the Ada 
Validation Organization (AVO), the AC VC Maintenance Organization (AMO), and 
the Ada Validation Facilities (AVFs). The AJPO, a component of the Department of 
Defense, establishes the policies of the Ada certification system, issues validation 
certificates for AVF-tested Ada implementations and registers Ada implementations 
that are un-tested by an AVF. The AVO provides the technical and administrative 
support required to operate the Ada certification system. The AMO provides the tech¬ 
nical and administrative support required to supply the Ada Compiler Validation Ca¬ 
pability (ACVC) for use in the operation of the Ada certification system. There arc 
five AVFs chartered by the AJPO to conduct validation (see Appendix G for points 
of contact). The Ada certification body works with the U.S. Department of Com¬ 
merce which has the responsibility for establishing and maintaining a certification 
system for the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS). 

• The Ada Compiler Validation Capability 

The ACVC is designed to demonstrate the compliance of an Ada implementation 
with the Ada Programming Language. Each new version of the ACVC test suite is 
available for at least six months before it is used for validation. The final ACVC ver- 
sionfor Ada83 is version 1.11. Version 1.11 will be used for validation until after the 
Ada9X ACVC is available. The AJPO will determine the expiration date of ACVC 
1.11 after Ada 9X has been adopted by ANSI. The AJPO will announce the expiration 
date at least six months in advance. 

Some test programs may contain test objectives which are irrelevant for a particular 
Ada implementation and may be declared inapplicable, in whole or in parts, for that 


I 


UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 


implementation. The grading criteria for each test and the ACVC User’s Guide, dis¬ 
tributed with the ACVC, provide information about the applicability of test programs. 
Some test programs are designed to make use of implementation dependent charac¬ 
teristics and must be adjusted according to instructions given in the ACVC User’s 
Guide. Tests may be withdrawn from the ACVC by the AVO when it is found that 
they am based on assumptions that need not hold true for all Ada implementations or 
that the test program does not meet its test objective. Any interested party may dispute 
a test program to the Ada Rapporteur Group, ISO WG9. An A VF Customer must dis¬ 
pute a test program only through an AVF. (See Sections 4.4,5.2.3,5.2.4 and Appen¬ 
dix B and C). The AVF customizes an ACVC for each Ada implementation which is 
validated by testing. An Ada implementation passes a given ACVC version if it pro¬ 
cesses each test of the customized ACVC and no test is failed; otherwise, the Ada im¬ 
plementation fails the ACVC. The ACVC is available to the public from the National 
Technical Information Service (NTIS) according to Department of Commerce poli¬ 
cies and rules for the payment of fees and for export control. The ACVC is also avail¬ 
able to customers of an AVF. 


♦ Validation by Testing 

There are well defined steps which must be completed by a customer and the Ada cer¬ 
tification body so that the customer obtains a validation certificate and a Validation 
Summary Report (VSR). These steps are: 


a. A formal validation agreement between the customer and an AVF is required to 
obtain validation services (see Section 5.1). 

b. Prevalidation which consists of customer testing, submission of results to the 
AVF, and the resolution of test issues (see Section 5.2). 

c. Validation testing performed by an AVF at a mutually agreed upon site (see Sec¬ 
tion 5.3). 


d. A Declaration of Conformance is completed and signed by the customer not later 
than at validation testing. A validation certificate will not be issued until a Dec¬ 
laration of Conformance has been completed (see Section 5.4 and Appendix A). 

e. A VSR is prepared by the AVF to document the validation by testing (see Section 
5.5). 

f. A Validation Certificate is issued by authority of the AJPO for a successfully - 

tested Ada implementation (see Section 5.6). 




□ 

□ 


DTTC QUALITY INSPECTBB l 


ii 


UNCLASSIFIED 


Distri bution/ 


Avail ability Cods* 
jAvaii and/or 
Special 


Olst 


8 


'I 


m 





UNCLASSIFIED 


g. An Ada implementation that fails one to ten ACVC test programs may be provi¬ 
sionally validated for a 12-month period. During this year, the Ada implementa¬ 
tion must be re-tested by the AVF and successfully pass the ACVC to obtain a 
validation certificate. (See Section 5.7.) 

• Validation by Registration 

An Ada implementation may be derived from one which has been validated by testing 
(a base implementation) when four conditions are true (see Section 6.2). These con¬ 
ditions provide an easy test for determining whether to proceed with a request to reg¬ 
ister an Ada implementation which was derived from a base implementation. A 
registration request must be submitted to the AVO in the form provided in Appendix 
D. The AVO will review registration requests for completeness and plausibility of in¬ 
formation. A registration request which is accepted by the AVO will be forwarded to 
the AJPO to be added to the public list of Ada implementations validated by registra¬ 
tion. A derived implementation loses its status of being validated if it is challenged 
successfully (see Section 6.7), upon expiration of the validation certificate of its base 
implementation, or when registration is revoked by the customer. A procedure is pro¬ 
vided for adjudication of a claim that the derived implementation fails the ACVC 
used to validate the base implementation (See Section 6.7-6.9). 

Three appendices have been added to this document Appendix C provides a descrip¬ 
tion of the Test Dispute and Resolution Process. Appendix D provides a standard 
form that will be used for submitting a registration request Appendix F provides 
Project Guidelines for the use of baselined Ada compilers. These guidelines are nor¬ 
mative for the DoD (United States) and optional for others. 


Hi 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. INTRODUCTION .1 

2. GLOSSARYOFTERMS.2 

3. ORGANIZATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES.7 

3.1 Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) .7 

3.2 The Ada Validation Organization (AVO).7 

3.3 The ACVC Maintenance Organization (AMO).8 

3.4 Ada Validation Facilities (AVFs).8 

3.5 ACVC Reviewers.9 

3.6 Fast-Reaction Team (FRT).9 

3.7 Customers.10 

3.8 Project Manager. 10 

4. THE ADA COMPILER VALIDATION CAPABILITY.11 

4.1 Versions.11 

4.2 Applicability of ACVC Test Programs .11 

4.3 Test Modifications.12 

4.4 Test Withdrawal .12 

4.5 Customization.13 

4.6 Passing the ACVC.13 

4.7 Availability.13 

5. VALIDATION BY TESTING .14 

5.1 Step One: Validation Agreement.14 

5.2 Step Two: Prevalidation.15 

5.2.1 Customer Testing.15 

5.2.2 Submission of Results.15 

5.2.3 Test Issues.16 

5.2.4 Test Issue Resolution .16 

5.2.5 Incomplete Prevalidations.17 

5.2.6 Successful Prevalidation .17 

5.3 Step Three: Validation Testing.17 

5.4 Step Four: Declaration of Conformance.17 

5.5 Step Five: Validation Summary Report.18 

5.5.1 VSR Production .18 

5.5.2 VSR Availability.19 

5.6 Step Six: Validation Certificate.19 

5.7 Provisional Validation.19 

5.8 Advertising Validated Status.20 

5.9 Certification Mark.20 

5.10 Ada 9X Transition Period.20 


iv 


UNCLASSIFIED 













































UNCLASSIFIED 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

6. VALIDATION BY REGISTRATION.21 

6.1 Result Profile.21 

6.2 Derived Implementations.21 

6.3 Registration Request.22 

6.4 Evaluation.23 

6.5 Registration.23 

6.6 Expiration of Validated Status.23 

6.7 Challenges.23 

6.8 Challenge Marie.24 

6.9 Challenge Test.24 

Appendix A. Declaration of Conformance.A-1 

Appendix B. Implementer Dispute Format.B-l 

Appendix C. Test Dispute and Resolution Process.C-l 

Appendix D. Registration Request.D-1 

Appendix E. Certification Marie.E-l 

Appendix F. Project Guidelines.F-l 

Appendix G. Points of Contact.G-l 

Appendix H. References.H-1 


v 


UNCLASSIFIED 


























UNCLASSIFIED 


1. INTRODUCTION 

The United States Department of Defense (DoD) sponsored the development of the 
Ada programming language and established the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) as 
part of an effort to support recognized principles of software engineering for a wide range 
of applications. In view of the well known benefits of standardization, the AJPO has estab¬ 
lished a certification system to prevent the proliferation of dialects of the Ada program¬ 
ming language and to encourage Ada implementations which conform to the [ANSI 83]. 
The Ada certification system rules of procedure and management address the validation 
of Ada implementations by testing and by registration. This document provides an oper¬ 
ational definition of a validated Ada compiler which is required by [DoD 91] and by the 
[FIRMR 87]. This version [3.1] pertains to the current validation process of Ada imple¬ 
mentation as defined by [ANSI 83], as well as its successor, informally known as Ada 9X. 
Subsequent revisions will reflect the Ada 9X transition policy and procedures for use of the 
Ada9X ACVC. 

The principals of the certification body of the Ada certification system consist of the 
AJPO for overall direction, the Ada Validation Organization (AVO) and ACVC Main¬ 
tenance Organization (AMO) for technical support, and the Ada Validation Facilities 
(AVFs) for performing validations. The Ada certification body operates in conjunction 
with the U.S. Department of Commerce which has the responsibility for establishing and 
maintainin g a certification system for the Federal Information Programming Standards 
(FIPS). 

It is important to note the scope and intent of Ada validation. Users of an Ada imple¬ 
mentation are cautioned that the purpose of validation is to encourage conformity of Ada 
implementations with the standard and that characteristics other than those specified by 
the standard, such as performance or suitability for a particular application, are outside the 
scope of Ada validation. Moreover, users are cautioned that the yardstick of conformity 
testing is the collection of test programs contained in the ACVC. Thus, conformity is mea¬ 
sured only within the limitation of these tests. 

A glossary of terms used in this document is provided in Section 2. Terms defined in 
the glossary are signified in the text of the document by bold print Appendices to this doc¬ 
ument provide examples of documents used in validation, a description of the test dispute 
and resolution process, project guidelines for use of baselined Ada compilers, current 
points of contacts, and references. 


1 


UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 


2. GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

Ada PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE: The language defined by reference [ANSI 83] or 
its successors. 

ACVC MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION (AMO): The part of the certification body 
that maintains the ACVC. 

ACVC Reviewers: A part of the certification body which provides technical expertise for 
ACVC development 

ACVC TEAM: The group that produces the ACVC under contract to the AMO. 

ACVC USER’S GUIDE: A document that explains the technical details of processing the 
test programs and evaluating their results. 

Ada COMPILER: The software and any needed hardware that have to be added to a given 
host and target machine to allow transformation of Ada programs into executable 
form and execution thereof. 

Ada COMPILER VALIDATION CAPABILITY (ACVC): The means for testing com¬ 
pliance of Ada implementations, consisting of the test suite, the support programs, 
the ACVC user’s guide and the template for the validation summary report 

Ada IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada compiler with its host machine and its target ma¬ 
chine. 

Ada JOINT PROGRAM OFFICE (AJPO): The part of the certification body that pro¬ 
vides policy and guidance for the Ada certification system. 

Ada Rapporteur Group (ARG): The Ada Rapporteur Group (ARG) is a subgroup of ISO- 
IEC/JTC1/SC22/WG9, the International Standards Organization Working Group for 
Ada. Members of the ARG are appointed by the convener of the ISO working group 
for the purpose of resolving issues with respect to the interpretation of the Ada pro¬ 
gramming language. 

Ada VALIDATION FACILITY (AVF): The part of the certification body that carries 
out the procedures required to establish the compliance of an Ada implementation. 

Ada VALIDATION ORGANIZATION (AVO): The part of the certification body that 
provides technical guidance for operations of the Ada certification system. 


2 


UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


ADAPTIVE MAINTENANCE: [ANSI/IEEE 90] Maintenance performed to make a soft¬ 
ware product usable in a changed environment 

APPLICABLE ACVC TEST: A test that is neither inapplicable nor withdrawn. Compare 
with inapplicable test program and withdrawn test program. 

BASE IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada implementation that was validated by testing 
(see Section 5). 

BASELINE: [IEEE 90] A specification or product that has been formally reviewed and 
agreed upon, that thereafter serves as the basis for further software development or 
maintenance work, that can be changed only through formal change procedures. (See 
Appendix F). 

CERTIFICATION BODY: [ISO/IEC 86] An impartial body, governmental or non-gov¬ 
ernmental, possessing the necessary competence and reliability to operate a certifica¬ 
tion system, and in which the interests of all parties concerned with the functioning 
of the system are represented. 

CERTIFICATION MARK: A mark which may be used only on products directly asso¬ 
ciated with the Ada compiler for which the certification mark was awarded. 

CERTIFICATION SYSTEM: [ISO/IEC 86] A system having its own rules of procedure 
and management for carrying out conformity certifications. 

COMPLIANCE of an Ada IMPLEMENTATION: The ability of the implementation to 
pass an ACVC version. [Note: For the purposes of this document, compliance is a 
practical measure of conformity.] 

COMPUTER SYSTEM: [IEEE 90] A system containing one or more computers and as¬ 
sociated software. 

CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT: [IEEE 90] A discipline applying technical and 
administrative direction and surveillance to: identify and document the functional and 
physical characteristics of a configuration item, control changes to those characteris¬ 
tics, record and report change processing and implementation status, and verify com¬ 
pliance with specific requirements. (See Appendix F). 

CONFORMITY: [ISO/IEC 86] Fulfillment by a product, process or service of all require¬ 
ments specified. [Note: Also see Section 1.1.2 in the ANSI/MEL-STD-1815A] 

CONFORMITY TESTING: The process described in Section 5 of this document 


3 


UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


CORRECTIVE MAINTENANCE: [ANSI/IEEE 90] Maintenance performed specifical¬ 
ly to overcome existing faults. 

CUSTOMER: An individual or corporate entity who enters into an agreement with an 
AVF that specifies the terms and conditions for AVF services (of any kind) to be per¬ 
formed. 

CUSTOMIZED TEST SUITE: The AC VC tests, adjusted as necessary, that must be used 
for a given Ada implementation (see Section 4 J). 

DECLARATION of CONFORMANCE: A formal statement from a customer assuring 
that conformity is realized or attainable on the Ada implementation for which vali¬ 
dation status is requested, [see Appendix A for the format of a declaration of con¬ 
formance.] 

DERIVED IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada implementation that was obtained from a 
base implementation that has a current validation certificate (see Section 6). 

FAIL AN ACVC VERSION: The Ada implementation fails one or more test of the cus¬ 
tomized test suite. 

FAST REACTION TEAM (FRT): The part of the certification body that provides ex¬ 
pertise for the expeditious resolution of test issues. (See Appendix C). 

HOST MACHINE: [IEEE90] (1) A computer used to develop software intended for an¬ 
other computer, (contrast with Target Machine(l)) (2) A computer used to emulate 
another computer. (3) The computer on which a program or file is installed. (4) In a 
computer network, a computer that provides processing capabilities to users of the 
network. 

INAPPLICABLE TEST: A test that contains one or more test objectives found to be ir¬ 
relevant for the given Ada implementation. 

INSTRUCTION SET: [IEEE90] The complete set of instructions recognized by a given 
computer or provided by a given programming language. 

KERNEL: [IEEE90] (1) That portion of an operating system that is kept in main memory 
at all times. (2) A software module that encapsulates an elementary function or func¬ 
tions of a system. 

OPERATING SYSTEM: [IEEE90] A collection of software, firmware, and hardware el¬ 
ements that controls the execution of computer programs and provides such services 


4 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


as computer resource allocation, job control, input/output control, and file manage¬ 
ment in a computer system. 

PASS AN ACVC VERSION: No test of the customized test suite is failed. 

PERFECTIVE MAINTENANCE: [ANSI/IEEE 90] Maintenance performed to improve 
performance or maintainability. 

PREVALIDATION TESTING: Processing of an appropriately customized test suite by 
the customer. 

PROJECT COMPILER A validated Ada compiler that is baselined for a project in ac¬ 
cordance with applicable configuration management practices. A project compiler 
may be used for the life of the project (see Appendix F). 

PROVISIONAL VALIDATION CERTIFICATE (PVC): Issued by authority of the 
AJPO for tested Ada implementations that fails an ACVC version. (See Section 5.7.) 

REGISTRATION REQUEST: A formal request for extension of validated status to a de¬ 
rived implementation. (See Appendix D for the required form). 

RESULT PROFILE: The result of processing the customized test suite according to giv¬ 
en evaluation criteria (see Section 6). 

SOFTWARE MAINTENANCE: [ANSI/IEEE 83] Modification of a software product af¬ 
ter delivery to correct faults, to improve performance, or to adapt the product to a 
changed environment 

TARGET MACHINE: [IEEE90] (1) The computer on which a program is intended to run. 
(2) A computer being emulated by another computer. 

TARGET RUN-TIME SYSTEM: The set of sub-programs that may be invoked by link¬ 
ing, loading, and executing object code generated by an Ada compiler. If these sub¬ 
programs use or depend upon the services of an operating system, then the target 
run-time system includes those portions of that operating system. 

TEST ISSUE: Any problem arising during validation (see Section 5.2.3). 

VALIDATION: The process of checking the conformity of an Ada compiler to the Ada 
programming language and of issuing a certificate for the implementation. 

VALIDATED Ada IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada implementation that has been vali¬ 
dated successfully either by AVF testing (see Section 5) or by registration (see Section 
6 ). 


5 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


VALIDATED Ada COMPILER: The compiler of a validated Ada implementation. 

VALIDATION CERTIFICATE (VC): Issued by authority of the AJPO for tested Ada 
implementations that pass an AC VC version. 

VALIDATION SUMMARY REPORT (VSR): A report produced by an AVF containing 
results that are observed from testing a specific Ada implementation or grouping of 
Ada implementations. 

WITHDRAWN TEST: A test found to be incorrect and not used in conformity testing. 
A test may be incorrect because it has an invalid test objective, fails to meet its test 
objective, or contains erroneous or illegal use of the Ada programming language. 


UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


3. ORGANIZATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

This section specifies the role of organizations which form the certification body, of 
customers who receive service from them, and of project managers who use Ada imple¬ 
mentations to develop or maintain software. 


3.1 Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) 

The AJPO establishes the policies of the certification system by: 

a. setting validation standards to be followed by all AVFs; 

b. establishing the conditions for issuance, the life, and the scope of a validation 
certificate; 

c. establishing the schedule for issuing versions of the ACVC; 

d. approving the release of an ACVC version; 

e. designating members of the certification body; 

f. resolving issues that may arise during validation when these issues can not be 
resolved through the best efforts of the AVO and AVF; 

g. maintaining the official lists of validated Ada implementations; and 

h. issuing documents pertaining to validation. 


3.2 The Ada Validation Organization (AVO) 

The AVO provides the technical and administrative support required to operate the cer¬ 
tification system by: 

a. advising the AJPO and AVFs concerning requirements for modification to the 
validation procedures; 

b. resolving issues that may arise during the validation process; 

c. reviewing all Validation Summary Reports (VSRs) prepared by AVFs; 

d. recommending to the AJPO issuance of a validation certificate for Ada imple¬ 
mentations validated by testing (see Section 5) and the registration of derived 
implementations (see Section 6); 


7 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


e. participating in the ACVC quality control and configuration management pro¬ 
cess; 

f. deciding on the withdrawal of test programs from the ACVC version that is 
being used for validation; and 

g. convening meetings of the members of the certification body at appropriate 
intervals to discuss the validation process and to evaluate practices. 

3.3 The ACVC Maintenance Organization (AMO) 

The AMO and its ACVC Team provide the technical and administrative support re¬ 
quired to supply the ACVC for use in the operation of the certification system by: 

a. producing an ACVC version according to a schedule established by the AJPO; 

b. performing ACVC quality control and configuration management; 

c. distributing an ACVC version to AVFs and the AVO; 

d. distributing an ACVC version to the U.S. National Technical Information Ser¬ 
vice (NTIS), a service of the U.S. Department of Commerce, for further distri¬ 
bution to the public; and 

e. providing information to the public concerning the test objectives and number of 
test programs in each version of the test suite, and other information that pro¬ 
motes a public awareness of the test suite and evaluation criteria. 

3.4 Ada Validation Facilities (AVFs) 

An AVF is chartered by the AJPO to conduct validation by: 

a. adhering to validation procedures approved by the AJPO; 

b. producing the VSR; 

c. forwarding unresolved test issues to the AVO for review and analysis, with final 
resolution to be provided by the AJPO, if necessary; 

d. providing advice on a customer’s registration request for a derived Ada imple¬ 
mentation; and 

e. striving to satisfy national accreditation criteria. 


8 


UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 


The AJPO may issue an AVF charter to an organization that has been recognized as an 
accredited testing laboratory by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST). The AJPO may issue a charter to an organization lo¬ 
cated in a country which has a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the U.S. gov¬ 
ernment covering the chartering of AVFs, according to the rules specified in the MoU. An 
AVF charter may remain in effect indefinitely; however, a charter can be revoked by the 
AJPO, at any time, for due cause. The AJPO may direct an impartial body to conduct an 
audit at any time or prior to issuing an AVF charter. Audits are conducted in accordance 
with procedures established by the AJPO at the time of the audit and are tailored to reflect 
the purpose of the audit. 


3.5 AC VC Reviewers 

The AC VC Reviewers is the group chartered by the AJPO to address quality and con¬ 
figuration management issues by: 

a. assisting in refining overall testing philosophy and priorities for test coverage; 

b. providing expert technical review of the test objectives and tests during their 
development; 

c. ensuring that advances in the interpretation of the Ada Programming Lan¬ 
guage are reflected appropriately in the test objectives; 

d. providing liaison between the certification system and the ISO Working Group 
for the Ada Standard (i.e. ISO-IEC/JTC1/SC22/WG9). 

e. reviewing and acting upon comments received from compiler vendors and other 
interested parties. 

Accordingly, the ACVC Reviewers cooperate closely with the AVO and the AMO. In 
particular, the ACVC Reviewers monitor the resolution of test program disputes (see Sec¬ 
tion 5.2.3). 

3.6 Fast-Reaction Team (FRT) 

The Fast-Reaction Team is a small group of Ada language experts who advise the 
AVO on complex test issues by: 


9 


UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


a. assisting the AVO to issue a decision to the customer and AVF in a timely man¬ 
ner, and, 

b. contributing to ISO Working Group 9 language issue resolution. 


3.7 Customers 

Customers are serviced by the Ada certification body in matters concerning Ada val¬ 
idation. In requesting services of the Ada certification body, customers are to provide ac¬ 
curate and complete information to perform validation, to register derived Ada 
implementations, or to obtain other services. 


3.8 Project Manager 

Project managers are responsible for the acquisition of an Ada compiler that is vali¬ 
dated according to the procedures set forth in this document The Ada compiler selected 
for software development or for maintenance of existing software should be baselined as 
a project configuration item which will be controlled by the project configuration man¬ 
agement process. A project manager should also obtain a copy of the ACVC used to val¬ 
idate the project compiler so as to periodically test it if customizing changes have been 
made. The project manager may perform the ACVC testing or obtain these services from 
an AVF. With good management practices, a project manager plays an important role in 
preventing the proliferation of dialects of the Ada programming language. 


10 


UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


4. THE ADA COMPILER VALIDATION CAPABILITY 

The AC VC is designed to demonstrate the conformity of an Ada implementation 
with the standard. The ACVC is distributed as a collection of test programs, support pro¬ 
grams which facilitate processing the tests, and an ACVC User’s Guide that explains the 
criteria for evaluating the results. 

With Ada 9X there will be a shift toward tests for expected usage of the language. Tests 
that reflect fringes of the language in terms of usage, or that reflect pathological, remote 
occurrences will be removed. This will permit the elimination of some existhg test pro¬ 
grams so that coverage of additional features can be achieved while maintaining, or even 
reducing, the size of the ACVC. The objective is to place strict limits on the size of all fu¬ 
ture versions of the ACVC. 


4.1 Versions 

A new ACVC version is released periodically according to a schedule which is deter¬ 
mined by the AJPO. Each new version incorporates changes to the ACVC as determined 
necessary by the AJPO. These changes are made in order to reflect a revision of the stan¬ 
dard, to incorporate ISO WG9 interpretations, and to address implementer or user com¬ 
ments. The test objectives for each new ACVC version will be available for public review 
and comment before test programs have been implemented. Comments on test objectives 
should be submitted to the ACVC Reviewers who will recommend action to the AJPO af¬ 
ter consultation with the ACVC Team, AMO, and the AVO. 

The final ACVC for Ada 83 is version 1.11. This version will be used for validation 
testing until after the Ada 9X ACVC is available. The expiration date for ACVC 1.11 will 
be announced well in advance by the AJPO. Each new ACVC version will be available to 
the public and AVF customers at least six months in advance of the date when it will be 
used in validation. 


42 Applicability of ACVC Test Programs 

Each ACVC test program has one or more test objectives which are described in a com¬ 
ment in the test program. Some test objectives might address language features that are not 
required to be supported by every Ada implementation (e.g., “check floating-point oper- 

11 


UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


adons for digits 18”). These test programs generally contain an explicit indication of their 
applicability and the expected behavior of Ada implementations for which they do not ap¬ 
ply. The determination of applicability is made according to the grading criteria in the 
ACVC or as a ruling by the AVO. All applicable test programs must be processed and 
passed according to the specified grading criteria. 


4.3 Test Modifications 

The certification body strives to apply the ACVC as uniformly as practical to all Ada 
implementations. In order to apply common test objectives that depend on implementation 
dependent characteristics (e.g., line lengths and numeric types), many test programs must 
be adjusted to a given implementation following the procedures given in the ACVC User’s 
Guide. These adjustments consist of the insertion of implementation dependent values in 
certain test programs at places prescribed by the ACVC. 

In addition to the anticipated test modifications, other changes may be required in order 
to remove conflicts between a test program and implementation dependent characteristics 
(e.g., the algorithm for recovering from syntax errors). The allowable changes for each Ada 
implementation are determined by an AVF after consultation with the AVO, except in the 
case of error-recovery problems which an AVF may address without consultation. 


4.4 Test Withdrawal 

In any ACVC version, it is possible that a test program is based on assumptions which 
need not hold true for all Ada implementations or that a test program does not meet its 
objective. In these cases, the AVO may issue a correction to the evaluation criteria in the 
ACVC User’s Guide or the test program may be withdrawn from that version of the test 
suite. Any interested party may challenge a test program by sending a rationale for the chal¬ 
lenge to the Ada Rapporteur Group (see appendix G for the address). The AVO will with¬ 
draw a test program from the current version of the test suite when the Ada Rapporteur 
Group has accepted the challenged test for extended resolution. When an AVF customer 
is preparing for validation, the customer must challenge a test program only through an 
AVF by asking for a review of its evaluation criteria or for its withdrawal. The form for 
submitting a challenge is provided in Appendix B. 


12 


UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


4.5 Customization 

A customized test suite is produced by the AVF for each Ada implementation that is 
a candidate for validation. This customization always consists of removing withdrawn 
tests and in making required modifications to test and support programs; and, it may in¬ 
clude removal of some inapplicable tests, when detailed rules for them are provided in the 
ACVC User’s Guide. 

4.6 Passing the ACVC 

An Ada implementation passes a given ACVC version if it processes each test of the 
customized test suite in accordance with grading criteria, whether the test is applicable or 
inapplicable: otherwise, the Ada implementation fails the ACVC. 


4.7 Availability 

The ACVC is available to the general public from the NTIS according to U.S. Depart¬ 
ment of Commerce policies and rules for payment of fees and for export controL The 
ACVC is also available to a customer of an AVF from that AVF. It should be noted that 
the distribution of the ACVC may be subject to the nominal export restrictions as detailed 
by laws of the U.S. and other countries. 


13 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


5. VALIDATION BY TESTING 

There are six steps which must be completed by a customer and the certification body 
so that the customer obtains a validation certificate and a VSR. The same ACVC version 
must be used to complete the steps described in this section. The ACVC version used for 
validation testing must be the current one: there is no exception to this rule. The AVF must 
be able to begin validation testing the Ada implementation at the customers site before 
the current ACVC version expires or else validation with that ACVC version will not be 
allowed. Anyone intending to obtain a validation certificate should contact an AVF with¬ 
out delay for advice on the handling of the ACVC, on interpretation of the test grading cri¬ 
teria, and on the operational details of that AVF’s management practices. 


5.1 Step One: Validation Agreement 

In order to obtain services from the certification body, an interested party must become 
a customer of an AVF by reaching a formal agreement This agreement should address the 
following topics: 

a. identification of the Ada implementation to be tested and the ACVC version to 
be used; 

b. a statement of work, including analysis of prevalidation testing, validation, 
and preparation of the VSR; 

c. the format of data to be exchanged; 

d. a schedule of events and the site of validation; 

e. financial arrangements; 

f. retention of records; 

g. AVF liability; and 

h. confidentiality of validation information. 

The schedule for events, deliverables, and payments should take into account the fact 
that certain steps in the validation process require interaction with other members of the 
certification body (i.e., AVO or AJPO). The AVF will put forth its best effort to keep con¬ 
fidential a customer’s intent to obtain a validation certificate and the projected schedule 
for validation. This confidentiality will not be allowed to interfere with the normal review 
procedures of validation. If the customer requests confidentiality for reasons of national 


14 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


security, the customer will provide to the AVF an official statement of the security level 
that applies to the validation, and the AVF will obtain further guidance from the AJPO. 


5.2 Step Two: Prevalidation 

The requirements of this step are discussed separately so that the customer understands 
the interaction that is required with an AVF. 


5.2.1 Customer Testing 

After entering into a formal agreement, the customer provides the necessary informa¬ 
tion for the AVF to prepare a customized test suite or, the customer may prepare a cus¬ 
tomized test suite according to instructions in the ACVC user’s guide. The customer then 
processes all the tests in this customized test suite using the candidate Ada implementa¬ 
tion or another Ada implementation which produces the same result If the implementa¬ 
tion provides for options in the way programs are processed, then the same set of options 
must be chosen for all test programs, with the possible exception of an option controlling 
the production of information output. Any other exception constitutes a test issue which 
must be resolved with the AVF (see Section 5.2.3). Test issues should be sent to the AVF 
for analysis as soon as they are known. 


5.2.2 Submission of Results 

Upon completion of testing, the customer delivers the complete set of results in the 
agreed format to the AVF. These results are accompanied by the following information: 

a. a list of test programs which the customer claims are inapplicable, together with 
an explanation for these claims; 

b. a list of test programs which are disputed but not withdrawn (see Section 4.4) 
together with explanations (see Appendix B for format); 

c. an annotated sample command script; 

d. the complete set of option settings used for processing the customized test suite, 
including the default settings; and 


15 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


e. complete and current documentation for implementation dependent characteris¬ 
tics as required in the VSR. 


5.23 Test Issues 

A test issue may be any of the following: 

a. a missing or incomplete result to a test; 

b. a result presented in an inadequate form; 

c. a disagreement between the customer and the AVF as to the interpretation of a 
result; 

d. a change in the choice of options to be used during testing; 

e. a result which makes the Ada implementation fail the ACVC according to the 
current grading criteria; or 

f. an implementation dependent characteristic that may affect the conformity of 
the Ada implementation. 

The material submitted by the customer is analyzed by the AVF and test issues re¬ 
solved. If the AVF and the customer cannot agree on a way to resolve a test issue, the issue 
will be referred to the AVO for a resolution (see Section 5.2.4). It may be justified to leave 
a test issue unresolved at prevalidation. For example, it may be impossible to check the 
processing of control characters by inspecting printed results. The AVF will note these un¬ 
resolved issues and describe the results which will be expected during validation testing. 
It is also possible that the customer information provided for production of the customized 
test suite (see Section 5J2.1) was insufficient so that corrections to the customized test 
suite must be made and additional processing will be required. 


5.2.4 Test Issue Resolution 

A customer may challenge the applicability or correctness of any particular ACVC test 
program. Such challenges should be presented to the AVF in the test-dispute format (see 
Appendix B). The AVF will forward challenges to the AVO for resolution; the AVO will 
strive to rule on the challenge within two weeks of receiving it The AVO will forward all 
challenges and rulings to die ACVC Reviewers, AMO and the ACVC Team. (See Appen¬ 
dix C for a description of the Test Dispute and Resolution Process.) 


16 


UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


5.2.5 Incomplete Prevalidations 

The AVF and the customer may agree that, at the customer’s risk, parts of the custom¬ 
ized test suite need not be processed. The customer must certify that the results from a pre¬ 
vious prevalidation submitted to the AVF or validation results obtained by the AVF are 
identical to those that would have been obtained by the customer. The normal practice is 
to submit complete prevalidation results. 


5.2.6 Successful Prevalidation 

Prevalidation testing is successful if the analysis of results and the resolution of test 
issues show that the candidate Ada implementation passes the customized test suite. Pre¬ 
validation is successful with caveats if the results are satisfactory except that they were in¬ 
complete or if resolution of some test issues are deferred until validation testing by 
agreement between the AVF and the customer. 


53 Step Three: Validation Testing 

Upon successful completion of prevalidation, with or without caveats, the AVF wit¬ 
nesses testing of the Ada implementation at the site and time mutually agreed by the AVF 
and customer. The AVF prepares a customized test suite based upon customer informa¬ 
tion and any information collected during the resolution of test issues. The customized test 
suite is installed and processed under AVF supervision. If the AVF determines that the re¬ 
sults agree with those obtained from prevalidation and are satisfactory with respect to the 
caveats, the testing has been successful: otherwise, re-testing will be required, unless the 
validation attempt is discontinued. (See Section 5.7 for Provisional Validation.) 


5.4 Step Four: Declaration of Conformance 

At some time during the validation but not later than at validation testing, the custom¬ 
er will complete and sign a declaration of conformance. The declaration states that the 
organization which is responsible for the production, maintenance or distribution of the 
Ada compiler is offering a product that is in compliance with the Ada programming lan¬ 
guage. The declaration becomes part of the AVF records and is copied into the VSR. A Val- 


17 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


idation Certificate will not be issued unless a signed declaration of conformance has 
been provided to the AVO. 


5.5 Step Five: Validation Summary Report 

A VSR is produced for each validation testing effort. A single VSR may cover valida¬ 
tion testing of several Ada implementations, provided that they all have the same result 
profile. The VSR provides the following documentation pertaining to the validation effort: 

a. identification of the customer responsible for validation of the Ada implemen¬ 
tation; 

b. identification of the organization responsible for the production, maintenance, or 
distribution of the Ada compiler or Ada implementation; 

c. identification of the Ada implementation tested; 

d. options provided by the Ada compiler and identity of the options used for test¬ 
ing; 

e. the inapplicable test programs and implementation dependent characteristics 
exhibited by the test programs that established inapplicability; 

f. the implementation dependent characteristics pertinent to the customized test 
suite; 

g. description of implementation dependent characteristics as detailed by “Appen¬ 
dix F’ of [Ada 83 and its successor]; 

h. withdrawn test programs; 

i. modifications to test programs with an explanation for such modifications; and 

j. a description of failed test programs, if applicable. (See Provisional Validation, 
Section 5.7.) 

5.5.1 VSR Production 

The VSR is prepared by the AVF but includes material which is produced by the cus¬ 
tomer, such as the “Appendix F’ required by [ANSI 83 and its successor]. A draft of the 
VSR is sent to the AVO for approval before or after validation testing. The final version of 
the VSR is signed by the AVF, the AVO, and the AJPO. 


18 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


5.5.2 VSR Availability 

The final version of the VSR is available to the general public from NTIS and from the 
AVF that produced it. The AVF may require payment of a fee for VSR reproduction and 
mailing costs. 

5.6 Step Six: Validation Certificate 

For each successful validation, one certificate is issued by authority of the AJPO. An 
example of a certificate is provided in Appendix C. Tne information on the validation cer¬ 
tificate describes the tested Ada implementation: the source of this information is the 
signed declaration of conformance which the AVF provides to the AVO after completion 
of testing. The customer will ensure that the information contained on the certificate does 
not infringe on the rights of third parties and may be required to provide a written statement 
of consent from any third party involved. Validation certificates will expire one year after 
the expiration date of the AC VC version used for the validation. An entry in the list of Ada 
implementations validated by testing will be made for each certificate issued. This entry 
will be removed when the certificate expires. 


5.7 Provisional Validation 

When prevalidation testing has been unsuccessful, a customer may petition the AVO 
to continue with validation by identifying up to ten AC VC test program failures to dispute 
on non-technical grounds. The AVO will present the dispute to the FRT as a petition for 
validation with test failures. Unless the dispute is denied by the FRT, the AVO will rule 
that the test program(s) will be processed during validation testing and the compiler be¬ 
havior will be documented in the VSR. A Provisional Validation Certificate (PVC) that 
lists the failed tests will be issued by the AJPO. A PVC will expire 12 months after the date 
validation testing was completed. The customer will arrange with the AVF to witness the 
result of error correction in the base implementation. The customer may appeal to the ex¬ 
tended resolution process (see Section 4.4) but the appeal must be accepted and the test pro¬ 
gram withdrawn from the ACVC before AVF re-testing. If the compiler passes the 
previously failed tests, a VC will be issued and the VSR will be revised. The list of PVCs 
will be maintained by the AJPO for the public. VSRs for validation with failed tests will 
be reviewed by the AVO and will be publicly available from the AVF, AVO and AJPO. 

19 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


The AVO may deny repeated petitions from the same customer for provisional validation 
of an Ada implementation. 


5.8 Advertising Validated Status 

The customer will not advertise or make public cl aims that the Ada implementation 
is validated until after receiving a validation certificate or after receiving formal notifica¬ 
tion from the AVF that the AJPO has issued a validation certificate. A waiver of confi¬ 
dentiality must be signed by a customer who intends to advertise the completion of events 
that indicate progress toward completion of validation. If a waiver of confidentiality has 
been signed with the AVF, the AVF will respond to inquiries about the customer’s adver¬ 
tisements or public claims by acknowledging receipt of validation materials (i.e., a formal 
agreement, pre-validation results, or validation testing results) without judgement con¬ 
cerning the success of the validation. 


5.9 Certification Mark 

The certification mark (see Appendix E for reproduction) may only be used on prod¬ 
ucts directly associated with validated Ada compilers, such as disks, tapes, packaging, ad¬ 
vertising, reference manuals and any other associated documentation where a significant 
portion relates to a validated Ada compiler. This unique mark distinguishes compilers val¬ 
idated in accordance with the rules in this document. The certification mark can be repro¬ 
duced in any size, color, or combination of colors. 

5.10 Ada 9X Transition Period 

Procedures in this document will be used during the transition to Ada 9X. Minor mod¬ 
ifications in procedures may be required to reflect differences between the Ada 83 AC VC 
and the Ada 9X ACVC. The life of ACVC 1.11 validation certificates and registrations has 
been extended to be compatible with ANSI adoption of Ada 9X. The Ada 9X Transition 
Plan [Ada 9X] and Ada 9X public reports provide current transition information. 


20 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


6. VALIDATION BY REGISTRATION 

6.1 Result Profile 

Two Ada implementations which pass a given ACVC version have die same result 
profile when: 

a. they use the same customized test suite; 

b. inapplicable test programs in the customized test suite are the same for both 
implementations; 

c. inapplicable test programs are inapplicable for the same reasons; and 

d. any implementation dependent characteristics tested for by the customized test 
suite are the same for both implementations. 


6.2 Derived Implementations 

An Ada implementation may obtain validated status by registration when all of the 
following conditions are true: 

a. The Ada compiler was obtained from the Ada compiler of the base implemen¬ 
tation by changes that are within the scope of accepted software maintenance 
practices. 

b. The target machine of the base and derived Ada implementation have compat¬ 
ible instruction sets and operating system or kernel. 

c. The Ada compiler has been tested with the customized test suite that was used 
to validate the base implementation. 

d. The result profile for the Ada implementation is either the same as the base 
implementation or, if there are differences, these differences are justified as 
being within the scope of accepted software maintenance practices, (see Section 
6.3). 

Common examples of compatible instruction sets and operating systems are two dif¬ 
ferent computer system models in a manufacturer’s product line or the computer systems 
produced by different manufacturers that use the same instruction set and operating sys- 


21 


UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 


terns, or any computer system and a simulated or emulated computer system that are the 
same instruction set. 

The changes that may be made to an Ada compiler for the purpose of derivation will 
be within the scope of software maintenance as applied to the domain of compiler con¬ 
struction. Changes must be classified as corrective, adaptive, or perfective. Examples of 
these changes are the correction of a compiler error, the adaption to an operating system 
upgrade, the transfer of the compiler to another host machine, the addition of a floating 
point processor to a small target machine, or the perfection of a garbage collection algo¬ 
rithm. For the purposes of obtaining validated status by registration, the changes required 
to render the base Ada compiler fully functional on a different host machine or host op¬ 
erating system is considered adaptive maintenance. 


6.3 Registration Request 

Any interested party may initiate a registration by sending a request to the AVO or to 
an AVF. An AVF may establish a fee for advisory service, or may refuse to provide advice 
if it did not validate the base implementation. The registration request must be signed 
and provide the following: 

a. reference to the validation certificate for the base implementation; 

b. identifying description of the Ada implementation(s) being derived from the 
base implementation; 

c. a declaration of conformance for the derived implementation(s); 

d. a consent agreement from any other party having a legal interest in the Ada com¬ 
piler; 

e. a listing of the Ada implementation(s) that were tested with tin customized 
test suite used in the validation of the base implementation; and 

f. appropriate evidence that the Ada implementation^) may, in fact, be derived 
from the referenced base implementation. 

Note that the identifying description required by b. must include the nomenclature of 
the computer system(s), including operating system for both host and target machines, 
or kernel for the target machine, if applicable, the Ada compiler name and version iden¬ 
tifier, and identifier for any components of the host and target machines listed in the VSR 
for the base implementation. The statement, required by f., will include the classification 

22 


UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


of software maintenance changes (see Section 6.2) and the effect these changes have on 
the result profile; will list the differences between the computer systems of the base im¬ 
plementation and the derived implementation; and will describe the effect these differ¬ 
ences have on the Ada compiler. The information required by e. and f. substantiate the 
claim made in the declaration of conformance. (See Appendix D for the proper form for 
a Registration Request) 


6.4 Evaluation 

The A VF will not perform testing on derived implementations. Any AVF may review 
the registration request for completeness and the plausibility of information and provide 
advice. The AVO will evaluate all registration requests before recommending that the de¬ 
rived implementation(s) be added to the list of validated Ada implementations 
maintained by the AJPO. 


6.5 Registration 

Registration requests which are acceptable to the AVO will be registered as validated 
Ada implementations untested by an AVF. A validation certificate will not be issued for 
these derived implementations but the customer may use the certification mark award¬ 
ed to the base implementation. The list of derived implementations and information pro¬ 
vided in the registration request will be available to the public. 


6.6 Expiration of Validated Status 

A derived implementation loses its status of being validated if it is challenged suc¬ 
cessfully (see Section 6.7), upon expiration of the validation certificate of its base imple¬ 
mentation, or when registration is revoked by the customer. 


6.7 Challenges 

Any derived implementation may be challenged by any interested party through an 
AVF. The challenger will pay a challenge fee to the AVF and will submit a challenge re¬ 
quest which: 


23 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


a. identifies the derived implementation being challenged; 

b. names one ACVC test from the customized test suite together with its imple¬ 
mentation dependent parameters, if any; and 

c. describes in which way the implementation will fail this test. 

The AVF will send this challenge to the originator of the registration asking for com¬ 
ment. The challenge will be considered settled if the registration is revoked by the registra¬ 
tion originator, otherwise, the challenge will be settled as outlined in Section 6.9. 


6.8 Challenge Mark 

The AVF will inform the AVO that a challenge for a given derived implementation 
has been received. The derived implementation will then be marked as “challenged” on 
the list of derived implementations maintained by the AJPO. Information pertaining to 
the challenge may be requested by any interested party and received from the AVF. It 
should be noted that a challenge mark applies only to the derived implementation which 
was named and does not indicate any judgement about the conformity of the challenged 
implementation. 


6.9 Challenge Test 

The AVF will conclude a formal agreement with the challenger which covers the AVF’s 
cost for performing a challenge test. For challenge testing, the challenged derived imple¬ 
mentation will be tested against the named ACVC test The challenger will provide access 
to the challenged derived implementation and appropriate expertise to facilitate the AVF 
test. The AVO will be informed of the test result. Depending on its result, the AVO will set¬ 
tle the challenge by either removing the challenge mark or the derived implementation 
from the list of validated Ada compilers. 


24 


UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 


Appendix A. 

Declaration of Conformance 


Customer: 

Certificate Awardee: 
Ada Validation Facility: 
ACVC Version: 


Ada Implementation 

Ada Compiler Name and Version: _ 

Host Computer System: _ 

Target Computer System: _ 

Declaration: 

I the undersigned, declare that I have no knowledge of deliberate deviations from the 
Ada Language Standard ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A, ISO 8652-1987, FIPS 119 as tested in 
this validation and documented in the Validation Summary Report 


Customer Signature Date 

Company 

Tide 


Certificate Awardee Signature Date 

Company 

Tide 


Note: If the Customer and the Certificate Awardee are the same, only the customer sig¬ 
nature is needed. 


A-1 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX B 

Implementer Dispute Format 

[part A] 


Implementer: 

Configuration: 

A CVC Version: 

Pre-Validation Submittal Date: 


<unplementer's name> 

<host & target hardware & operating systems> 
<ACVC version#> 

<due date for in-house results> 


[Part A will be completed once by each implementer, part B will be completed for 
each dispute. It is not necessary for a pre-validation date to have been established. 
Part A information is treated as confidential.] 


B-1 


UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


Reference: 

Summary: 

Discussion: 


[part B] 

<test name {,test name}> 

<brief description of the dispute> 
<detailed description of the dispute> 


[In this Discussion, arguments should be specified using test line #s and references 
to pertinent sections of the Ada standard. Commentaries (AI-xxxx), or the ACVC 
Implemented Guide (AIG)*. The implementer must describe the behavior of the 
implementation for the test or tests that are disputed, stating the particular test mes¬ 
sages that are produced. It is sufficient for the detailed description to be limited to 
the particular segment of test code that is disputed. Relevant source code with com¬ 
piler messages should be included. (For a group of tests that cause much the same 
behavior, it is sufficient for a detailed description to be given for one of them, with 
the relevant line numbers given for the like problems in the related tests.) 

If the argument depends upon implementation constraints of hardware or software 
(e.g., characteristics of the operating system), then these should be specified; die 
particular computer and operating system should be identified. It is especially im¬ 
portant that implementations that fail to pass some test due to capacity limitations 
be described in enough detail for the A VO to assess the reasonableness of these lim¬ 
itations. 

Failure to fully specify the points pertinent to a dispute might result in an adverse 
decision being made, with the disputer having to further argue the case with a sec¬ 
ond submittal to the AVO. Yet it is possible that the Summary will suffice to ade¬ 
quately present a dispute. 


*. (The AIG is not an official interpretation of the Ada standard but it might provide useful information 
in support of a dispute in explaining implementation choices.) 


B-2 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX C 


TEST DISPUTE AND RESOLUTION PROCESS 

C-l. Introduction 

A “dispute” is defined by the ACVC User's Guide as any result from processing an 
ACVC test program that is not a passed or inapplicable result according to the established 
grading criteria. This intentionally broad definition of a “dispute” is to make certain that 
compiler implemented bring all deviant test results to the attention of the AVF, without as¬ 
suming that such results would be accepted without special review. The compiler imple- 
menter also provides a rationale for each challenge being made to a particular test program. 
Disputes are forwarded to the A VO, usually electronically, by the AVF on behalf of their 
validation customer. For each dispute that is accepted (Le., when the AVO rules in favor of 
the dispute), it is likely that some correction is indicated for the disputed tests. The AVO 
withdraws any test that is found to be incorrect to a degree that makes it unsuitable for val¬ 
idation. The withdrawal of a test consists of including it on a list of tests that are ignored 
for validations conducted with the current ACVC version. The AVO updates the list of 
withdrawn tests, and distributes this list to the AVFs, the AMO, ACVC Reviewers, and 
ACVC Team. The AVO also maintains a database consisting of all test disputes and their 
resolution (AVO rulings) which is periodically provided to the ACVC Reviewers, AMO, 
ACVC Team, and the FRT. The AVO may also recommend that certain resolved disputes 
be considered further by the ARG/URG, even though the Chairman of both the ARG and 
URG currently participate in deliberations of the FRT. 


C-2. Expedited Resolution Process 

The AVO resolves disputes by any of three methods: a resolution that was made previ¬ 
ously is applied to the current dispute (e.g., the same dispute might be submitted at different 
times by different petitioners); the resolution can be determined unequivocally based on the 

C-1 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


Ada standard or Ada Commentaries; or, the resolution is determined based on the deliber¬ 
ations of the FRT. Although the Ada Compiler Validation Procedures do not set a limit on 
the length of time for reaching a resolution, the AVO attempts to resolve disputes within 
two weeks, an informal guideline that was established by the certification body. The AVO 
also attempts to place priority on resolving disputes for AVF customers who have a firmly 
scheduled date for validation testing. Implementers should submit disputes well in advance 
of a scheduled validation testing date, (see Section 5) 

On receipt of a dispute, the AVO checks whether the issue matches any that had been 
previously resolved. If the dispute is new, it is given an initial AVO analysis which involves 
research using the Ada Commentaries in conjunction with the Ada standard and references 
to previous dispute deliberations. A dispute is referred to the FRT when questions of inter¬ 
pretation arise and a resolution is not obvious. The AVO presents the dispute and any ad¬ 
ditional information resulting from an initial analysis to the HIT by e-mail without 
disclosing the identity of the petitioner. Deliberation of the dispute proceeds with the ex¬ 
change of each expert's opinion and analysis. The AVO participates in the deliberation by 
providing information as requested (e.g., ACVC tests or information from the petitioner), 
eliciting discussion from the experts, and making or challenging technical points raised in 
the discussion. In general, where an issue receives support from some members of the FRT, 
the dispute is accepted. 

There is no prescribed formality to the FRT deliberations, such as voting procedures or 
time limits on deliberation. The AVO might extend deliberation when a basis for resolving 
the dispute has not been made. However, the AVO will give its ruling on the dispute when 
a sufficient basis has been established, regardless of whether the FRT discussion continues. 


C-3. Types of Resolutions 

The resolution of a dispute is either an acceptance or rejection of the petitioner's argu¬ 
ments. Acceptance can result in either withdrawal of the test program from the ACVC or 
in a “Test, Processing, or Evaluation” modification for validation. A dispute may be reject¬ 
ed if it conflicts with the Ada standard or Ada Commentaries or if it is a test to which pre¬ 
viously validated implementations conform and the petitioner has not provided compelling 
reasons for a deviation. A dispute may lead to the withdrawal of a test program if the test 
is shown to be incorrect to a degree that wrongly influences implementation. Withdrawn 
tests have no effect on validation (they are generally not processed). If the dispute shows 

C-2 


UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 


the affected test program(s) to be incorrect in only a minor, limited degree, generally the 
AVO will direct that the test(s) be processed with a test modification. 

There are three types of test modification: Test, Processing, and Evaluation modifica¬ 
tions. A Test Modification is an actual change to the code of the test (e.g., adding a choice 
to an exception handler). A Processing Modification is a change to the way in which the 
test is processed (e.g., re-ordering the compilation of component files of a multi-compila¬ 
tion test). And an Evaluation Modification is simply the grading of the observed results by 
other than the established grading criteria (e.g., interpreting particular intermediate output 
and a final “failed” result as “passed”, according to an understanding of the dispute). All 
test modifications are documented in the VSR. 


C-4. Example of Extended Resolution 

The major issue to arise during fiscal year 1991 was the vulnerability of many tests to 
optimization that removes assignments to unused variables. Many of the tests that check 
that an exception is raised under prescribed conditions use code that does not prohibit the 
exception-raising expression from being eliminated. The Ada standard (11.6:7) permits an 
operation to be eliminated “if its only possible effect is to propagate a[n] exception”. In 
many of the tests this is precisely the case, as the expression returns a value that is intended 
to be assigned to a variable that is never used (hence, the value is not needed and the as¬ 
signment and expression evaluation need not be made). The AVO rejected only one case 
of optimization, where it removed a programming safeguard (local variable initialization 
for a block) and was too far from what the standard clearly permits. This issue has been 
referred to the ACVC Team and the ACVC Reviewers for consideration during the devel¬ 
opment of the Ada 9X ACVC and the Ada Rapporteur Group. 

C-5. Summary 

There is no limit on the number of disputed tests that can be submitted by an implement- 
er. Although there is a risk that a dispute will not be decided in the implementer’s favor, that 
risk can be managed so as to not affect validation by early submission of disputes. The va¬ 
lidity of grading criteria for ACVC tests has been very important for Ada 83, and will take 
on even greater importance for Ada 9X usage based tests. Any interested party may dispute 
an ACVC test and its grading criteria. Disputes that lead to the removal of unusual test cas- 


C-3 


UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 


es (informally called pathological tests) from the last version of the Ada 83 ACVC will be 
helpful in making a transition to the Ada 9X usage based test coverage. Future modifica¬ 
tions to procedural rules for test disputes will be consistent with the Ada 9X ACVC. 


C-4 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX D 

REGISTRATION REQUEST 


A registration request must have two main parts: (1) a letter and (2) an enclosure con¬ 
sisting of specific information to support the request 

PART 1 - LETTER 

The request letter should be addressed to the Ada Validation Organization (AVO) 
(note: see Appendix G for address) even though the requester does seek advice from an 
AVF. The mandatory parts of the letter are: 

1. Certificate number and description of the Base Implementation, 

2. List of derived implementations that were fully tested with the customized 
ACVC used in the base validation. If this list is less than the list for which reg¬ 
istration is requested, item 4 must also be included in this letter. 

3. We declare that we have no knowledge of deliberate deviations from the Ada 
Language Standard [ANSI/MIL_STD-1815A/ISO 8652-1987/FIPS 119] in the 
implementation. 

4. For the derived implementations that were not fully tested, we declare that, to the 
best of our knowledge, these implementations will pass the customized ACVC 
used in the base validation. Any possibly observed deviations are the conse¬ 
quence of implementation errors. 

5. If this statement applies, legal interests of (name) are affected by this registration 
request and their consent is documented in enclosure (number) to this letter. 

6. The Ada implementations for which registration is requested may, in fact, be 
derived according to the rules given in the Ada Validation Procedures, Version 
3.1 as explained in enclosure (number). 

7. Signature 

8. Corporate Title 


D-1 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


PART 2 - TEMPLATE FOR SUPPORTING INFORMATION 

1. Identification of Base Ada Implementation: 

a. Certificate number:_ 

2. Registration requested for. 

Note: This registration request pertains to all Ada implementations obtained by tak¬ 
ing the Ada compiler and selecting any host and any target from the list below. 

Compiler: [name and version(s)/release number/product(s) range of versions/re¬ 
leases] 

Host: choose either (a) or (b) 

a. [make, specific members of series and/or model numbers] (e.g. IBM PS2 
model 80-110 & 113) or, 

b. [all members of a model series] (e.g. IBMPS2 all models, or HP 9000 series 
300) 

Operating System: [name and version/release numbers)] 

Target: choose (a), (b), or (c) 

a. [make, specific members of series and/or model numbers] or 

b. [all members of a model series] or 

c. [members of an instruction set architecture and board implementation^)] 
(e.g. Motorola 68020-MVME133-1 & MVME130COF, Motorola 68030- 
MVME147, Motorola 68030-MilSpec285) 

Operating System: choose either (a) or (b) or (c) 

a. [OS name and version/release number for all target machines listed] or 

b. [kernel identifier for all target machines listed] or 

c. [none for all target machines listed] 

3. Evidence that the Ada implementations listed above should be validated by reg¬ 
istration: 

a. State the type of software maintenance changes made to the compiler and 
describe what was done. 

• corrective * maintenance performed specifically to overcome an existing 
fault. 


D-2 


UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


• perfective - maintenance performed to improve performance or main¬ 
tainability. 

• adaptive - maintenance performed to make a software product usable in 
a changed environment 

b. Which host/target combinations were fully tested with the ACVC? 

Testing with “customer applications” or other types of tests is not equivalent to 
running the ACVC. If a sub-set of ACVC tests were run, so state and indicate the 
sub-set. 

c. State whether the result profile is the same or different from the base. If dif¬ 
ferent, list all ACVC test results that are different or exhibit different behav¬ 
ior and explain the difference. 

d. What is the authoritative source used to determine the technical compatibil¬ 
ity between the derived implementations and the base? 

If copies of technical manuals are supplied as the source of this information, give 
the enclosure number where this information can be found. Do not duplicate a pre¬ 
vious submission of identical technical material, just reference its previous submis¬ 
sion. If there has been a change in the previously submitted material, submit only 
the change. If there is no authoritative source of information given, this registration 
request may be refused. 


D-3 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX E 


Certification Mark 



THIS PRODUCT CONFORMS TO 
ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A AS 
DETERMINED BY THE AJPO 
UNDER ITS CURRENT TESTING 



TESTING PROCEDURES THIS PRODUCT CONFORMS TO 

ANSI/M IL-STD-1815A AS 
DETERMINED BY THE AJPO 
UNDER ITS CURRENT TESTING 
PROCEDURES 


E-1 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX F 


PROJECT GUIDELINES 

F-l. BACKGROUND 

The general validation procedures given in the preceding sections of this document de¬ 
scribe the process of establishing the conformity of an Ada implementation before it is 
offered for sale in the market place. In the U.S., Federal Information Resources Manage¬ 
ment Regulations [FIRMRs] require that a compiler must have validated status when it be¬ 
comes part of the Federal Government’s software inventory. The FIRMRs also require that 
application software supplied to the Federal Government will be the product of a validated 
compiler. In other countries, there may be established government or commercial require¬ 
ments that are similar to the FIRMRs in intent Since validated status is limited to the life 
of a particular validation certificate, suppliers of compilers or software must periodically 
complete the steps in the validation process so as to have a current validation certificate 
for Ada implementations. However, there are practical project-level difficulties associat¬ 
ed with maintaining an always current validated status for all compilers being used to de¬ 
velop or maintain software. This section provides guidelines for project managers that are 
consistent with the goal of preventing the proliferation of dialects of the Ada program¬ 
ming language. These guidelines should be tailored by organizations that manage software 
projects according to their quality assurance policies and configuration management pro¬ 
cedures. These guidelines are normative for the U.S. DoD and optional for others. 


F-l.l Acquisition Requirements 

A project manager will identify the requirement for a validated Ada compiler as an 
action within the context of project milestones. This requirement will be met when a vali¬ 
dated Ada implementation has been delivered for the project If the Ada implementation 


F-1 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


selected for the project is not validated, the project manager is responsible for requesting 
that validated status will be obtained in accordance with the general rules of procedure for 
validation by testing or registration as early as possible in the software development pro¬ 
cess. 


F-1.2 Baselined Project Compiler 

The project manager should determine whether the Ada compiler(s) used on the 
project will be upgraded or replaced by the supplier on a validation schedule which is in¬ 
dependent of project milestones; or, whether the validation certificate will be allowed to 
expire before these milestones are reached. The project manager will baseline the validated 
compiler and the ACVC at a given version when it is more cost-effective for the project to 
forego replacements of the compiler with later validated versions. If the compiler being 
used on the project does not have validated status (e.g., the version was derived but not reg¬ 
istered by the vendor), it must have validated status, by testing or registration, to qualify as 
a project compiler. When the validated compiler has been baselined, it then becomes a 
project compiler for the lifetime of that project, or until the project manager establishes a 
requirement for validation prior to reaching a particular project milestone. When a vali¬ 
dated Ada compiler has been baselined for a project, configuration management proce¬ 
dures must be established to ensure complete documentation of any derivations from it or 
any deviations from ACVC test results obtained previously from the baselined compiler. 


F-1.3 Project Registration 

The project manager should notify the AJPO when a validated Ada implementation 
has been selected for a particular project as a baselined version that will be used for an ex¬ 
tended period or for the life of the project Notification may take the form of the registration 
request generally used by compiler vendors with the addition of information that identifies 
the project. (See Appendix D for the registration request form and Section 6 for general 
rules.) Experience has shown that formalizing the declaration of a project compiler is use¬ 
ful for a project manager, as well as for the AJPO, when disputes arise concerning the val¬ 
idated status of compilers that have been used on a project 


F-2 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


F-1.4 Embedded Applications 

Some software development projects include applications that execute on a target ma¬ 
chine that is embedded in a larger system. A compiler used to generate object code for the 
embedded target machine is considered to be a validated project compiler only if all of 
the following conditions are satisfied: 

a. The project compiler was a validated Ada compiler or was derived from a val¬ 
idated Ada compiler. 

b. All mandatory features of the Ada programming language that can be sup¬ 
ported, or are emulated on the embedded target machine, are supported by the 
compiler for the target That is, compilers for the restricted target shall not be 
arbitrarily constrained to subset implementations of the Ada programming lan¬ 
guage. 

During software development of embedded applications, project managers must ensure 
that all run-time systems used to generate code are managed as configuration items con¬ 
sisting of libraries and documentation for all versions that will be delivered for operational 
use. All limitations of the restricted target should be documented in Appendix F for the Ada 
implementation. 


F-1.5 Re-testing 

The project manager should ensure that the project compiler retains a known degree 
of compliance with the standard throughout the remaining life of the project by periodical¬ 
ly re-testing the project compiler using the AC VC version used to originally establish the 
conformity of the base implementation or a derived implementation. The project man¬ 
ager should determine whether this testing will be done by project personnel or by an AVF, 
so as to obtain a VSR that will document the result of re-testing. The services of an AVF 
are desirable when project personnel are unfamiliar with the testing procedure and interpre¬ 
tation of test results. (A VC will not be issued for a project compiler unless it passes a cur¬ 
rent ACVC version and validation is conducted as described in Section 5.) 

When a software release has been produced on several project compilers, ACVC re¬ 
testing requirements apply to each of these compilers. Records of compiler maintenance 
changes and the ACVC result profile will be maintained for each project compiler. These 


F-3 


UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


records will be current and available for inspection by the government Examination of 
such records should be a routine action for audit teams. 


F-1.6 Ada 9X TRANSITION 

The last [Ada 83] ACVC version that can be baselined with a project compiler is 
AC VC version 1.11. Project managers who decide to baseline a validated Ada compiler 
for [Ada 83] must do so before expiration of the validation certificates issued for ACVC 
1.11 validations. The first Ada 9X ACVC version that can be baselined with an Ada 9X 
project compiler is ACVC version 2.1. 


F-4 


UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX G 
Points of Contact 


Ada Validation Facility Managers 
Dr. William Dashiell 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
National Computer Systems Laboratory 
Building 225, 

Room A266 

Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
U.S. 

phone: 301-975-2490 

net: nist-avf@ajpo.seLcmu.edu 

Captain Russ Hilmandolar, USAF 
Standard Languages and Environments Division 
Engineering Applications Directorate 
DCS/Communications-Computer Systems 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 
Ohio 45433-6503 
phone: 513-255-4472 
net: hilmanrk@adaivc.wpafb.af.mil 

Mr. Jon Leigh 

The National Computing Centre, Ltd. 

Oxford Road 
Manchester 
England, M17ED 
phone: +44-61-228-6333 
net: uk-avf@ajpo.sei.cmu.edu 

Mr. Alphonse Philippe 
AFNOR 

Tour Europe, cedex 7 
F-92080 Paris la Defence 
France 

phone: +33-1-42-91-55-55 or 57-96 
net: afnor@ajpo.sei.cmu.edu 


G-1 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


Mr. Michael Tonndorf 
IABG, Dept. ITE 
Einsteins' ^0 
W-8012 Ottobrunn 
Germany 

phone: +49-89-6088-2477 
net: tonndorf@ajpo.sei.cmu.edu 
(EU net: tonndorf@ ite.iabg.de) 

ACVC Maintenance Organization 

Ms. Christine Anderson (Ada 9X) 

Ada 9X Project Office 
PL/VTET 

Kirtland AFB, NM 87117-6008 
phone: 505-846-0817 
fax: 505-846-2290 
net: andersonc@uservx.plk.af.mil 

ACVC Team (Ada 9X) 

Mr. Mike Middlemas 
SAIC 

10770 WaterRidge Circle 
MS 213 

San Diego, CA 92121 
phone: 619-552-5326 
net: middlema@ajpo.sei.cmu.edu 

ACVC Reviewers (Ada 9X) 

Dr. Nelson Weiderman (Chair) 

127 Schooner Dr. 

Wakefield, RI02789 
phone: 401-783-6863 
net: nhw@sei.cmu.edu 

Ada Rapporteur Group (ISOWG9) 

Dr. John Goodenough (Chair) 

net: jbg@sei.cmu.edu 

net: comp.lang.ada@AJPO.sei.cmu.edu 

Ada Joint Program Office 

Dr. John P. Solomond 

Director Ada Joint Program Office 

Deputy Director, Defense Research and Engineering (S&T) 

Pentagon Room 3E114 (Fern St.) 

Washington, D.C. 20301-3081 

phone: 703-614-0209 

net: solomond@ajpo.sei.cmu.edu 


6-2 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


Ada Validation Organization 

Ms. Audrey A. Hook 
Institute for Defense Analyses 
1801 N. Beauregard St. 

Alexandria, Va. 22311 
phone: 703-845-6639 
net: hook@ida.org 

Fast Reaction Team 

Mr. Dan Lehman (test challenges) 

Institute for Defense Analyses 
1801 N. Beauregard St 
Alexandria, Va. 22311 
phone: 703-845-6633 
net: avo@ajpo.sei.cmu.edu 

Ada Information Clearinghouse (for the AJPO) 

Ms. Susan Carlson (industry and government inquiries) 
Ada Information Clearinghouse 
ITT Research Institute 
4600 Forbes Blvd. 

Lanham, Md. 20706-4312 
Telephone: 703-685-1477 

ACVC and VSR Distribution 

National Technical Information Service 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, Va. 22161 
Telephone: 703-487-4650 

DoD Public Affairs (press inquiries) 

Ms. Jan Walker 
OASDPA 

Pentagon Room 2E765 
Washington, D.C. 20301-1400 
Telephone: 703-695-0192 


G-3 


UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


Validated Compiler Lists 

AJPO - Official Ada lists, updated monthly. 

Michele Kee 

Ada Information Clearinghouse (for the AJPO) 

IIT Research Institute 
4600 Forbes Boulevard 
Lanham, MD 20706-4312 
Telephone: 703-685-1477 

NIST - All FIPS validated compilers, updated quarterly. 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
National Computer and Telecommunications Laboratory 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 


G-4 


UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX H 


References 


[Ada 9X] Ada 9X Project Reports, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for 

Acquisition, Washington, D.C. Available from the Ada 9X Project Of¬ 
fice. 

[ANSI 83] American National Standards Institute and United States Department of 
Defense: ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A Reference Manual for The Ada Pro¬ 
gramming Language, 1983 Note: This standard is identical with ISO/ 
8652-1987 and FIPS 119,1985. The ANSI 83 is available from various 
publishers and from the U. S. Government at the following addresses: 

Commanding Officer 
Naval Publications and Forms Center 
Attn: NPODS 
5801 Tabor Avenue 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19120 

Superintendent of Documents 
Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 

The ISO/8652-1987 (French and English versions) is available from: 
AFNOR 

Tour Europe, cedex 7 
F-92080 Paris la Defence 
France 

[ANSI/IEEE 90] American National Standards Institute and Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers, Inc., Standard 610.12-1990; 44 ANSI/IEEE Stan¬ 
dard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology”. 


H-1 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


[DoD 91] 
[FERMR 90] 

[ISO 74] 
[ISO/IEC 91] 


Department of Defense Instruction: Number 5000.2, January 1, 1991 
Subject: Defense Acquisition Management Policies and Procedures 

General Services Administration, Federal Information Resources Man¬ 
agement Regulations (F1RMR) 201.20.303 and 201.39.1002, 28 De¬ 
cember 1990, Subject: Federal Standards; and. Associated Federal ADP 
and Telecommunications Standards Index (updated semi-annually). 
Subject: Federal Information Processing Standards; Implementation, 
Validation and Conformance. 

International Standards Organization: ISO 2382/1-1974 Data Processing 
- Vocabulary - Section 01: Fundamental Terms. 

International Standards Organization: ISO/IEC, Guide 2, 6th edition 
1991 - General Terms and Their Definitions Concerning Standardiza¬ 
tion and Related Activities. 


H-2 


UNCLASSIFIED 


