Visual Data Comm: A Tool for Visualizing Data 
Communication in the Multi Sector Planner Study 

Hwasoo Eric Lee 

San Jose State University / NASA Ames Research Center 
Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA 
hwasoo.lee@nasa.gov 


ABSTRACT 

Data comm is a new technology proposed in future air 
transport system as a potential tool to provide comprehensive 
data connectivity. It is a key enabler to manage 4-D trajectory 
digitally, potentially resulting in improved flight times and 
increased throughput. Future concepts with data comm 
integration have been tested in a number of human-in-the-loop 
studies but analyzing the results has proven to be particularly 
challenging because future traffic environment in which data 
comm is fully enabled has assumed high traffic density, 
resulting in data set with large amount of information. This 
paper describes the motivation, design, current and potential 
future application of Visual Data Comm (VDC), a tool for 
visualizing data developed in Java using Processing library 
which is a tool package designed for interactive visualization 
programming. This paper includes an example of an 
application of VDC on data pertaining to the most recent Multi 
Sector Planner study, conducted at NASA’s Airspace 
Operations Laboratory in 2009, in which VDC was used to 
visualize and interpret data comm activities. 

Keywords 

Data Visualization, Data Comm, Multi Sector Planner 

INTRODUCTION 

With the FAA’s prediction of a threefold increase in air traffic 
demand by 2025 [1], there is an increasing need for a 
reorganization of the current system as well as the creation of 
support tools. As a result, the Joint Planning and Development 
Office (JPDO) defined a set of concepts known as The Next 
Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) that was 
derived to mitigate this forecasted challenge [2]. 

One of the key enablers of various NextGen concepts is 
ground-to-ground and ground-to-air digital data 
communication (data comm), especially if they can be coupled 
with 4-D trajectory-based traffic management. The ability to 
create and exchange graphical representations of aircraft 
trajectories between air traffic service providers would 
significantly enhance traffic assessment and coordination tasks 

[ 3 ]. 

A number of prototype concepts that utilize data comm in this 
manner have been explored in human-in-the-loop experiments. 
For example, a mid-term FAA concept called Multi Sector 
Planner (MSP) [4,5] has been recently prototyped at NASA 
Airspace Operations Laboratory [6] as a collaborative project 
between San Jose State University Research Foundation and 


NASA Ames Research Center, and has yielded positive results 
that demonstrate the usefulness of the MSP concept [7,8]. 

In short, the MSP concept proposes a new staffed position 
whose functions would lie between the tactical operations of 
controllers and the strategic operations of traffic management, 
augmented by the aforementioned 4-D trajectory based 
management tools. One of many focal points of the most 
recent MSP study was to examine the implications of adding 
this new position to the existing team, more specifically how it 
would impact the team dynamics. It was hypothesized that 
coordination would be an integral part in the feasibility of such 
a position. Of particular interest was the role of data comm in 
the team coordination and resulting performance. 

The analyses took the simplest approach by running statistical 
tests on categorical counts of various attributes of data comm 
messages such as locations, times, senders, and recipients. 
However, this approach proved to be inefficient in trying to 
see the dynamics of the communication at a macro-level 
because each attribute only offered a slice of the whole 
picture. Undoubtedly, data comm messages are both 
contextually and spatially organized. As a result, a 
visualization tool was deemed necessary to understand the data 
comm interactions between players. If successful, one would 
be able to infer insights as to how these data communication 
channels were used. 

The current paper describes the design, implementation, and 
application of Visual Data Comm (VDC), a visualization tool 
specifically conceived for the latest MSP study [7] in trying to 
help build a story around data comm activities. 

MULTI SECTOR PLANNER (MSP) STUDY 

Although an extensive description of the MSP concept and its 
human-in-the-loop study of 2009 are beyond the scope of this 
paper, this section includes a brief explanation of the main 
points. 

Airspace 

The experiment was conducted in two sessions of two weeks 
each. Each session had a different team of seventeen currently 
certified (participants) and retired (confederates) FAA air 
traffic radar controller, area supervisor, and traffic manager 
that staffed the following positions: 

• 4 Multi Sector planner (MSP) positions: Four participants 
played the role of MSPs whose areas of responsibility are 
represented by the four colors in Figure 1, including three in 
the Kansas City ARTCC (ZKC) and one in the Memphis 



ARTCC (ZME): ZKC_MSP_North (Green), 

ZKCMSPSouth (Orange), ZKC_MSP_West (Yellow), 
and ZMEMSP (Pink). 

• 2 Traffic Management Coordinator (TMC) positions: One 
participant played the role of a TMC for the ZKC while a 
confederate acted as multiple TMCs for the surrounding 
centers (mainly ZME, ZID, ZAU, and ZMP) and the 
Command Center. 

• 2 Area Supervisor positions: In a similar pattern as the 
TMCs, one participant played the role of an Area Supervisor 
for the eastern half of ZKC (area represented by Green and 
Orange in the figure) while a confederate acted as multiple 
Area Supervisors for the surrounding regions. 

• 9 Radar Controller positions: A combination of four 
participants and three confederates played the roles of radar 
controllers for the seven sectors in the eastern half of the 
ZKC (area represented by Green and Orange in the figure) 
while two other confederates each controlled the eastern and 
western halves of the entire test airspace that is outside of the 
seven test sectors controlled by participants. 



Figure 1: Test airspace used in the MSP condition. 

Simulation Environment 

Each run was 75 minutes long and had more than 3000 aircraft 
operated by automation agents and a dozen of general aviation 
and commercial pilots. Runs were simulated using Multi 
Aircraft Control System (MACS) [3], a Java-based software 
package developed to emulate current ATC system and 
quickly prototype NextGen concepts to conduct human-in-the- 
loop experiments. 

Experiment conditions and scenarios 

The two test conditions represented two different air 
navigation service provider (ANSP) team configurations: the 
No-MSP condition included traffic management, area 
supervisors, and radar controllers; whereas the MSP condition 
added four MSP positions to the team. There were eight 
different traffic scenarios: four Traffic Load scenarios with 
1.5x current day traffic levels and traffic load imbalances 
between sectors; and four Weather scenarios included 
developing convective weather situations at current day traffic 
levels. All eight scenarios were run once in each condition, for 
a total of sixteen test runs. 

Experiment task 

The TMCs, Area Supervisors, and MSPs were provided with 
various interactive support tools that are based on 4-D 


trajectories and allow for the filtering of traffic by flows, 
individual aircraft, conflict and weather penetration 
predictions, future positions of aircraft, etc. The tools were 
used to monitor the traffic situation and to aid in the 
development and execution of plans and initiatives in response 
to traffic disturbances and complexity issues. However, the 
TMC and MSPs were responsible for managing different 
prediction time horizons. In the No-MSP condition, the TMC 
was asked to manage the predicted aircraft count and/or 
complexity from 30 to 75 minutes into the future. In the MSP 
condition, the MSPs were asked to manage the 30 to 60 
minute predictions while TMC managed the 45 to 75 minute 
predictions. In both conditions, area supervisor was 
responsible for managing the traffic below the 30 minute time 
horizon. 

Once the problems (and aircraft involved in them) are 
identified, solutions could be coordinated and implemented by 
the team using three types of data comm messages: 

• Coordinated Plan (CP) is a message containing the details of 
proposed solutions (i.e., trajectory adjustments) that can be 
amended, sent, and received between the TMCs and MSPs. 
These CP messages can be exchanged further and refined 
until sent as coordinated clearances. 

• Coordinated Clearance (CC) is a message containing the 
details of requested trajectory adjustments that is sent to the 
radar controller with track control of the subject aircraft. 
These messages could be sent by either the TMCs or MSPs. 
The receiving radar controller could accept or reject the 
message at his or her discretion by assessing its viability 
given the traffic situation. 

• If the radar controller decides to accept the request, he or she 
can uplink the trajectory adjustments as an Uplink Clearance 
(UC) message from ground to aircraft. Only the radar 
controllers had the authority to send these messages unless 
the requested trajectory adjustments occurred more than 30 
minutes in the future, in which case the TMC and MSPs had 
the option of bypassing the radar controller and sending the 
UC message directly to the aircraft. Also, in this study, all 
pilots were instructed to comply with the trajectory 
adjustments as requested in UC messages. 

Additionally, two sub-categories of data comm messages were 
implemented to be used to relay back responses to CP and CC 
messages: Coordination Yes/ Accept (CY) and Coordination 
No/Reject (CN). 

RATIONALE FOR VISUAL DATA COMM 

Data visualization is one of many approaches in trying to infer 
structure from data and is particularly useful when dealing 
with huge amounts of information [9]. There already are 
existing visualization tools in the ATM realm. One prime 
example is TCSim Route Analyzer/Constructor (TRAC), 
which is a graphical tool with a vast set of functions such as 
performing fast-time agent-based simulations, prototyping 
airspace and route structures, as well as offering a wide range 
of sophisticated visualization features [10]. 



Messages 


Figure 2: Layout overview of Visual Data Comm. 


Callsigns 


Data Link 


Center/Sectoi 


Boundaries 


Playback Scroll Bar 


Aircraft 


Positions 


Although TRAC was used to analyze parts of the MSP data, 
VDC was created as a visualization tool to explore the team 
interactions in the MSP study in both temporal and spatial 
dimensions. An important distinction between TRAC and 
VDC is that while TRAC features a full set of functions and 
analyses tools that are designed to accommodate a wide range 
of ATC related simulations, VDC is light-weight, MSP study- 
specific, and primarily tailored for data visualization. 

VISUAL DATA COMM 
Processing Library 

VDC is entirely developed in Java using the Processing 
graphics library. Processing was chosen because it is an open 
source language and platform-independent development 
environment and is specifically designed for interactive 
visualization programming [11]. There are many advantages in 
using Processing, including: 

• As a language based in Java, it is translated to Java at run- 
time and executed as a Java program. Java-based programs 
usually run faster than programs based on scripting 
languages such as Flash/ ActionScript, which is important for 
interactive graphics applications. 

• Its programming style is simplified in such a way that it lets 
the user bypass advanced programming and graphics 
concepts such as classes, objects, animation and double- 
buffering, while still making them accessible for advanced 
users. This feature is especially important and vital for 


people without a formal background in computer 
programming. 

• As an extension to the previous point, it can also trivialize 
the low-level and complex nature of OpenGL to take 
advantage of the optimized processing and rendering speed 
of the graphics card. 

• Processing can also easily export applets for the Web or 
standalone applications for Mac, Windows, and GNU/Linux 
operating systems. 

Although a full overview of simple implementations of 
drawing functions is out of the scope of this paper, the 
Processing library is undoubtedly well suited for the rapid 
prototyping of visualization tools by non programming-savvy 
analysts. 


Overview of Visual Data Comm 


Figure 2 | shows the layout overview of VDC highlighting some 


of its features. In this figure, a particular run’s data comm 
activities are shown with aircraft positions and path history 
trails up to about the midpoint of the run. Keyboard shortcuts 
are available for toggling on/off various records such as 
aircraft callsigns and positions, flight paths, data comm 
messages, center/sector boundaries, and even the legends. 
Some featured highlights are discussed in the following 
subsections. 








Input data 

The input data to VDC are generated using Python that pulls in 
only relevant information (e.g., time, sender, recipient, and 
content of data comm messages) from different output files 
from MACS (the simulation platform used for MSP) that are 
rather large. Although feeding in the original output files to 
VDC was possible, a decision was made to create much 
simpler and smaller files for VDC to handle to make data 
processing much faster. 


Center/sector boundaries 

The Center/sector boundaries depict the Kansas City ARTCC 
(ZKC) and its surrounding ce nters and sectors and are 
congruent with the map shown in Figure 2. However, VDC’s 
environment can be adapted to any center to include any 
number of sectors as long as it is provided with the appropriate 
set of latitude and longitude vertices for the area of interest. 


Playback scroll bar 

VDC is able to replay a particular run from the experiment and 
allow the user to view the data comm interactions in the test 
airspace on one screen. This feature is attractive in that one 
can see the “big picture” of how data comm messages are 
exchanged between all positions in the simulation. The tool 
has a horizontal scroll bar at the bottom of the screen that 
represents the whole duration of a run. It can be manipulated 
to jump to anywhere in the run and fast forward, play or 
rewind the development in a similar fashion as a VCR. 


Data comm message types and senders 
As outlined previously in Experiment task , the MSP study 
included various types of data comm messages and they are 
represented by dots of varying sizes and colors. Similarly, 
senders of these data comm m essages ar e also visualized by 
“bubbles” around the messages [Figure 2j . A legend of all ten 
possible senders (i.e., non-controller positions) is also shown 
in the figure. The color-scheme used in the legends is 
congruent with the map used throughout the experiment. 


Flight path 

In addition to the data comm messages, users can also view 
individual flight paths of all aircraft in the test airspace. 
Depending on the scroll bar’s position, each aircraft’s flight 
path history is shown up to that point in time. Flight paths can 
also be color coded by arrival and departure ai rports, or even 
departure-arrival pairs, and altitude as shown in | Figure 3j This 
feature is particularly useful when studying a particular set of 
flows. 


Additionally, VDC can be easily customized to allow any kind 
of filter to be set on the fly. One can filter flight paths by 
aircraft associated with a particular set of data comm message 
types. For example, one could easily study the flight path of all 
aircraft that received CPs to examine how that affected their 
trajectories. As a concrete example, in the MSP study, the 
researchers were interested in looking at how aircraft were 
handled by the participants during the runs. Of particular 
interest was the way they were handling the task of weather 
avoidance. To visualize such data, aircraft paths were color 
coded in red if the aircraft had hit a weather cell, or in green, 


otherwise ^Figure 4j . As such, this feature allows the user to 
visually grasp the outcome of the weather avoidance task and 
detect patterns in the data and performance that would 
otherwise be missing from a simple investigation of the raw 
numbers. 



Figure 3: Example of flight path color coding scheme: By 
destination airport (left) and altitude (right). 



Figure 4: Flight paths of weather penetrating aircraft are shown 
in red while those that successfully avoided weather are depicted 
in green. 


Navigation in 3-D 

It is often the case with such large amounts of data, such as 
what resulted from the MSP study, to get overwhelmed by the 
clutter of information. To remedy this issue, a feature was 
added to VDC to give the user the ability to traverse and zoom 
in and out of the test airspace to d ynamically explore portions 
of the recomposed data visually. Figure 5 depicts a screen 
capture during 3-D navigation in space. Memphis International 
Airport is revealed by departing and arriving aircraft paths. 
Also, at the bottom right corner of the figure, the figure shows 
an example of a coordinated plan being implemented: a CP 
message (yellow dot) is accepted (green dot) and sent (pink 
dot) to the radar controller of that particular aircraft. 



Figure 5: Screen capture of VDC plotted in 3-D with data comm 
messages color-coded by type (UC, CC, CP, CY, CN). 





V 


V 


♦ ♦ ♦ 


♦ ♦ 


coordinated plans was significantly higher in the MSP 
condition (61 vs. 5) with a significantly lower number of 
aircraft that hit convective weather (15 vs. 34). 






• •• • gk • ••• - 


Figure 6: Screen captures of VDC showing vertical profiles of 
aircraft paths by data comm message types. 

An extension to this feature is the ab ility to vie w the vertical 
profile of aircraft paths as shown in Figure 6\ In the figure, 
three separate plots show vertical profiles of aircraft associated 
with each of the three data comm message types. One can 
clearly see distinct flight levels in each of the plots as well as 
message distribution patterns. 


APPLICATION OF VISUAL DATA COMM IN THE MSP 
STUDY 

During the analysis phase, it was decided that it would be best 
to compare MSP condition versus No-MSP condition for each 
of the eight run-pairs, because all runs used different strategies 
and showed a unique pattern of responses in each. For 
example, in the Weather scenarios, aircraft generally received 
more lateral movements than vertical ones to avoid convective 
weather cells whereas in Traffic Load scenarios, the team as a 
whole had the option of descending aircraft as well as 
rerouting them out of test sectors to lower the sector aircraft 
counts. In addition, all four runs in each of the Weather and 
Traffic Load scenarios were constructed using unique traffic 
flows and as a result made more sense to treat all eight run- 
pairs individually. 

With that in mind, another feature was added to VDC that 
allowed the users to toggle between MSP and No-MSP 
conditions for the same scenario type with the touch of a key. 
The ability to quickly switch between two matching runs made 
visual comparison tasks relatively effortless. 


Case study: Run 2 (No-MSP Condition) vs. Run 5 (MSP 
Condition) 


Due to the limited scope of this paper, a subset of data (runs 2 
and 5 in the Weather scenario) was chosen to demonstrate how 
VDC was used in the data analysis. These two runs were 
chosen because of their interesting differences which will be 
revealed in the following section. 


Table 1 summarizes the total messages counts and aircraft 


weather penetration data for each of the two runs. As shown in 
the table, the two conditions did not differ statistically both in 
the numbers of uplinked clearances (412 vs. 420) and 
coordinated clearances (84 vs. 109). However, the number of 



No-MSP 

MSP 



Condition 

Condition 

x 2 


(Run 2) 

(Run 5) 


Uplink 

Clearance 

412 

420 

X 2 (l) = 0.08 
p > 0.78 

Coordinated 

Clearance 

84 

109 

X 2 (l) = 3.24 
p > 0.07 

Coordinated 


61 

X 2 (l) = 47.52 

Plan 


p < 0.0001 

Aircraft in 
Weather 

34 

15 

X 2 (l) = 7.37 

p < 0.01 


Table 1 : Summary of data comm activities and aircraft weather 
penetration data (significant p-values are bolded). 


Uplink Clearance (UC) 


Figure 7| shows all UC activities for the entire duration of the 


run in each condition. At first glance, uplinked clearances are 
similarly scattered around the seven test sectors in ZKC across 
the two conditions. However, upon close inspection, there was 
visibly much more UC activity in the western half of ZKC 
(highlighted in yellow), while in the surrounding area, events 
stayed relatively constant. 



Figure 7: Distribution of Uplink Clearances (UC) in No-MSP 
(top) and MSP (bottom) conditions. 





Coordinated Clearance (CC) 

Figure 8| shows all CC activities for the entire duration of the 
run in each condition. The most apparent difference between 
the two conditions is that more aircraft in the western half of 
ZKC were impacted by the coordinated clearances in the MSP 
condition. This is in tune with what was observed with the UC 
activity in that area (see Figure 7j and suggests that most of 
them were accepted coordinated clearances (as shown by the 
green dots that depict CC-CY messages). 



Figure 8: Distribution of Coordinated Clearances (CC) in No- 
MSP (top) and MSP (bottom) conditions. 


Coordinated Plan (CP) 


Figure 9| shows all CP activities for the entire duration of the 


run in each condition. As expected (as seen in | Table 1] , there 
was a greater number of CP messages (depicted by yellow 
dots) throughout the MSP run. Also, the figure reveals that 
particularly high UC and CC activities in the western portion 
of ZKC, as shown previously, were mainly results of planned 
activities. In addition, in the figure, the senders of these CP 
messages are displayed in “bubbles” to show who the plan 
coordination initiators were. 


While the traffic manager was solely responsible for all five 
CP messages in the No-MSP condition, it was not the case in 
the MSP condition as the four MSP positions took an active 
role in initiating plan coordination. The northeastern and 
western flows that were previously manipulated by the traffic 
manager in the No-MSP were offloaded by the MSP ZME 
(pink bubbles). Also, both MSP North and MSP South (green 


and orange bubbles, respectively) were heavily involved in the 
eastern flows in the western portion of ZKC. 



Figure 9: Distribution of Coordinated Plans (CP) and their 
senders of coordinated plans (CP) in No-MSP (top) and MSP 
(bottom) conditions. 


Aircraft in Weather 


As a result of different strategies employed in the runs, the set 
of aircraft that penetrated weather cells in one condition was 
different from another. For that reason, in order to make the 
comparison fair, it was decided that a common set of aircraft 
would be preselected for examination according to whether or 
not they were impacted by evolving weather cells. 
Accordingly, those aircraft that penetrated weather in the open 
loop run of the same scenario type, which effectively 
corresponds to the same run without any human-operator 
involvement, were chosen as the comparison set. By doing so, 
within the same scenario type, every aircraft in one 
condition/run would have a matching aircraft in the other. 


Figure 10 p resents the flight paths of those preselected aircraft 


in each condition/run. Each path is overlaid in either green or 
red depending on whether or not the corresponding aircraft 
successfully avoided the weather. 






penetrated weather. Uplinked clearances associated to aircraft 
not in the weather penetrating set from the open loop run are 
not shown. 



Figure 10: Visual representation of flight paths of aircraft that 
penetrated weather cells in the open loop run in each of the No- 
MSP (top) and MSP (bottom) conditions (Green flight paths 
depict aircraft that successfully avoided weather; Red flight paths 
depict aircraft that hit weather). 

From the figure, there are three things that are visually 
apparent: First is the location of the convective weather in the 
middle of the eastern airspace of ZKC as one can clearly see 
the “hole” where aircraft were rerouted; Second is the fact that 
green flight paths outnumber red ones in MSP condition which 
implies that more aircraft were successful in avoiding weather 
cells as a result of adding four MSP positions to the team; 
Third, and most importantly, in the MSP condition, east-west 
flows took advantage of both northern and southern routes 
around the convective weather while the southern route was 
predominantly used in the No-MSP condition. This 
observation triggered the researchers to speculate whether or 
not the UC activities in the western half of ZKC that were 
observed previously in the MSP condition could explain its 
superior performance in weather avoidance. For that reason, 
the flight paths of those aircraft that received UC messages 
were reviewed using VDC’s playback function. Accordingly, 
it was shown that those aircraft in the western half of ZKC 
were routed north around the convective weather. 


Another way of e xamining t he weather impact data is to only 
display UCs as in | Figure 7 l and appl y the same c olor-scheme 
as the flight path plots above. In Figure llj green dots 
represent UCs sent to aircraft that successfully avoided 
weather while the red dots represent UCs sent to aircraft that 


As shown earlier with flight paths, there are noticeably more 
green dots over red in the MSP condition than the No-MSP 
condition. Altho ugh the sam e amount of UCs were sent in both 


conditions (see Table lj , more UCs were attributed to 


successful weather avoidance in the MSP condition. 


In addition, the distributions of green and red dots in both 
conditions seem to be comparable to the flight path data 
shown earlier. In the No-MSP condition there is a high 
concentration of UCs that are associated to weather impacted 
aircraft. 



Figure 11: Distribution of uplinked clearances (UC) of those 
aircraft that penetrated weather cells in the open loop in each of 
the No-MSP (top) and MSP (bottom) conditions. (Green dots 
depict UC sent to the aircraft that successfully avoided weather; 
Red dots depict UC sent to the aircraft that hit a weather cell). 


Summary of Findings using VDC 

Once data from this particular set of runs was visualized, it 
was visually apparent that more aircraft did in fact successfully 
avoided weather in the MSP condition while the total numbers 
of CC an d UC were statistically equivalent across conditions 


Table lj . Moreover, it was also clear that strategies employed 


across conditions differed: In the MSP condition aircraft were 
routed both north and south around the weather cells while 
southern route was mainly used in the No-MSP condition. 
Also in the MSP condition, there were more CP activities that 
led to CCs and eventually to UCs, particularly in the western 
half of ZKC. Using the playback function, it was shown that 
these clearances resulted in aircraft taking the northern route 




around the convective weather. MSP-N and MSP-S were the 
biggest senders of CPs in the western half of ZKC. 

CONCLUSION 

Processing is a good platform for quickly producing a 
visualization tool with a set of requirements in mind. This tool 
is not meant to compete with other extensive analysis tools 
that exist today, but rather to complement them. All studies try 
to address different sets of questions (often unique to the study 
itself) and as a result some analyses such as the one discussed 
in this paper cannot rely on generic visualization tools. What 
this paper demonstrated is that VDC was useful in visualizing 
and analyzing data from the MSP study. It also demonstrated 
that a software development environment such as Processing 
was a good platform upon which to quickly build custom 
visualization tools. Perhaps in the future, VDC can serve as a 
good starting point as a visualization platform for studies 
involving data comm messages. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

Realization of the visualization tool described in this paper 
was made possible through encouragements from all research 
team members of the MSP study of the Airspace Operations 
Laboratory. I would like to thank Nancy Smith in particular 
for continually providing valuable feedback and suggestions. 

REFERENCES 

1. Federal Aviation Administration (2009). FAA Aerospace 
Forecast Fiscal Years 2009-2025. Washington DC, p.31. 

2. Joint Planning and Development Office (2004). Next 
Generation Air Transportation System. 
http://www.jpdo.gov (accessed March 16, 2010). 

3. Prevot, T., (2002). Exploring the many perspectives of 
distributed air traffic management: The Multi Aircraft 
Control System MACS , Proceedings of the HCI-Aero 2002, 
AAAI Press, Menlo Park CA, pp. 149-154. 


4. Corker, K., Lee, P.U., Prevot, T., Guneratne, E., Martin, L., 
Smith, N., Verma, S., Homola, J., Mercer, J. (2006). 
Analysis of Multi-Sector Planner Concepts in U.S. 
Airspace, FAA ATO Planning, Research & Technology 
Development Office. 

5. Lee, P.U., Corker, K., Smith, N., Prevot, T., Martin, L., 
Mercer, J., Homola, J., Guneratne, E. (2006). A Human-in- 
the-ioop Evaluation of Two Multi-Sector Planner 
Concepts: Muiti-D and Area Flow Manager ; Proceedings 
of the 25th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), 
Portland OR. 

6. Prevot, T., Smith, N., Palmer, E., Mercer, J., Lee, P.U., 
Homola, J., Callantine, T., (2006). “The Airspace 
Operations Laboratory (AOL) at NASA Ames Research 
Center,” AIAA-2006-61 12, American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Reston VA. 

7. Smith, N., Lee, P.U., Prevot, T., Homola, J., Lee, H., 
Kessell, A., Brasil, C., Mainini, M., Mercer, J. (2010) A 
Human-in-the-Loop Investigation of Multi-Sector Planning 
Operations for the Next Gen Mid- Term , 1 0th AIAA Aviation 
Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) 
Conference, September 13-15, Fort Worth TX. 

8. Kessell, A., Lee, P.U., Smith, N. (2010). Ground-Ground 
Data Communication-Assisted Verbal Communication for 
Multi-Sector Air Traffic Management ; 29 th European 
Association of Aviation Psychology, September 20 - 24, 
Budapest, Hungary. 

9. Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D., Shneiderman, B. (1999). 
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to 
Think, California: Morgan Kaufmann. 

10. Callantine, T. (2008). An integrated Tool for NextGen 
Concept Design, Fast-Time Simulation, and Analysis, 
Proceedings of the AIAA Modeling and Simulation 
Technologies Conference and Exhibit, August 18 - 21, 
Honolulu HI. 

1 1 . Processing 1.0. (No Date), http://processing.org (accessed 
March 16,2010). 



