jfL- 



m 

pH 

pO o 

0 i/> rg 

rH 03 pH 

1 p » H 

N u * 

O' co 

2 : 00 




y/i/ • ; : / 



,7 3 


RlCIS TECHNICAL NOTE 



Integrity and Security 
in an 

Ada Runtime Environment 



CD 

Z * ^ 

►H V O 
t/> 

> C -J 

H •-* U l 

CO 

a: jC u 
O U 

o w a 

UJ 03 
00 0) O' 

CO 

o a; : 

2! c*: — * 

< w a> 

u 

> c 
^ k a? 

z — 

a: uu u 

Oil/) ^ 

LU Z g 

K O U 
Z CC V 
b-i H 

> 3 
Z a 
^ uj E 
^ o 
rg LU u 
00 3: 

OC h T3 

00 h- 03 

rH ^ U 

1 => C 
CC OC 03 

O > f» 

! rt? T> ** 

< TJ < 

00 < 

< L 

z z o 

>-* < 4~ 


Rodney L. Bown 

University of Houston-Clear Lake 
June, 1991 


Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 
Research Activity No. SE.26 

NASA Johnson Space Center 
Engineering Directorate 
Flight Data Systems Division 



Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems 
University of Houston - Clear Lake 


T* E CHN'IC'A * L R • E * P • O * R • T 





The 

RICIS 

Concept 


The University of Houston-Clear Lake established the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information systems in 1986 to encourage NASA Johnson Space 
Center and local industry to actively support research in the computing and 
information sciences. As part of this endeavor, UH-Clear Lake proposed a 
partnership with JSC to jointly define and manage an integrated program of research 
in advanced data processing technology needed for JSC’s main missions, including 
administrative, engineering and science responsibilities. JSC agreed and entered into 
a three-year cooperative agreement with UH-Clear Lake beginning in May, 1986, to 
jointly plan and execute such research through RICIS. Additionally, under 
Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16, computing and educational facilities are shared 
by the two institutions to conduct the research. 

The mission of RICIS is to conduct, coordinate and disseminate research on 
computing and information systems among researchers, sponsors and users from 
UH-Clear Lake, NASA/JSC, and other research organizations. Within UH-Clear 
Lake, the mission is being implemented through interdisciplinary involvement of 
faculty and students from each of the four schools: Business, Education, Human 
Sciences and Humanities, and Natural and Applied Sciences. 

Other research organizations are involved via the “gateway” concept UH-Clear 
Lake establishes relationships with other universities and research organizations, 
having common research interests, to provide additional sources of expertise to 
conduct needed research. 

A major role of RICIS is to find the best match of sponsors, researchers and 
research objectives to advance knowledge in the computing and information 
sciences. Working jointly with NAS A/ JSC, RICIS advises on research needs, 
recommends principals for conducting the research, provides technical and 
administrative support to coordinate the research, and integrates technical results 
into the cooperative goals of UH-Clear Lake and NASA/JSC. 


RtCIS TECHNICAL NOTE 


Integrity and Security 
in an 

Ada Runtime Environment 



Preface 


This research was conducted under auspices of the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems by Dr. Rodney L. Bown, Associate Professor of 
Computer Systems Design at the University of Houston-Clear Lake. Dr. Bown also 
served as RICIS research coordinator. 

Funding has been provided by the Engineering Directorate, NASA/JSC through 
Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 between NASA Johnson Space Center and the 
University of Houston-Clear Lake. The NASA technical monitor for this activity was 
William C. Young, of the Project Integration Office, Flight Data Systems Division, 
Engineering Directorate, NASA/JSC. 

The views and conclusions contained in this report are those of the author and 
should not be interpreted as representative of the official policies, either express or 
implied, of NASA or the United States Government. 



RICIS TECHNICAL NOTE 


Integrity and Security in an Ada Runtime Environment 


Principal Investigator 
Rodney L. Bown 


in partial fulfillment of 
RICIS Task SE.26 


June 1991 




Integrity and Security in an Ada Runtime Environment 
Rodney L. Bown 

University of Houston-Clear Lake 


RICIS task SE.26 proposed that the principal investigator (PI) participate in the 1990 
Workshop on Issues of Integrity and Security in an Ada Runtime Environment Funds 
and time were not available for the PI to participate. The proceedings from the 
workshop are published in [Ada90b]. A copy of the proceedings has been provided to 
the SE.26 task monitor. 

This technical note provides a review of the Formal Methods group with additional 
commentary based on presentations and discussions with Dr. John McHugh [McHU90], 
[McHU91J. Dr McHugh was the leader of the Formal Methods working group. 

Dr. Charles W. McKay of UHCL was the chair of the group that discussed the issues of 
Access Control in a Distributed Environment with Persistent Data. Dr. McKay has 
provided the Clear Lake technical community with comments related to this working 
group. 

When one reads the Formal Methods section (section 3) of the proceedings, there is a 
temptation to dwell on the bitter tone of the group. An example is the statement "We 
are less than comfortable with the conceptual basis of the workshop". The group 
concentrated on process and not on a lengthy list of veiy specific issues. The group’s 
contribution is that they have provided a list of research issues. 

The group had difficulty in providing a formal definition of integrity. Dr. McHugh 
wrote: 

"Integrity is not a binary quantity but we seem to lack a metric for quantifying 
integrity. There is no basis for establishing the integrity of externally developed 
data or specifying the effects of software on the relationship between the integrity 
of input and output data. There is no basis for establishing the integrity metrics 
for software." 

The integrity issue was discussed with Dr. McHugh during a Februaiy 1991 visit to the 
University of North Carolina. He emphasized that security can be represented with a 
discrete Boolean metric i.e. there has been a write down or a read up violation on a set 
of sensitive data. 

He states that integrity is not a pure mathematical dual of security. As stated in the 
working group, the input data is part of the integrity domain. If the system observes a 
write up, is it an integrity violation? The new data itself may have higher integrity. An 


1 



weak analogy may be viewed within the context of equal data coming to Central 
Intelligence Agency: one set from an agent and another set from a CNN TV broadcast. 
The ability of the agent to write up to the CIA does not guarantee his data has a higher 
degree of integrity over the data provided by an on-the-scene CNN TV reporter. 

The group provided a roadmap for research. One item of the roadmap and the final 
position statement are closely related to the space shuttle and space station. The group’s 
position is to use a safe subset of Ada. Examples of safe sets include the Army Secure 
Operating System and the Penelope Ada verification tool. This PI recommends that a 
conservative attitude is required when writing Ada code for life and property critical 
systems. This requires the use of a safe subset of Ada. The benefit is that a developing 
tool such as Penelope may be sufficient to verify the safe subset. 

The group complete their report with a position statement that is related to the 
developing Software engineering curriculum at UHCL and its support of RICIS research 
activities. 

"Incorporation of formal methods in software engineering practice requires a 
cooperative effort involving practitioners in the design and engineering of formal 
methodology and greater understanding and appreciation of software practice on 
the part of formal methods researchers. 

We therefore recommend a multi-threaded approach involving teams of 
researches and practitioners, preferably situated in the application development 
environment, to negotiate approximate solutions of real utility and strategies for 
extending them progressively more complete solutions." 

Local activities related to this position statement include those cited below: 

RICIS research activity with the Micro-electronics Computer Corporation (MCC) to 
evaluate Formal Methods. 

UHCL is offering a Master of Science degree in Software Engineering Sciences. The bad 
news is that the degree should be called Software Engineering without the Sciences 
modifier. UHCL has proposed a name change for this degree. 

This PI is offering a summer 1991 course in Formal Methods and Models. The good 
news is that there are 8 students in the class. The bad news is that 7 of the students are 
foreign. 

The PI has submitted a RICIS research proposal to NASA JSC on using formal 
methods within the post delivery enhancement and configuration management activities 
of non-developmental (NDI) software. 


2 


The Ada 9X effort is directly related to this discussion. Dr. McHugh provided a report 
on Ada 9X at the November 1990 RICIS Conference [McHU91]. Dr. McHugh attended 
the Ada 9X Requirements Workshop held in Soderfors, Sweden on April 24-27., 1990. 
The Chair’s report appeared in the September/October 1990 Ada Letters [Ada90a]. His 
notes have been provided to the task monitor. During this discussion Dr. McHugh 
expressed the view that in an attempt to be 100 percent upward compatible, Ada 9X will 
become too unwieldy for formal verification of the executable axle. Locally Dr. Charles 
W. McKay has been coordinating the UHCL response to Ada 9X activities. 


References 

[AdA90a] 

Boyd, Stowe. "Ada9X Requirements Workshop Soderfors, Sweden." Ada Letters . 
September/October 1990 104-128. 

[Ada90b] 

Proceedings from the 1990 Workshop on Issues of Integrity and Security in an Ada 
Environment . 3-5 April. Orlando, Florida. Sponsored by IIT Research Institute and 
Ada Joint Program Office. Published in Ada Letters November/December 1990 88-121. 

[McHU90] 

McHugh, John. Issues Related .to Ada 9X . Presented at RICIS’90 Symposium. 
University of Houston-Clear Lake 7-8 November 1990. 

[McHU91] 

Private conversations with John McHugh, 8 February 1991. 


3 



