N89- 16328 


A Software Development Environment 
Utilizing PAMELA 


Prepared by: 

R. L. Flick 

L 

R. W. Connelly 

Westinghouse Defense &. Electronics Center 
P.O. Box 746 
Baltimore, Maryland 21203 


May 12, 1986 


D.4.3.1 



A Software Development Environment 
Utilizing PAMELA 1 

Abstract 


Hardware capability and efficiency has increased dramatically since 
the invention of the computer, while software programmer productivity 
apd efficiency has remained at a relatively low level. A user-friendly, 
adaptable. integrated software development environment is needed to 
alleviate this problem. The environment should be designed around the 
Ada 2 language and a design methodology which takes advantage of the 
features of the Ada language such as the Process Abstraction Method 
for Embedded Large Applications (PAMELA). 


Introduction 


Since the invention of the computer, advances in software 
development productivity have not kept pace with hardware productivity. 
Although the throughput of modern computers has made a 1,000.000-fold 
increase over the last thirty years, software productivity has increased 
only slightly. During the same period, hardware costs have decreased 
dramatically and software costs have skyrocketed. Moreover. the 
complexity of embedded systems is growing exponentially. putting an 
ever increasing demand on software production. 

Many studies have shown that the major costs in the software 
development life cycle occur after system delivery. Approximately 70% 
of these costs are incurred during the maintenance phase. There are 
several reasons for this: 

1. Personnel costs for software professionals have risen steadily 
over the years. Consequently, for large systems designed to 
last many years, the cost of people becomes a major concern. 

2. Inadequacy of documentation either internal or external to the 
code is a continual source of increased costs. Frequently on 
large systems, a modification in one routine will affect many 
other routines in unexpected ways. It is not uncommon that a 


1. PAMELA is a trademark of Dr. George Cherry, Reston, Virginia 

2. Ada is a registered trademark of the United States Department of Defense, 
Ada Joint Program Office. 


D.4.3.2 


change to correct one error will lead to numerous other errors. 
This is partially because large programs are intrinsically hard to 
understand. but also because inadequate documentation 
hampers understanding. Furthermore. most programming 
languages do not promote greater understanding since they do 
not always enforce good software engineering practices. 

3. Yet another factor is an inadequate design process. Frequently, 
paper designs are created by systems engineers and then handed 
to programmers for implementation. The programmer often will 
tend to stray from the paper design in order to increase 
efficiency or make changes that are required by the constraints 
of the language employed. 

The real cost of software therefore is in the maintenance of 
programs - but it originates in the methods and languages used to 
create these programs. 

Current projections show that the cost of developing software is 
likely to continue to increase unless new. more efficient methods are 
employed. If current trends continue there will be a short fall of 

programmers by 1990 which may exceed 800,000. s Such a devastating 
short fall will slow software development to a crawl for many major 
government programs. 

Current trends can be reversed by developing and utilizing standard 
software engineering practices throughout the software industry. These 
practices can be implemented in an expert system that is designed to 
specifically support one design methodology. In addition the methodology 
used must be specific to the language that is supported. The preferred 
language to be used is Ada. and one methodology that is specifically 
designed for the Ada language is PAMELA. 

The Ada Language 

Since the software development environment supports development of 
large embedded applications for the Department Of Defense (DOD) 
applications, and incorporate state-of-the-art tools, the language of choice 
is Ada. Ada is a fairly new language developed by the DOD specifically 
for embedded applications. Although Ada is new. the DOD has set a 
requirement that all new software written for the DOD will be done in 
Ada. As the advantages of using Ada as a general purpose programming 


3. Mr. Edward Berard, EVB Systems, ACM SIGAda meeting, Los Angeles, 
California, February, 1986. 


D.4.3.3 


language become more fully developed. commercial firms will also 
choose Ada for there software needs. Some of the important features 
brought to software engineering are : 

Code Reusability; 

Ada supports code reusability in the form of generic packages, a 
common library of compiled units, and modular coding techniques. With 
these facilities Westinghouse has established a common database of 
program modules at the company level. By establishing and using this 
database of reusable software modules. generating software for 
embedded applications has become cheaper and faster. 

Tasking: 

Something new that is supported by Ada and virtually no other 
language, is the task unit. This unit is on the same level as a function 
or subprogram with one important difference: a task unit can be declared 
as a type. Because of tasking, generating embedded systems that 
require some form of parallel processing is easier. 

ParaHci Development; 

An important feature of Ada. is the ability to do parallel 
development. Ada offers this facility in the form of separate compilation 
units. Westinghouse has found that several individuals can work on 
different sections of the code and not interfere with each other, and that 
code development is not dependant on any special order of 

accomplishment (other than Ada s dependency rules of course). 
Westinghouse has been able to increase software engineering productivity 
by reducing the scope of dependencies within the software application. 

Information Hiding: 

Ada provides the facility to hide the underlying machine dependent 
representation of data items. This discourages the software engineer 
from depending on a machine specific characteristic when implementing a 
section of the software system. It also means that the code generated 
should be transportable to any other machine that supports a validated 
Ada compiler. 

Strong Type Checking Across Separate Compilation Units: 

Ada is a strongly typed language that will not allow nonconformant 
data types to be passed between program units. The purpose of Ada's 
strong type checking is to prevent common errors from occurring when 
calling another software engineer's code. 


D.4.3.4 




Ada's Place In The Design Of A Software System: 


To be able to take advantage of the state-of-the-art facilities that 
Ada offers, the perception of when the capabilities of the programming 
language that is used is to be considered must be changed. In addition 
a design methodology that implements design concepts specified in MIL- 
STD 2167 and takes into account the improved facilities of Ada must be 
utilized. 

Up until now the typical method for designing a software system 
involved specifying requirements, doing a preliminary design, doing a 
detailed design using a PDL and finally selecting a language and 
implementing the design. The primary methodology used when designing 
the system was typically a derivative of Data Flow Diagrams, (see Fig. 
# 1) This approach has worked with other languages (before Ada) 
because they did not provide sophisticated facilities for embedded 
environments such as tasking. Languages therefore, had little impact on 
the design of the system itself. All popular languages, aside from Ada. 
are sequential in nature. The design methodology used to express a 
system under development in this language is compatible with the 
capabilities of the language used and is sequential in nature. 

If Ada is to become an effective alternative. several common 
practices and assumptions used in designing an embedded system must 
change, and a design methodology that is designed to accommodate a 
specific language must be used. To be able to take advantage of the 
advanced features that Ada offers. the methodology must take the 
language features into consideration in the preliminary design phase of a 
software system (see Fig. # 2). This means that consideration of 
language facilities should be an integral part of the preliminary and 
detailed design of the system. If the language considerations are made 
early in the development of the preliminary design, the overall impact 
will be in the areas of coding and integration time. These two areas 
comprise most of a software systems development cost. If however. 
Ada’s facilities are not considered early in the preliminary development. 
Ada will offer almost no advantage over any other language. 

The method of considering Ada's facilities in the preliminary and 
detailed design phase is dependent on the methodology used to express 
these designs. The popular methodologies of flow chart's, data flow 
diagrams, etc. will be of little advantage in the preliminary design phase 
when using Ada. The inability of these methodologies to express the 
unique facilities of tasking, code reusability, modular design, and parallel 
development diminish their usefulness for creating a design based on 


D.4.3.5 


THIS METHODOLOGY REFLECTS THE SEQUENTIAL NATURE OF AVAILABLE j^GUAGES 



D.4.3.6 


'.METHOD CJ^SOFTWARESYSTCMIMPLEMENTATtON 



THIS METHODOLOGY REFLECTS THE PARALLEL NATURE OF THE ADA I ANini 1AHF 




D.4.3.7 


LMETHOO_OF_80FTWARE_8YaTEMIMPt.EMENTAnON 



Ada. It is therefore necessary that a design methodology that can 
express parallelism, code reusability, modular design, and parallel 

development be used. It is also necessary that the methodology used in 
the preliminary and detailed design be a direct expression of the Ada 
language. We have found that PAMELA fits this description. 


Description of PAMELA 

PAMELA is a methodology for producing real-time Ada programs 

which utilize Ada tasking. It was designed by Dr. George Cherry 

(Reston. Virginia) to address the needs of Ada users in developing real- 
time programs using Ada's rich variety of language features. 

PAMELA is a structured methodology that encourages a top-down 
approach, with each step in the method revealing more details than the 
previous step, (see Fig. # 3) It is also a graphical methodology which 
produces pictographs of the underlying Ada code. In fact. Ada package 
and task specifications. as well as skeletal package and task bodies, 
can be produced directly from PAMELA graphs. 

PAMELA combines aspects the two most prominent program 

representation methodologies of the past two decades, data flow 

diagrams and control flow diagrams (flow charts). It’s pictographs are 
very similar to those produced by structured analysis and structured 
design techniques (data flow diagrams), but it also embodies a certain 
amount of control flow information - primarily because of the well 
defined Ada tasking mechanism. 

PAMELA guides the program designer in the selection of multiple, 
concurrent threads of execution (called processes in PAMELA 

nomenclature). By analyzing the requirements of the problem, and by 
following the process idioms outlined in the method, (see Fig. # 4) the 
program designer identifies which elements of the program should become 
processes. He then determines what kind of data or control signals 

must be passed between processes. Next, he determines which process 
is the producer of the flow and which is the consumer, (see Fig. # 5) 
Finally, he determines which of the processes should be single-thread (a 
typical C. PASCAL, or FORTRAN - style program) and which should be 
multi-thread (more than one Ada task). Once the graph has been 
annotated with this information. Ada code can automatically be 
generated (in skeletal form) which implements the design. 


D.4.3.8 


Define External Entities 



D.4.3.9 


FIGURE //3 




D.4.3.10 


Reference: Process Abstraction Method for Embedded Large Applications 
George W. Cherry, Reston VA 1985. 

FIGURE 14 



LEVEL 1 



D.4.3.11 


FICUkk II 



From the PAMELA graphs, single-thread processes become Ada 
tasks. while multi-thread processes become packages. The package 
body of a multi-thread process contains task and package specifications 
for the lower level singfe- and multi-thread processes respectively. 


The Problem To Be Solved 


The problem of increasingly large and complex software systems, in 
concert with a massive projected shortfall of software engineers in the 
next decade, fueled by spiraling software costs, must be abated. It is 
foolhardy to think that software systems will decrease in complexity: all 

current trends support the notion that future software systems will be 
very much more complex than those of today. The number of software 
engineers may increase by the next decade. but probably not fast 

enough to meet the challenges of these more complex systems. If 
software engineers continue to be in high demand, there is little hope 
of abating spiraling software costs. 

The key to the solution of the problem is to substantially increase 
the productivity of software professionals. The primary tool to 
accomplish this goal is a high performance Software Development 
Environment (SDE). The SDE must be designed and built around a 
single specific language and design methodology. Since the DOD has 
mandated that all new software written for the DOD will be in Ada. 
Ada is the natural language of choice for the SDE. There are several 
new Ada based design methodologies such as Object Oriented Design 
(OOD). PAMELA (Process Abstraction Methodology for Embedded Large 
Applications). and Ada Partition Programming Language (APPL). Of 
all the new design methodologies we are considering PAMELA, as an 
example, around which to design the SDE. 

The Software Development Environment 

A software development environment (SDE) is being created at 
Westinghouse which supports all activities associated with the 
development of embedded software systems, as well as software 
management and post deployment support. By integrating all of the 
activities involved in software development under the control of one 
expandable. adaptable environment, software development and support 
can be made easier, more cost effective, and more reliable (see Fig. # 
6). 


D. 4. 3.12 



TOOLS 





D.4.3.13 


FIGURE 116 



Important elements of the environment are: 

Reliability: 

The reliability of programs created under the SDE must be 
significantly greater than that of programs generated without such an 
environment. Reliability metrics. when applied to programs created 
under the SDE. should show a measurable and statistically significant 
increase in reliability. This in turn will require that the SDE itself be 
an exceptionally reliable program. We have seen that by using 
PAMELA, it is relatively straightforward to create reliable designs in a 
timely manner. Since the underlying Ada code maps directly to 
PAMELA pictographs. it is only necessary to correctly identify control 
and data flows at a high (pictograph) level to insure the reliability of 
the underlying code. Application of expert system techniques will also 
enhance the reliability of the environment. 

Ease of Use: 


The SDE will encompass a common. multi-level. user friendly 
interface. In particular, the interface will be as easy to use for the 

novice as for the expert. This will probably be accomplished with a 

multi-window, menu-driven interface which will provide full prompting 
for the novice. For the expert, a series of function keys and/or control 
keys can be defined (by the environment and/or by the user) to enable 
rapid execution of frequently used command sequences. For others, on- 
line help and an English-like command interface will be provided. Every 

user will be able to select the interface he/she prefers and will also be 

allowed to jump to any particular interface level at will. 

PAMELA will support the ease of use concept since it is graphical, 
and is supported by an interactive. full screen tool which can 
automatically generate executable code. 


Cost Effectiveness: 


The environment should be networked so that individual 
workstations can be utilized by development and management personnel. 
This means that each individual or team will be able to achieve 
maximum utilization of the facilities available while avoiding the typical 
slow down experienced with multi-user super-mini implementations. 
Because of advances in micro-processors, a single user workstation can 
provide an engineer with a more responsive machine than can normally 
be attained with a time-shared super-mini. The resultant increase in 

throughput, can increase productivity substantially. As a side benefit, 
costs incurred due to main CPU down-time can be minimized by 
allowing the workstations to operate independent from the host. 


D. 4. 3.14 



The use of PAMELA should also prove cost effective in that it 
allows for rapid prototyping of the software system within the SDE. 
This allows the program implementors (and designers) to identify and 
correct potential or unexpected problem areas before they actually become 
problem areas. 

Adaptability: 

The environment will support various tools that will measure 
productivity, quality, maintainability and overall cost. This means that 
management will have the ability to measure all aspects of the evolving 
system in terms of quality, maintainability and cost. It will also allow 
the measurement of team performance compared to calibration data 
contained in the database. Such measurements can be used to 

recalibrate the system to more accurately reflect real world situations. 

PAMELA has proven itself to be quite adaptable. In one particular 
instance, a 7000 line program was re-designed and re-implemented from 
scratch in just three days. 

Design Continuity: 

The environment is an expert system which provides tools that 

enhance all phases of the software life cycle. Program requirements are 
entered into a relational data base under the control of the expert 
system. Once a requirement has been entered, a basis is established 

for all later phases of the software life cycle. In particular, design, 

coding. and test specifications are derived from the requirements and 
related back to them by the expert system. This provides traceability 

from requirements to code, but also allows the environment to provide 
an impact analysis report for each requirement. 

Software designs (specifically PAMELA designs) are accepted by the 
expert system. Once a design has been entered, it can be verified for 
compliance to the requirements by the environment. 

Tools such as language sensitive editors, compilers, and debuggers 
which facilitate the coding and unit testing process can also be directed 
by the environment. For example, a compiler which produces diagnostic 
information could relate the number and kinds of programmer errors to 
the environment. The expert system could in turn relate this 
information back to a language sensitive editor to help correct 

programmer mistakes as they happen. 

Since all requirements and design information are entered into the 
expert environment. test scenarios and/or test cases can be 
automatically generated to verify the design. 


D.4.3.15 


Program Visibility 


The SDE supports all levels of management visibility into the 
current status, and projected results of the project. This means that 

the management functions of progress tracking, scheduling, and cost 
information gathering will be provided by the expert system. This 
includes but is not limited to. the automatic generation documentation 
and management reports with little or no human intervention. In 
addition there is some capability of the software factory concept in that 
generic, reusable software could be placed in the design by the expert 
system itself. This will alleviate the problem of the software engineer 
overlooking a reusable package that is in the database of reusable 
program modules. 

Projected Environment Layout: 

The environment will be as flexible as possible and support all types 
and sizes of software development. The system will incorporate artificial 
intelligence. networking. database management and some form of 
electronic mail. The hardware of such a system is projected to be 
composed of the following components: 

1. A VAX minicomputer as the central database machine. 

2. Several VAXSTATION ll's as individual workstations. 

3. Several micro computers such as IBM PC/AT's for manager 
workstations. 

4. Some type of clustering system. 

5. Some type of LAN (Local Area Network) system for node 
communications. 

6. Hardware simulators and development stations for hardware 
specific support. 

(see Fig. # 7) 


Potential Problem Arenas 


As is the case with all things. PAMELA is not perfect. There are 
two potential problem arenas associated with PAMELA which affect the 
performance of the SDE. For one thing. PAMELA designs typically 


D. 4. 3.16 



Microvax II work stations IBM pc/at*s 


r i iinn L*r\o 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



□ 





D.4.3.17 


FIGURE j?7 






create too many tasks. This is not a fault with the methodology per 
se. but reflects the fact that there are precious few machines out there 
that are made to run Ada. The methodology has been altered 
somewhat to account for this fact, but in so doing, it has lost some 
of its "virtual machine" flavor. 

Another potential problem arena is that of testing. The current 
suggestion is to test each single-thread process using current structured 
techniques. As each is tested, it is integrated with the others and an 
integration test is performed. Eventually a multi-thread process will be 
declared valid and it then can be integrated with other processes. 
There is no method however for verifying that all the task rendezvous 
and other task interactions are correct. This is still a matter of art as 
much as it is of science but may be alleviated somewhat by the use of 
heuristic approaches common in expert systems. It is not clear however, 
whether this will be harmful for large embedded systems. If the paper 
design is solid. the implementation should be as well: but there is 

unfortunately no method for verifying paper designs either. 


Potential Solutions 


The horizon should not be clouded by the concerns raised above. 
Each problem poses new and exciting possibilities for new technologies 
and new ideas to solve those problems. Each new challenge brings us 
closer yet to another breakthrough. 

The problems posed in the development of a state-of-the-art 
software development environment can be solved by hard work and 
dedication. They should not be attacked alone. but in concert with 
concerned organizations willing to lead us into the next century. 


Conclusions 


In conclusion. the need for a comprehensive, integrated software 

development environment has been demonstrated by the severe lack of 
productivity in developing software as compared to computer hardware. 
The need to automate documentation so that it provides a better picture 
of the program is essential to decreasing the maintenance costs of large 
software systems. An automated, integrated environment supporting a 
single specific language such as Ada and designed around a specific 
methodology such as PAMELA will reduce time and errors in the design 
and testing phases. Since the environment will ensure adequate tracking 
of requirements, design, implementation and testing, the cohesion is 


/ 


D. 4. 3.18 



provided to aid management tracking of progress during the software life 
cycle. A common, multi-level, user friendly interface is absolutely 
required to insure maximum effectiveness for all users of various levels of 
experience and expertise. Finally. PAMELA is an ideal design 

methodology for such an environment. since it is Ada-based, and 

naturally addresses multiple concurrent tasks. PAMELA has been used 
on projects at Westinghouse and has proven its effectiveness for rapid 
prototyping, ease of design, maintainability and adaptability . 4 


4. Some material contained in this document was presented by Rich Connelly and 
Barbara Sullivan at the SigAda conference held in Boston Ma. in Nov. 1985 


D.4.3.19 



