both the LI (1.57542-GHz) and L2 
(1.2276-GHz) GPS signals. 

This program was written by Sung Byun, 
George Hajj, and Lawrence Young of Cal- 
tech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1 ).. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-40463. 


© Parallel Adaptive Mesh 
Refinement Library 

Parallel Adaptive Mesh Refinement 
Library (PARAMESH) is a package of 
Fortran 90 subroutines designed to pro- 
vide a computer programmer with an 
easy route to extension of (1) a previ- 
ously written serial code that uses a logi- 
cally Cartesian structured mesh into (2) 
a parallel code with adaptive mesh re- 
finement (AMR) . Alternatively, in its 
simplest use, and with minimal effort, 
PARAMESH can operate as a domain- 
decomposition tool for users who want 
to parallelize their serial codes but who 
do not wish to utilize adaptivity. The 
package builds a hierarchy of sub-grids 
to cover the computational domain of a 
given application program, with spatial 
resolution varying to satisfy the demands 
of the application. The sub-grid blocks 
form the nodes of a tree data structure 
(a quad-tree in two or an oct-tree in 
three dimensions). Each grid block has 
a logically Cartesian mesh. The package 
supports one-, two- and three-dimen- 
sional models. 

This program was written by Peter Mac- 
Neice of Raytheon/STX and Kevin Olson of 
George Mason University for Goddard Space 
Flight Center. For further information, access 
http://sdcd.gsfc. nasa.gov/RIB/repositories/ in 
house_gsfc/Users_manual/ amrjtutorial. html. 
GSC-14626-1 


© Space Physics Data Facility 
Web Services 

The Space Physics Data Facility 
(SPDF) Web services provides a distrib- 
uted programming interface to a por- 
tion of the SPDF software. (A general 
description of Web services is available 
at http://www.w3.org/ and in many cur- 
rent software-engineering texts and arti- 
cles focused on distributed program- 
ming.) The SPDF Web services 

distributed programming interface en- 
ables additional collaboration and inte- 


gration of the SPDF software system 
with other software systems, in further- 
ance of the SPDF mission to lead collab- 
orative efforts in the collection and uti- 
lization of space physics data and 
mathematical models. This program- 
ming interface conforms to all applica- 
ble Web services specifications of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. The in- 
terface is specified by a Web Services 
Description Language (WSDL) file. The 
SPDF Web services software consists of 
the following components: 

• A server program for implementation 
of the Web services; and 

• A software developer’s kit that consists 
of a WSDL file, a less formal descrip- 
tion of the interface, a Java class li- 
brary (which further eases develop- 
ment of Java-based client software), 
and Java source code for an example 
client program that illustrates the use 
of the interface. 

This program was written by Robert M. Can- 
dry, Bernard T. Harris, and Reine A. Chimiak 

o/Goddard Space Flight Center. For further 
information, access http://spdf.gsfc.nasa.gov/. 
GSC-14730-1 


Predicting Noise From 
Aircraft Turbine- 
Engine Combustors 

COMBUSTOR and CNOISE are com- 
puter codes that predict far-field noise 
that originates in the combustors of 
modern aircraft turbine engines — es- 
pecially modern, low-gaseous-emission 
engines, the combustors of which some- 
times generate several decibels more 
noise than do the combustors of older 
turbine engines. COMBUSTOR imple- 
ments an empirical model of combustor 
noise derived from correlations between 
engine-noise data and operational and 
geometric parameters, and was devel- 
oped from databases of measurements 
of acoustic emissions of engines. 
CNOISE implements an analytical and 
computational model of the propaga- 
tion of combustor temperature fluctua- 
tions (hot spots) through downstream 
turbine stages. Such hot spots are known 
to give rise to far-field noise. CNOISE is 
expected to be helpful in determining 
why low-emission combustors are some- 
times noisier than older ones, to provide 
guidance for refining the empirical cor- 
relation model embodied in the COM- 
BUSTOR code, and to provide insight 
on how to vary downstream turbine- 
stage geometry to reduce the contribu- 
tion of hot spots to far-field noise. 


These programs were written by P. Gliebe, R 
Mani, S. Salamah, and R Coffin of General 
Electric Co. and Jayesh Mehta ofDiversitec, Inc., 
for Glenn Research Center. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Commercial 
Technology Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-1 7385-1. 


^ Generating Animated Dis- 
plays of Spacecraft Orbits 

Tool for Interactive Plotting, Sonifica- 
tion, and 3D Orbit Display (TIPSOD) is a 
computer program for generating inter- 
active, animated, four-dimensional 
(space and time) displays of spacecraft 
orbits. TIPSOD utilizes the program- 
ming interface of the Satellite Situation 
Center Web (SSCWeb) services to com- 
municate with the SSC logic and data- 
base by use of the open protocols of the 
Internet. TIPSOD is implemented in Java 
3D and effects an extension of the pre- 
existing SSCWeb two-dimensional static 
graphical displays of orbits. Orbits can be 
displayed in any or all of the following 
seven reference systems: true-of-date (an 
inertial system), J2000 (another inertial 
system), geographic, geomagnetic, geo- 
centric solar ecliptic, geocentric solar 
magnetospheric, and solar magnetic. In 
addition to orbits, TIPSOD computes 
and displays Sibeck’s magnetopause and 
Fairfield’s bow-shock surfaces. TIPSOD 
can be used by the scientific community 
as a means of projection or interpreta- 
tion. It also has potential as an educa- 
tional tool. Documentation and links for 
downloading the software can be found 
at http://sscweb.gsfc.gov/ tipsod/. 

This program was written by Robert M. Can- 
dey, Reine A. Chimiak, and Bernard T. Harris 
of Goddard Space Flight Center. For more 
information contact the Goddard Commercial 
Technology Office at (301 ) 286-5810. 
GSC-14732-1 


© Diagnosis and Prognosis of 
Weapon Systems 

The Prognostics Framework is a set of 
software tools with an open architecture 
that affords a capability to integrate var- 
ious prognostic software mechanisms 
and to provide information for opera- 
tional and battlefield decision-making 
and logistical planning pertaining to 
weapon systems. The Prognostics 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs, February 2005 


