NASA KSC/Intem Abstract - 7/27/15 


Internship Abstract 

Regolith Advanced Surface Systems Operations Robot (RASSOR) Phase 2 
and Smart Autonomous Sand-Swimming Excavator 


Student Name: Michael Sandy 
Academic Level: Junior 

Academic Major: Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Academic Institution: California Baptist University 


Mentor Name: Thomas Lippitt 
Job Title: GMRO Lab Manager 

Org Code/Branch or Division: UB-R1/ Spaceport Systems Branch 
Directorate: (UB) Exploration Research and Technology Programs 



Abstract 

As an intern at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center I worked in the UB-R1 branch in the Swamp 
Works Granular Mechanics and Regolith Operations (GMRO) lab. The main project that I was 
assigned to was the RASSOR 2 robot. I worked on the software and programming of the robot. 
The RASSOR 2 runs on Linux and is programmed using the Robotic Operating System (ROS). In 
order to be competent in programming RASSOR 2, 1 spent time learning ROS by using the ROS 
Wiki beginner tutorials. I also learned how to use various functions of the Linux terminal. 
Furthermore, RASSOR 2 uses a robot simulation program called Gazebo to simulate how the robot 
would act in a real physical environment, so I learned how to use this program through 
gazebosim.org tutorials. Some of its programs are written in Python, so I spent some time learning 
the programming language through tutorials on codecademy.com. I was assigned to various 
aspects of the RASSOR 2 program in order to make it a fully functioning and professional robot. 
I created header files that are used in the C++ source code to use the joystick and to control the 
robot. Also, I modified the control of both the front and rear drums in the RASSOR 2 to turn on 
the rear drum to dig or dump when the d-pad is pressed down or up respectively, and to turn off 
when pressing up or down on the d-pad again. This also works when using the “A” or “Y” buttons 
for the front drum. I also changed the code for the mobility of the robot to only use commands 
that come from the left joystick. This saves bandwidth so that RASSOR 2 can operate more 
efficiently. Furthermore, I spent time creating a graphical user interface plugins to display the 
speeds of the motors and other robot information. RASSOR 2 will continue to be developed as a 
professional robot after my internship. 

During this internship I also worked on a Kennedy Space Center Kick Start project called the 
Smart Autonomous Sand-Swimming Excavator. It was designed as a proof-of-concept of digging 
through sand to locate sample material. The first version uses an Arduino Uno and the lsheeld for 
Bluetooth communication to an Android device. It is also being developed to work with a single 
board computer like the Raspberry Pi or the Intel Edison to communicate with the user over the 
internet. The user is able to know what orientation the Sandswimmer is in using an accelerometer, 
and the user can send commands back to the Sandswimmer through an Android device over 
Bluetooth. The Sandswimmer uses two solenoids connected to each other to move around. I 
programmed the Sandswimmer using the Arduino IDE and various programs on the single board 
computer as needed. I also worked on the circuits used to control and power the solenoids and the 



Sandswimmer. In the future the Sandswimmer can be designed to dig through regolith on Mars 
or an asteroid. 



