


National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 


November/December 1986 





THINK SMART 



Hundreds of leading 
edge organizations 
develop practical 
applications using Tek’s 
Family of Al Worksta- 
tions. The 4400 Series 
offers you excellent pro- 
ductivity for rapid proto- 
typing, expert systems 
building and advanced 
software development. 

This productivity 
results from Tek’s commit- 
ment to practical 
research and develop- 
ment goals. Goals we 
can help you achieve 
with tools like Common 
Lisp and Prolog as well 
as object-oriented lan- 
guages like Smalltalk. 

All optimized to run on 
Tek's low-cost, high- 
performance 32-bit 
workstations. 

Add to this the out- 
standing training and 
support, and you know 
why more and more inno- 
vative developers are 
selecting Tek Al systems 
when they want to think 
smart. 

For more information, 
circle the reader service 
card or write to: Tektronix, 
Inc., Al Marketing, P.O. 
Box 1000, M S. 63-635, 
Wilsonville, OR 97070. 

Copyright <55 1986. Tektronix. Inc 
All rights reserved VTT-101 


Tektronix 

COMMITTED TO EXCELLENCE 


Circle Reader Action No. 357 







ji.f't THE TRANSISTOR 
— 0,1 OF LUBRICATION 


How to make your machinery use less power, 
start and run smoother, quieter, with lower wear 

Lab tests show our patented technology produces the lowest friction and wear of any known lubricant ... not just a little bit 
better, but better by a wide margin (orders of magnitude in some cases). Four-ball tests at the U.S. National Bureau of 
Standards show the friction for our product TUFOIL, as low as .029 with very low wear. Confirmation is coming in from labs all 
over the world. 

TUFOIL LIGHTNING GREASE (a jelled version of TUFOIL) works where all others fail. Field tests show that the life of crucial 
machine parts is greatly extended. 


SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE PHOTOS 50X MAGNIFICATION 


HEATS FAST 

Molybdenum Disulfide Grease 
(Test “C" below) 



ROTOR BALL STATOR BALL 


STAYS COOL 

Tufoil Lightning Grease 
(Test "D" & “E* below) 



ROTOR BALL STATOR BALL 


4 BALL TEST OF GREASES 
80 KG LOAD — 1700 RPM — .375 DIA. STEEL BALLS 


HOT ^B;;C 

h v 


is, 

• : 

• / / 
;/ •' 


r 1 


COOC -A' - 

CLEAR WHEEL BEARING GREASE 
(HEATED RAPIDLY) FAILEO IN 7 5 
MINUTES AT 130 C 

COOE'B’- 

WHITE UTMIUM GREASE HEATEO 
SLOWER FAILED IN 15 MINUTES 
AT ISO'C 

COOETT- 

OARK GREY MOLYBDENUM 0* 
SULFIDE GREASE HEATED 
SLOWLY TO 100‘C THEN FAILED 
RAPOLY 


Tufoil 

rE 


COOL 


STOP FOR COMPARISON 
SE M PHOTOS ID) 15 MINUTES 


LOW WEAR POLISHED ROTOR NO 
MOOE Of FAILURE APPARENT 
STOP TEST AT END OF SHIFT 
(SEESEM PHOTOS) 

AMBIENT 20 C 


7.5 is 4S 
(MINUTES) 
NON-LINEAR 


4 S 

HOURS 


The Tufoil lubricants have been under development for 1 5 years They all contain 
Teflon ’* or Fluon"* 

Teflon is Reg TM of DuPont Fluon is Reg TM of ICI Americas, Inc TUFOIL is Reg 
TM of Fluoramics. Inc . U.S Patents No 3.933.565. 4.127.491 and 4.224.1 73 Other 
U.S. and International Patents issued and pending 

OEMs all over the world are using TUFOIL products to make 
machines run better, smoother and last longer. 


TUFOIL LIGHTNING GREASE STAYS COOL AND 
SHOWS LESS WEAR 

Scanning electron microscope photos of the rotor and stator 
ball scars from "C” (moly disulfide grease) show a great deal 
of wear and metal distress. “A” and “B” were similar. 

The newly developed TUFOIL LIGHTNING GREASE was 
tested for 15 minutes. The test was stopped at "D” so that 
S.E.M. photos of the balls could be made for comparison 
purposes. Both the rotor and stator marks appear polished 
and smooth. A great deal of super fine PTFE debris (teflon or 
fluon) can be seen at the bottom of the rotor photos. It is 
loosely bonded to the metal surface. Solvent rinsing will not 
easily remove it. 

The wear areas on the stator were calculated, showing the 
spot on the control was 7.7 times larger than for TUFOIL 
grease (7.7 times the wear). Another test was set up with fresh 
balls (“E”) and run for a full shift of 6 hours. The temperature 
stabilized at 50°C. The test was terminated with no mode of 
failure apparent. S.E.M. photos show highly polished surfaces 
with scar marks only slightly larger than those for "D” (the 15 
minute sample). 

We then life tested for 7 days (7 hours per day) ... no failure 
and less wear than the moly disulfide produced in 15 minutes. 


Ground support vehicles start easier on cold mornings . . . 
turn table spindles have less rumble . . . automatic inserting 
machines run smoother . . . servos and steppers are more 
accurate . . . computer print heads are more accurate. 

TUFOIL for Engines; TUFOIL Lubit-8; TUFOIL Gun-Coat; 
TUFOIL Compu-lube; TUFOIL Lightning Grease; all fill 
different needs ... all use our patented dispersion 
technology! 



Call for prices and information! 


Fluoramics Inc. 


103 PLEASANT AVENUE, 

UPPER SADDLE RIVER, NJ 07458 
201-825-8110 


Circle Reader Action No. 340 


“IPS WHAT \DU DONT SEE IX THE CONTRACT 
THAT GETS THE JOB DONE!’ 



You’ll never read the word commitment in a 

contract. 

“Yet, that’s what you need most when you’ve got a 
mission to complete. You need someone to respond quickly, 
to handle the unexpected and to stick with you to get the 
job done. 

“The only way you can get this kind of commitment 
is to work with a company whose reputation is built 
on it: EDS. 

“For nearly 25 years we’ve been solving tough data 
processing problems by doing whatever it takes to make sure 
our solutions work. Every day. 

“That means being ready to deal with the real life 
situations that may never be covered in writing. To put in 
the extra hours and the extra effort to come up with the 
best answer— not the pat answer. 

“This kind of commitment is what EDS was founded 
on, and it’s never been more important than it is now. 
Because government needs business partners whose 
dedication matches today’s challenges. 

“We do our job right, so you can do what you do best” 


Electronic Data Systems Corporation 


Circle Reader Action No. 334 


f\J/NSATech Briefs Vbpa 

National Aeronautics and november/december 1986 

Space Administration Special Edition 


Special Features 
and Departments 


8 Editorial Notebook 


10 Computing: The View from NASA Headquarters 

Earth Resources Laboratory Applications Software: 

13... . . Versatile Tool for Data Analysis 

20 The Hypercube: Cost-Effective Supercomputing 

24 Artificial intelligence: Rendezvous with NASA 

32 NASA’s Ada Connection 


35 COSMIC: NASA’s Software Treasurehouse 

36 Golden Oldies: Tried and True NASA Software 


38 Computer Technical Briefs 


42 NASA TU Services 

44 Digital Fly-by-Wire 

50 Supplier’s Forecast 

51 Advertising index 


On the cover: Dr. William F. Ballhaua, 
Jr., Director ot the NASA Ames 
Research Center, Is standing with the 
Cray-2 supercomputer, the Initial high- 
speed processor for the Ames 
Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation 
(NAS) system. The NAS description 
begins on page 20. 


At Kennedy Space Center, expert systems 
will help plan launches around severe 
weather. More Information on NASA’s 
artificial Intelligence applications can be 
found on page 24. 



This document was prepared under the sponsorship of the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration. Neither Associated Business Publications, Inc., nor anyone 
acting on behalf of Associated Business Publications, Inc., nor the United States 
Government nor any person acting on behalf of the United States Government assumes 
any liability resulting from the use of the information contained in this document, or 
warrants that such use will be free from privately owned rights. The U.S. Government 
does not endorse any commercial product, process, or activity identified in this 
publication. 


NASA T*ch Briefs. ISSN 0145-319X, copyright 1 1986 in U S-, is published tx -monthly by Associated Business Publications Inc., 41 
E 42nd St . New York. NY 10017-5391 The copyrighted information does not include the individual Tech Bnefs which are supplied 
by NASA Editorial, sales, production and circulation offices at 41 E 42nd Street, New York, NY 10017-5391 Subscriptions for non 
qualified subscribers m the US. Panama Canal Zone, and Puerto Rico. *75 00 for 1 year. *125.00 for 2 years. *200 for 3 years Single 
copies *15 00 Remit by check, draft, postal or express orders Other remittances at sender's risk Address ail communications Tor 
subscriptions or circulation to NASA Tech Briefs. 41 E 42nd Street. New York. NY 1001 7-5391 Second-class postage p*d at New York. 
NY and additional mailing offices 

POSTMASTER: please send eddreee changed to NASA Tech Briefs, 41 E. 42nd Street. Suite 921, New York, 
NY 10017-5391. 


NEW CAPABILITIES FOR 
FIBER OPTIC TESTING 


Not since Laser Precision introduced the 
world’s first totally integrated OTDR, the 
TD-9901 in 1979, has there been an instru- 
ment like the TD-9950, all wavelength 
OTDR, to revolutionize the industry. 



The TD-9950’s unique HELP BUTTON pro- 
vides instant display of operating instruc- 
tions or on-line application notes. It can be 
used at any time, for a quick reference, with- 
out interfering with work in process. The 


SPLICE LOSS 

To accurately SPLICE LOSS' 

Cursor A should be pieced lwwediately 
SCFORC thw beeinnirve of the splice or thp 
reflection due to the splice. These comaton 
cases are illustrated belowi 

A A 

loss I ' loss I 

rue i an splice mechanical splice 

SPLICE LOSS computations cannot be wade at 
the very baymniny or end of the horizontal 
ranee. In these cases/ N^A will be 
displayed in the SPLICE LOSS field. 

8 Prior Pe*e ML*a»* Help pgt^l Hsrdcopy 
Next Peee 0Help Menu 


user can select either from the Help Menu or 
any function key to obtain clear operation 
instructions. 

OPERATES AT ALL WAVELENGTHS 

Designed for all wavelengths, the TD-9950 
offers plug-in 850, 1300, 1550, and dual wave- 
length 1300/1 550nM modules. 

Specifications include: ± 0,01% base-accu- 
racy, O.OldB resolution, 20dB minimum one- 
way backscatter range, 131 km range, one- 
meter resolution, dual cursors, and real-time 
display. 

The TD-9950's built-in digital X-Y plotter 
provides complete data hardcopies for cable 
system documentation. 

-- 




A a 15.661 Km INDEX: l.«6«0 

B* 27. 194 Km 1300 mm 

B.8- 11.533 Km SPLICE LOSS: 0.«2 OB 

pT.cifiom corp. TD-9950 OTDB 

The automatic splice loss mode provides 
instant splice loss measurement, to within 
O.OldB, on closely spaced or long distance 
splices. During splicing or connectorization, 
the real-time trace and continuous dB read- 
out enable the user to optimize the fiber core 
alignment. 

For more information, contact Laser Preci- 
sion Corporation, 1231 Hart St., Utica, NY 
13502, or call (315) 797-4449. 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


Circle Reader Action No. 345 3 





SYSTEMS INTEGRA 

OF MIXING APPL 


TON: THE SCENCE 
SAND ORANGES 


We’ve been doing it successfully 
for over 15 years 

Grumman Data Systems approaches 
information processing problems with 
a single goal: to develop integrated 
systems that deliver the best 
performance at the lowest life-cycle 
cost, while remaining as simple and 
user-friendly as state-of-the-art 
technology allows. 

It’s a difficult task, at best. But it’s 
one to which we bring years of 
experience, and the objective 
viewpoint that only a hardware- 
independent system integrator can 
provide. 

In Ci systems, management 
information systems, computerized test 
systems, engineering and scientific 
systems, and integrated manufacturing 
systems, we’ve built a record of success 
that any company would envy. 

To maintain that record, we’ve 
invested substantially in research and 

CUSTOM SOLUTIONS 

far Manapng inform 


development. That’s why our name is 
so often linked to new advances in 
networking, computer graphics, 
machine intelligence, command 
support systems, fault tolerant systems 
and the Ada software language. 

We re also a total service company, 
not one that simply installs a system 
and walks away. We hav e facilities 
nationwide. And we support our 
customers with information processing 
services, multi-vendor hardware and 
software maintenance, training, data 
base publishing and facilities 
management. 

Our ability to effectively mix apples 
and oranges has made us the fastest 
growing division of the Grumman 
Corporation. For further information 
about any of our capabilities, contact 
Wesley R. Stout, Director, Technical 
Services at (516) 682-8500. 

Grumman Data Systems 

Circle Reader Action No. 363 GRUMMAN 


• A repttereo trademark o* Grumman Corporator 



At 1600 °C, your ceramic 
component retains full 
structural integrity if 
you designed with Alumina 
by Duramic Products. 


When you specify DURAMIC PRODUCTS Alumina, a 
3200°F maximum use temperature keeps your ceramic 
part from breaking down during high-heat applications. 

Extreme heat tolerance makes Alumina ideal for labora- 
tory requirements like heat chamber insulation and 
furnace lining. Alumina is also excellent for field use as a 
heat shield component and in other heat-intensive pro- 
cedures. DURAMIC PRODUCTS Alumina ceramics are 
used extensively in aerospace applications because of 
their heat resistance, corrosion resistance, hardness and 
electrical insulation properties. 

DURAMIC PRODUCTS expert ceramic engineers can 
rapidly and economically provide you with virtually any 
Alumina ceramic component your situation requires — any 
size, any shape. They'll work with your drawings to pro- 
duce precision machined parts that will match your speci- 
fications to the letter. 

Physical properties 

Compressive strength — 340 KPSI 

Flexural strength — 46 KPSI 

Impact resistance — 7 in-LBS, CHARPY 

Hardness — 9 MOHS scale 

Specific gravity — 3.76 

Water absorption — 0 

Electrical resistivity — > 10 15 ohm/cm 


Duramic Products also produces MACOR ' — a 
user machineable ceramic material. For more 
information, call or write Duramic Products, Inc. 



MACOfl' ComngOlaM works 

Duramic 

PRODUCTS, INC. 

The Ceramic Specialists 


P.O. Box 426, 426 Commercial Avenue, 
Palisades Park, New Jersey 07650 U.S.A. 
(201) 947-8313 TWX 710-991-9632 


f\J/\SATech Briefs 


National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 


Vbpa 


NASA Tech Briefs: 

Published by Associated Business Publications 

Editor-in-Chief/Publisher 


Managing Editor 


Associate Editor 


Assistant Editor 


Technical Advisor 

Dr. Robert E. Waterman 

Art Director 


Assistant Art Director 

Michelle Schmitz 

Production Manager 


Traffic Manager 


Circulation Manager 

Anita Weissman 

Fulfillment Manager 

Elizabeth Kuzlo 

Controller 


Technical Staff: 


Briefs prepared for National Aeronautics and Space 

Administration by Logical Technical Services Corp., NY, NY 

Technical Editor 

Ted Selinsky 

Art Director 

Ernest Gillespie 

Managing Editor 

Theron Cole, Jr. 

Administrator 

Elizabeth Texeira 

Chief Copy Editor 

Joe Renzler 

Staff Editors 

James Boyd, Larry 

Grunberger. Jordan Randjelovich, George Watson 

Graphics Luis Martinez, Huburn Profitt 

Editorial & Production 



Bill Little, Frank Ponce. 


Ivonne Valdes, 

NASA: 


NASA Tech Briefs are provided by the National Aeronautics 

and Space Administration, Technology Transfer Division, 

Washington, DC: 


Administrator 

Dr. James C. Fletcher 

Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs . . Isaac 


T. Gillam IV 

Director Technology Utilization Division . . Henry J. Clarks 

Publications Manager 

Leonard A. Ault 

Associated Business Publications 


41 East 42nd Street, Suite 921 


New York, NY 10017-5391 


(212) 490-3999 


President 

Bill Schnirring 

Executive Vice President 

Frank Noth aft 

Vice President— Sales 

Wayne Pierce 

Vice President 

Patricia Neri 

Advertising: 


New York Office: (212) 490-3999 


Vice President— Sales 


Sales Manager 

Robin OuCharme 

Account Executive 

Dick Soule 

Account Executive 


Account Executive 

Fred Bousquet 

Advertising Assistant 

. . Erving Dockery, Jr. 

Los Angeles Office: (213) 477-5866 



6 


Circle Reader Action No. 355 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 




THE FIRST NAME IN DIGITAL SCOPES 



TWO 
DIGITAL SCOPES 



,":i 

. Mj. 

’■•Jo- 




The Acquisition. 

With sweep speeds from days to nanoseconds and 
resolution up to 15 bits, the 4094 digital scope can capture 
the most elusive signals. Every plug-in has 16K of memory, 
viewable trigger set-up and independent pre- or post-trigger 
delay on each channel. Signal averaging is standard and our 
latest 10 MHz/12-bit plug-in even 
offers real time manipulation of 
the incoming signals. With two 
plug-ins the 4094 can record four 
channels simultaneously. Or even 
monitor two slow signals and capture high speed glitches 
at the same time. All under computer control or via manual 
operation: whatever your application demands. 

The Analysis. 

Expand and examine any waveform feature in detail. Use 
the dual cursors and numerics to measure the time or voltage 
of any point. Compare live or stored waveforms with each 
other or with pre-recorded references. Store signals on disk 
manually or automatically. Use pushbutton programs to 
manipulate the data or send it to your computer via GPIB 
or RS232 interface. Complete your report with a hardcopy 
plot using the XY/YT recorder or digital plotter outputs. 

First Time, Everytime. 

Don't miss important data because of set-up errors. From 
the World’s first in 1973 to the latest models, Nicolet scopes 
are easy to use. Find out how they can be the quickest 
solution to your signal problems. For more information call 
608/273-5008, or write Nicolet Test Instruments Division, 
P.O. Box 4288, 5225 Verona Road, Madison, W1 53711-0288. 


rci Nicolet 


Circle Reader Action No. 350 










Editorial Notebook 


A s regular readers of NASA 
Tech Briefs will have gath- 
ered, this is no ordinary 
issue of NTB. Our research has shown 
that well over 70% of our readers buy 
or specify computer hardware and/or 
software. The number of readers who 
use computers on a regular basis is 
even higher than that. 

Moreover, our readership is literally 
growing daily, and more than half of 
the people who now receive NTB did 


not receive it two years ago. A number 
of these newer readers have mention- 
ed that they really like the magazine, 
but also wonder what they’ve been 
missing. Add to that the fact that 
computer-related editorial material 
ranks high on the interest list in every 
survey we’ve taken, stir in the general 
interest in what NASA’s doing on the 
computer front, and you have the 
reason we decided to publish this 
special issue, NTB’s Computer Pre- 



views '87. 

We’ve tried to present a taste of 
what’s going on at NASA vis a vis 
computers. We’ve reprinted a number 
of what have historically been the 
most requested and/or most important 
software briefs, which I’ve called, for 
want of a better term, Golden Oldies. 
We’ve got a feature on COSMIC, the 
great NASA software library, and an- 
other on Al, as well as articles on other 
computer-related subjects. We’ve also 
added an area where suppliers are able 
to give you a little information about 
what they have to offer. You will also 
soon note that there are no tech briefs 
that are not computer-related. 

It’s a radical departure for us, and 
we’d like to get your reaction to our 
doing a once-a-year or occasional 
issue like this. I do want everyone 
to understand that this issue in no way 
supplants our regular publication of 
NASA Tech Briefs. We were scheduled 
to publish but six regular issues of 
NTB this year, all of which you have 
already received. This issue is, then, 
“value added” . . .or at least that is how 
we hope you will perceive it. 

In 1987 we plan to publish 10 regular 
issues of NTB. Those of you who have 
been regular readers for some time will 
rememberthat when we first commer- 
cialized NTB in 1985, we published 
quarterly. Provided that all goes well, 
and we see no reason why it should 
not, we should become a monthly pub- 
lication in 1988. I cannot reiterate 
enough that this is our magazine. Let 
us know what you do and don’t like 
about it. We keep pushing the envel- 
ope. Help us, if you will. 

How? Keep the cards and letters 
coming. □ 



NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 



■ ERIM launches great ideas ■ 

ERIM — The Environmental Research Institute of 
Michigan — began in 1946 as the University of Michigan’s 
Aeronautical Research Center. Today, we are a private, non- 
profit research institute that develops and helps deploy new 
technology. The major focus of our current research is image 
processing and remote sensing. We are one of the nation’s 
leading R&D facilities in this field, with the support of hundreds 
of sponsors throughout the country. 

Our ongoing projects create a number of technical career 
opportunities in our research divisions, including: 

• E-O/IR System Design and Analysis 

• Infrared Phenomenology 

• Computer Vision 

• Optical Computer System 

• Phase Retrieval/Signal Reconstruction 

• Radar System Engineering and Analysis 

• Signal and Image Processing 

• Microwave Scattering and Measurement Engineering 

• Diffractive Optics 

If you have a degree in engineering, physics, mathematics 
or statistics, consider joining the men and women of ERIM. For 
more details, call (313) 994-1200, ext. 260, or send your resume 
to ERIM, Personnel Administrator, Dept. NT, P.O. Box 8618, 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48107-8618. Ask about positions available in Ann 
Arbor, Los Angeles, Fort Walton Beach, FL and Washington D.C. 



U S Citizenship required Equal opportunity employer 


Circle Reader Action No. 339 

8 




THE 

AGAINST COMPROMISE: 

WE HAVE THE ONLY PROGRAMMABLE 
STEPPING MOTOR CONTROLLER 
THAT WILL WORK WITH ANY HOST COMPUTER. 




KLINGER ARGUMENT 



Only Klinger's CC-1 universal programmable stepping 
motor controller gives you exceptional flexibility at a 
low price. 

RS-232-C, IEEE-488 and 8-bit parallel interfaces 
allow our motor controller to operate with all commer- 
cially available micro or mini-computers. 

The CC-1 operates under direct computer control or 
as a stand-alone with a stored down-loaded program. 
An easy-to-use instruction set provides the ability to 
implement even the most complex motions. Front 
panel controls allow the CC-1 to be operated as a man- 
ual indexer, independent of a host computer. 


Our CC-1 can drive a wide range of variable reluc- 
tance or permanent magnet type stepping motors at 
speeds in excess of 2 KHz. 

Don't compromise. The best is always a bargain. 
Klinger standards of engineering and manufacturing, 
as exemplified by our CC-1 controller, have made us 
the world leader in micropositioning systems. Get our 
free 212-page micropositioning handbook for complete 
specifications on our CC-1 and thousands of other 
components. Write or phone Klinger Scientific Corp- 
oration, 110-20 Jamaica Avenue. Richmond Hill. NY 
11418 (718)846-3700. 


m 


KLinCEB 


Worldwide Network to Meet Your Needs • France. Micro Controle Evry (tel ) 6-077-82-83 • West Germany : Spindler & Hoyer Goit.ngen tel i 49/551 620 16 
Canada: Optikon Corp Ltd . Waterloo. Ontario (tel ) 519.885/2551 • England: Unimatic Engineers Ltd . London (tel ) 44/ 1 45500 12 
Netherlands: Elmekanic N V . Hilversum. (tel ) 31/35/43070 • Sweden: Martmsson & Co Hagersten (tel ) 08/744/03/00 

Switzerland: G M PS A Lausanne (tel ) 41/21/33/33/28 • Italy: Le«tz Italiana. M.lano (tel 1 39/2/27/55/46 • Japan: Hakuto Co Ltd Tokyo, (tel >03>34i 2611 




COMPUTING: 

The View from 
NASA Headquarters 



10 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 








The National Aeronautics and Space Administration Headquarters, 
located between the Washington Monument and the Capitol, determines 
Agency programs and projects, establishes management policies, and 
reviews and analyzes all phases of the aerospace program. 


M ake up a list of the leading contributors to America's 
growth in high technology and NASA wouid surely be 
among the top entries. For more than 25 years, NASA's 
requirements for its manned and unmanned space programs have 
inspired major breakthroughs in engineering, science and medicine. 
NASA’s programs have nurtured astounding growth in anumberof 
industries, especially in companies involved in the development, use 
and manufacture of computers. 

Today, through the leadership of NASA Headquarters in 
Washington, D.C., NASA continues to break new ground in the use 
of computers to solve difficult technical problems in disciplines related 
to space and aeronautics. NASA also devotes a significant portion 
of its resources to develop methods to make computer software more 
reliable, cost-effective and reusable, and to increase the overall 
productivity of the agency through the use of computers. All of these 
activities are a part of NASA’s mission to "conduct aeronautical and 
space activities for peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind," 
as prescribed by the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. 

It’s difficult to think about NASA's high technology programs 
without acknowledging the central role that computers play in many 
of them. It's just as hard to imagine a time when NASA did not de- 
pend on computers to accomplish the goals of its research and space 
programs. Yet Project Mercury, America’s first manned space pro- 
gram, was in progress years before the first pocket calculator was 
sold. Space flight without an on-board computer? There was no com- 
puter aboard the single occupant Mercury spacecraft. Today the Space 
Shuttle relies on five on-board computers to handle all phases of its 
flight, from ascent to reentry. NASA’s use of computers in other areas 
has also changed dramatically. The agency is developing new com- 
putational capabilities to study aerodynamical phenomena related 
to vehicle design. NASA is conducting research in electronics, com- 
puter science, artificial intelligence, and robotics for increased use 
of automation, improved information processing and advanced com- 
munications systems. 

All of this work is planned, directed and coordinated by NASA Head- 
quarters through a number of program offices. The operational aspects 
of NASA’s wori< in aerodynamics and space are performed at its field 
centers throughout the country. Each installation has a specifical- 
ly described mission, with related tasks, and is allocated the resources 
for their accomplishment. 

Some of the major computing activities at the NASA Centers are 
centered around theoretical analysis, computer-aided design/analysis, 
real-time flight simulation, and test data acquisition and reduction. 

Theoretical analysis and simulation in the disciplines of fluid 
mechanics, avionics, acoustics, structures, and atmospheric model- ► 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


11 


ing depends heavily on the use of ultra 
high speed, large memory, advanced 
scientific computer systems. To meet 
this demand, NASA Headquarters is 
planning for a variety of computational 
facilities containing state-of-the-art 
supercomputers. 

In a major bid to advance the frontiers 
of computational analysis, NASA is 
developing the Numerical Aerodynamic 
Simulation (NAS) system. Its goal is to 
provide a testbed for developing new 
techniques to tackle complex computa- 
tional problems. The NAS system will 
consist of a network of high speed 



Industrial image processing detection of fault in 
electrical connector 



Information extraction from Landsat satellite images 
Death Valley. California 


processors anchored by the CRAY-2 
supercomputer. 

NASA Headquarters’ emphasis on re- 
search productivity is increasing the use 
of computer-aided design and analysis 
tools. These tools will allow engineers 
to evaluate and refine promising advan- 
ced aircraft and space vehicle configur- 
ations from concept to detailed design 
while minimizing the need for expensive 
model design and laboratory testing. 

Real-time flight simulation is accel- 
erating the development of new aero- 
nautical controls for aerospace vehi- 
cles. Simulation uses mathematical 


Vista-IPS 

IMAGE 

PROCESSING 

DEVELOPMENT 

SOFTWARE 



Features extracted from a moon image 


models of vehicle aerodynamics, con- 
trols, propulsion systems, structures, 
avionics, and environmental charac- 
teristics. Computer controlled displays 
and kinesthetic cues provide pilots 
with a realistic, ground-based cockpit 
in an environment approaching that of 
actual flight. 

Experimental data collection and 
reduction is a fundamental part of most 
research and development activities. 
Wind tunnels, airborne experiments and 
remote sensing systems generate enor- 
mous amounts of data that often must 
be analyzed in real-time in order to 
control the experiment. As experiments 
increase in complexity and sophistica- 
tion, significant increases in speed, 
reliability, and complexity of the data 
acquisition and reduction systems 
are required. 

Two important computer related 
Headquarters programs, the Software 
Management and Assurance Program 
and AIM, deal with reliability and pro- 
ductivity. While not as well publicized 
as NASA’s space accomplishments, 
these two programs are confronting 
challenging problems whose solutions 
are vital to the ability of NASA to carry 
out its overall mission. 

The Software Management and 
Assurance Program (SMAP) is concern- 
ed with assessing and improving soft- 
ware practices used on major NASA 
projects. The program is directed by the 
Office of the Chief Engineer at Head- 
quarters and concentrates on software 
policy, software engineering tools and 
techniques, human resources and in- 
formation exchange. 

NASA’s Automated Information Man- 
agement (AIM) Council is trying to 
increase the productivity of adminis- 
trative personnel and to automate the 
administrative functions for the entire 
agency. Dr. C. Howard Robins, in the 
Office of Management at Headquarters, 
is the AIM Council Chairman. According 
to Robins, “The percentage of NASA’s 
budget being spent on information 
systems has at least doubled in the last 
five years. Information systems now 
account for 10% of NASA’s budget.” 
In listing the conditions contributing 
to rising costs, Robins indicates that 
“the growing cost of software and 
maintenance has more than eaten 
up the difference in hardware cost 
reductions.” Robins is optimistic, 
though, that the AIM Program can help 
to reduce these costs and allow the 
agency to make better use of its 
precious resources. 

These are just a few of the many 
research and development projects that 
NASA Headquarters is currently plan- 
ning, directing and participating in. 
Further details on these and other 
projects appear in articles elsewhere 
in this issue. □ 

NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


For more information contact - 
LOGICA INC 
372 Washington St. 

Wellesley Hills MA 02181 
tel (617) 235-2424 

Outside USA, Vista-IPS is sold under the name LUQD”Call Logica UK at +44 1 637 9111 or your local Logica office. 




c a 


12 


Circle Reader Action No. 346 


If you are developing image processing 
techniques, then you should know about 
Vista-IPS™ for: 

• remote sensing • sonar 

• industrial inspection • data compression 

• infra red • X-ray 

and many other applications. 




Earth Resources Laboratory 
Applications Software— 

Versatile Tool for Data Analysis 



Using the Earth Resources Laboratory Applications Software, a technician computer-enhances a Landsat 
Image to Include geographic coordinates. 


T aking 98.9 minutes between 
sunrises, a Landsat satellite 
orbits at an altitude of 438 
miles. Along each orbital path, the 
Thematic Mapper (TM) sensor scans 
an eight million acre swath with a 
resolution or cell size 30 meters 
square. Complete coverage of the 


earth is achieved in 233 orbits; sites 
receive repeat coverage every 16 days. 
The TM sensor measures and records 
blue to mid-infared reflected light 
energy and emitted thermal energy. 

Each cell, equivalent to a pixel on a 
digital display, contains seven raw 
data values which must be manipu- 


lated to produce useful images. The 
Earth Resources Laboratory Applica- 
tions Software (ELAS), developed at 
NASA’s National Space Technology 
Laboratories, was especially design- 
ed to analyze and process this multi- 
spectral digital data. 

Because ELAS processes digitized 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


13 



TOPOGRAPHY 


EASTERN HEMISPHERE REGION 



-2.2 ELEVATION, KM 11 


ELAS software Is used to Interpret Mars Images transmitted 
by the Viking orblter. 


data, it has applications that range far beyond interpreting 
Landsat information: Aircraft-acquired scanner data, 
digitized topographic data, soil types and rainfall informa- 
tion; any information that can be stored in digitized form. 
As an integrated image processing and data base 
maintenance system, ELAS offers the remotely sensed 
data user a wide range of easy to use capabilities in the 
areas of land cover analysis. 

Composed of 300 separate executable programs, or ap- 
plication modules, and an operating subsystem, ELAS is 


meant to be as variable as possible. For easy changing 
from one application to another, the operating system 
handles all input/output functions, system control func- 
tions, and applications module swapping when necessary. 
The versatile operating subsystem and the available ap- 
plication modules allow users to perform an unlimited 
variety of land cover analyses, as well as data base con- 
struction and manipulation. 

ELAS User Group 

In 1983 the NSTL Earth Resources Laboratory (ERL), 
which authored the original ELAS software and documen- 
tation, helped form the worldwide ELAS Users Group. The 
Group disseminates information concerning the ELAS 
package, and assists users who are just beginning to imple- 
ment the software. 

Annual meetings are held at NSTL, where improvements 
continue to be devised and added to the ELAS software. 
Providing a forum for the user community to exchange in- 
formation on any aspect of the program, the meeting is an 
opportunity for synergism of the finest kind. According to 
Sid Whitley, Deputy Director of the ERL, “We’ve found that 
if a geologist develops something, the agronomists or the 
hydrologists or the geographers are looking eagerly over his 
shoulder; they try it to see what utility it has for their own 
applications. It makes little difference what the algorithm 
was developed for; it finds its way into the other disci- 
plines as well.” 



An engineer 
should use a 
design foundation, 
not build one. 


SAVE TIME, AVOID 
ERRORS. IMPROVE 
COMMUNICATION: 

Automatically extract data cards and matrices from 
NASTRAN output files and load them into the Ctrl-C 
workspace. 

INTERACTIVE ?£ 
MODELING: K 

Formulation, One-Step Model Reduction. 

ADVANCED 23f & 

PLOTTING: Perspective View. 


The Ctrl-C/NASTRAN Interface: A better tool 
to design and analyze control systems for flexible 
structures. 

INTEGRATION between Ctrl-C’s 

control system design environment and NASTRAN's 
finite element structural analysis system. 


OFT SYSTEMS CONTROL 
I TECHNOLOGY, INC. 

1801 MCE Mill ROAD, RUjO AI.TO. CA 94303 

NASTRAN* is a reg. trademark of NASA. 

Ctri-C* is a reg. trademark of Systems Control Tfechnotogy. Inc. 


For more information call Audrey Leeds at 

800-227-1910 (In CA 800-821-5888) 

Telex 176451 SYSTEC PIA 

Ctrl-C’ 

THE SINGLE 
INTEGRATED 
CAE SOLUTION 


14 


Circle Reader Action No. 338 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 



Whitley sees ELAS with continually 
improving and increasing capabilities, 
mentioning that ERL personnel are 
“always improving documentation, 
based on user feedback.” Software ad- 
ditions are made frequently, a result of 
on-going research and development at 
ERL. 

With a well structured and en- 
thusiastic user group, and a highly 
supportive central clearing house for 
software improvements, this versatile 
program is a real winner, a fact sup- 
ported by its longevity. To learn more 
about the Earth Resources Laboratory 
Applications Software, or to obtain a 
copy, contact NASA's COSMIC, men- 
tioned on page 43 of this issue. □ 

At the Center tor Eerth and Planetary 
Studies In the Smithsonian Institution’s 
National Air and Space Museum, Dr. 
Thomas R. Watters, a research geologist, 
makes use of the Earth Resources Labor- 
atory Applications Software for planetary 
studies. With ‘‘Mara Consortium Data " 
garnered from the Viking orblter, Dr. 
Watters examines such Information as 
topography, thermal data and albedo, 
using a variety of classification schemes 
afforded by the software. Here are two 
three-dimensional perspective views of 
the Mars topography. The upper perspec- 
tive Is color coded with the geologic 
units of Mars, while the lower Is color 
coded topography. 



Choose SD for Ada™ Cross-Compilers— 

DEC Did. 



The deadline is fast approaching tor 
adopting Ada. 

Without it, your future prospects of 
securing vital defense contracts are 
virtually nil. 

But not all Ada solutions on the market 
can offer the essential and continued 
support you need, for the future as well 
as for today. 

Systems Designers has that solution. 

That is why we were chosen by Digital to 
jointly develop a new generation of VAX 
Ada-based cross-compilers, XD-Ada for 
MIL-STD-1 750A, Motorola MC680x0 family 


and Intel 80 x 86 series. This is the future. 
Available now is the interim solution— 
SD-Ada Plus— an integrated set of software 
tools for the cross development of 
embedded systems in Ada using Host- 
Target Technology supporting MIL-STD- 
1 750A and Motorola 68000 Both products 
are validated— SD being the first company 
in the world to produce a validated 
compiler for MIL-STD-1 750A. 

Total solution. Systems Designers Ada 
products are backed by our consultancy. 


support, development, education and 
training services, giving you a rich environ- 
ment for controlled and well managed 
progression in the implementation of Ada. 

Call 1 -800-843-9489 now to find a solution 
to your Ada cross-compiler problems of 
today and tomorrow 


CD 

SYSTEMS DESIGNERS 
SOFTWARE INC. 

444 Washington Street. Suite 407, Woburn, MA 01801 
Telephone: 617-935-8009 Telex: 5101002943 


Ada is a trademark of the U S Government Ada Joint Program Office 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


Circle Reader Action No. 354 


15 





Showing only the most significant surfaces, this computational model simu- 
lates airflow around an F-16. To compute the Navler-Stokes equations, a grid 
is constructed around the aircraft's geometry. The equations are computed at 
each node ( the Intersecting lines ) of the grid. Increasing the number of nodes 
gives a more accurate simulation. 


UPERC0MPUT1NG AT 
AMES RESEARCH CENTER 


A Cray-2, Serial Number 2, the 
most powerful supercompu- 
ter in the world, sits in Build- 
ing 233A at the Ames Research Center. 
The Cray-2 cornerstones the Numeri- 
cal Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) 
Program, which serves as a national 
supercomputing facility. This acquisi- 
tion represents the first major mile- 
stone of the NAS, forming the initial 
operating configuration of the NAS 
Processing System Network. 

The genesis of the NAS program 
goes back to the middle seventies 
when Ames computational fluid 
dynamics researchers realized more 


advanced supercomputers were need- 
ed to solve their fluid physics equa- 
tions. Computational Fluid Dynamics 
(CFD), used in aerospace vehicle 
design, combines fluid physics, com- 
puter science and applied mathe- 
matics. With wind tunnel tests, CFD is 
an important tool for understanding 
the forces acting on aerospace craft 
and their engines. 

The researchers defined the future 
NAS as an ongoing, continuously 
upgraded program. Three objectives 
were set: 

1) The NAS program would provide a 


computational capability to ensure 
leadership in CFD and related dis- 
ciplines, available to NASA, Depart- 
ment of Defense, other government 
organizations, industry and 
universities; 

2) Continuous hardware and software 
upgrades would maintain state-of- 
the-art facilities; 

3) The NAS program would provide a 
strong research tool for NASA’s 
office of Aeronautics and Space 
Technology. 

NAS has been in "Initial Operating 
Configuration" since July, 1986, when 
the Cray went on-line at Ames. With 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 






Achieve new heights in 
system throughput with IBIS 
ultra-high performance disk drives 


Now, meet the I/O demands of 
your system applications with 
IBIS ultra-high performance disk 
drives. In applications ranging 
from storage-intensive, real-time 
data acquisition to pure number 
crunching. 

The first in a family of ultra- 
high performance products, the 
Model 1400 has been delivered 
in volume to the most demand- 
ing customers. Its 12 megabyte- 
per-second data transfer rate, 

1.4 gigabyte capacity and field- 
proven reliability are the result 
of significant IBIS achievements: 
■ Proprietary 14-inch, thin- 
film media as the foundation for 
the high quality, high density 
head/disk assembly (HDA). With 
recording densities beyond 
16,000 bits per inch and a raw- 
error rate, without retries, of 
4 x 10' n . IBIS products assure 
you of data integrity. 


■ High sustained throughput 
rate, made possible by the ex- 
tremely low flaw count of the 
HDA and designed-in parallel 
channel technology. Modular 
read /write channels are deskewed 
in real time and made accessible 
through a choice of high level 
interfaces, simplifying subsystem 
integration. 

■ Stringent and exacting engi- 
neering, manufacturing and qual- 
ity assurance programs that result 
in product reliability of greater 
than 10,000 hours MTBF and less 
than 30 minutes MTTR — maxi- 
mizing up time availability' and 
serviceability' of your system. 

Whether you are a classic 
OEM, a systems integrator or a 
value added systems house, IBIS 
offers you important perform- 
ance and support benefits. 

Let us show y'ou how the 
growing family of IBIS ultra-high 
performance products can 


maximize system throughput and 
increase your competitive edge. 



IBIS Systems, Inc. 

5775 North Undero Canyon Road 
Westlake Village. California 91362 
Phone: (818) 706-2505 
Telex: 472-0228 IBIS WLVG 


Circle Reader Action No. 343 





HM 

W$k 


Using particle traces to display the flow physics, vortical patterns created by the strake 
and leading edge of an F-16 are shown. The particles are color mapped according to their 
elevation above the wing, providing a three-dimensional view of the vortical Interactions. 


an upcoming move to a dedicated 
facility and subsequent testing, the 
NAS will begin full operations in 
March, 1987. The NAS Cray has a sus- 
tained computational rate of 250 
million floating-point operations per 
second (Mflops), as opposed to a 
burst speed of approximately two 
billion Mflops. Supercomputer 
qualities include a 256 million-word 
central memory and a 4.1 nanosecond 
clock-cycle time. The system con- 
figuration includes two Amdahl 5840 
computers, four VAX 11/780, and 30 
Silicon Graphics IRIS workstations. 
Frank R. Bailey, Manager of the NAS 
Projects Office, explains one of the 
benefits of the configuration: “An im- 
portant thing about the system is that 
all these computers are networked to- 
gether, they all use the Unix operating 
environment.” 


The Advantages of Power 

The degree of computing power in- 
herent in the NAS has proven its worth. 
Says Bailey, "We’ve demonstrated the 


great advantage of a very large 
memory capacity supercomputer. 
NAS users are able to approach prob- 
lems they’ve not been able to consider 
before.” 

Bailey mentions that the NAS is the 
first opportunity to exploit high per- 
formance graphics workstations and 
supercomputers operating in a co- 
operative, symbiotic manner. This 
allows task division between the 
supercomputer and workstation so 
that each is performing its function 
optimally. For example, large scale cal- 
culations on a complex model such as 
viscous flows around an F-16 are com- 
puted on the Cray-2. The data from that 
calculation can be abstracted for 
display on the workstation. 

By rapidly sending results from the 
Cray to the workstations, which them- 
selves can do interactive graphics 
manipulation, the system can display 
three dimensional perspective gra- 
phics. The rapid response time gives 
users immediate feedback to the re- 
sults of their calculations. 

A nationally available resource, the 


NAS is on-line through a sophisticated 
set of communications devices, in- 
cluding NASA’s Program Support 
Communication Network, (PSCN). 
Through NASnet, connecting remote 
Ethernets to the Ames Ethernet, 
remote users have “all the capabilities 
someone locally in the NAS facility 
would have,” according to Bailey. NAS 
also accesses MILnet and ARPAnet, 
run by the Defense Communications 
Agency. Bailey's goal is to be able to 
access all the available networking 
within the government infrastructure. 

One of the most striking examples 
of this pioneering remote access 
technology is the use of the “Dialup 56 
kilobit Service.” This enables remote 
users to connect to a NASA PSCN 
gateway over commercial telephone 
lines. Connected to NAS at a relative- 
ly high bandwidth, users can simply 
hang up when they’re through. 

In the Future 

Staying at the cutting edge of ad- 
vanced scientific computing systems 
is a primary NAS goal. Bailey's acquisi- 
tion plan includes a sequential im- 
provement of the High Speed Pro- 
cessors (HSP) in the NAS. HSP-1, the 
CRAY-2, is the first of the high speed 
processors. The next generation HSPs 
will be integrated to the facility this 
fiscal year, giving it two HSPs, one 
each of the first and second genera- 
tion. HSP-2 will be able to perform 1000 
Mflops, and should have a central 
memory capacity of one billion words. 
Bailey foresees a performance in- 
crease of four to five times with each 
generation. 

A decade of study has resulted in a 
state of the art supercomputing facility 
at NASA’s Ames Research Center. 
The recent acquisition of the Cray-2 
represents a major milestone in the 
NAS program. Intended to advance 
aerospace research and development 
through the field of computational 
fluid dynamics, the NAS includes the 
ability to support supercomputer- 
generated large-scale aerodynamic 
flow simulations with powerful work- 
stations, high-resolution graphics, 
and high-bandwidth remote communi- 
cation links to nationwide remote 
sites. □ 

Any researcher involved in U.S. in- 
dustry, academia or government aero- 
space programs can apply for access 
to NAS resources. For the operation 
period beginning in March 1987, appli- 
cations are available from Leslie 
Chow, User Interface Manager, NASA 
Systems Division, Mail Stop 233-1, 
NASA Ames Research Center, 94035. 
Potential users must demonstrate a re- 
quirement for the unique capabilities 
offered by the NAS. 




»» 






lisas 




MM 




18 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 




Precision Glass Tape Reels 


CORNING 


When 
cell (9 


rthe best data protection, 
i or write Corning Glass 
ficed Products, Main Plant 
5, NY 14831. 


Circle Reader Action No. 335 


What you see 
is what you'll get 


Your tape. Your precious information. 
Protected and clear as the reel 
surrounding it. 




have solid flanges This design virtually 
eliminates dirt, electrostatic charge and 
normal physical-handlincf damage. Your 
tape life is increased and Signal quality 
ensured because temperature and 
humidity changes are unform, rather 
than concentrated at flafqe holes. 


When your tape edge# are better 
protected, st/isthe d«a you recorded. 
Data Shields chemiallly strengthened 
Chemcor*/lass fla/ges do not warp 
or permanently be#d and cannot 
be dente/. / 


Data Shield" 






SECTION 


(4 MBYTES 


memory 


MEMORY 


SECTION 

MUN.CM'^fJ 

00 MBrt-SEC COM" __ 


The HYP e ? ube 


Cost 


b oar® 


Mark 


mutative n 0<,e 
Ar r,; S Hy percube- 


for the 


A new and exciting area of re- 
search at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory’s (JPL) Advanced 
Microelectronics Program (AMP) in- 
volves the investigation and develop- 
ment of concurrent computers to 
attack computationally intense prob- 
lems. The power promised by this 
type of computer can be applied not 
only to well-understood numerical 
applications, but also to the more 
complex problems that are found, for 
example, in expert systems and arti- 
ficial intelligence. 

It has been recognized for some 
time that substantial (i.e. order-of- 
magnitude) increases in the com- 
puting speed of future-generation 
computers will be attained only 
through the development of concur- 
rent, or parallel, computation. 
Ultimately the various components 
within a single Von Neumann-type 


machine cannot communicate with 
each other at greater than the speed 
of light, a limit now being pressed (in 
Von Neumann machines instructions 
are carried out one after another, 
building in a basic limitation of pro- 
cessing speed). With VLSI technology 
providing almost mainframe compu- 
tational performance in increasingly 
smaller packages, arraying a suf- 
ficiently large number of micro- 
processors can provide cost-effective, 
next-generation supercomputer 
performance. 

Enter the Hypercube 

One approach to concurrent com- 
puting is the Hypercube. In this con- 
figuration, a number of microproces- 
sors are directly linked in an array con- 
taining 2 k processor-nodes, with each 
node connected to its K nearest neigh- 


bors. A K = 3 configuration is a normal 
cube, with eight concurrently opera- 
ting computers. As K values increase, 
the configurations are nested and 
represent cubes in higher spatial 
dimensions, hence the name “hyper- 
cube.” 

Mark I and II 

In 1981, the California Institute of 
Technology began investigating Hyper- 
cube architecture by constructing a 
first generation 64-node Hypercube, 
using the Intel 8086 16-bit micropro- 
cessor. Its demonstrated performance 
was about eight times that of the DEC 
VAX 11/780 supermini computer. 

JPL became involved in 1983, de- 
signing and contracting the Mark II 
Hypercube, based on an enhanced 
Mark I design. Four 32-node Mark II 
machines and one seven dimensional, 


20 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


TEK MICROCIRCUITS 



Now, it’s all yours. 

Tektronix has developed a way to design 
semi-custom analog ICs that will greatly 
reduce your development time and cost. 
The QuickCustom approach 
uses a series of QuickChips™ 
prefabricated with "core" arrays 
of capacitors, resistors and up to 
1800 transistors configured for 
easy interconnection. Analog 
QuickChip designs use NPN 
transistors with f T typical to 
6.5 GHz at 15V or 2.5 GHz at 95V. 
Analog-digital combination QuickChip 
arrays offer a gate propagation delay of 
400 ps with digital functions including 
OR/NOR/AN D/NAN D, flip-flops, latches, 
buffers and inverters. 

We’ll provide the training, graphic 
layout and simulation tools for your 
design, and one of our experienced 1C 
designers will be available to consult 
with you. 

Following design approval, we'll 
deliver two untested wafers within three 
weeks. Guaranteed. Or, 25 untested 
packaged parts within four weeks. 

This is the fastest semi-custom pro- 
cess in the industry. And it's dedicated to 
meeting your exact ASIC requirements at 
a reasonable price. So, if you’re inter- 
ested in turning Tektronix’ unsurpassed 
1C advantage into yours, call us. We’re 
ready to talk with you about your semi- 
custom and full custom needs. 


Tektronix Integrated Circuits Operation 
PO. Box 500, M/S 5 9-420 
Beaverton, OR 97077 
Phone: 800-262-4374 

503-627-2515 within Oregon or 
for technical assistance. 


Ibktronix 

COMMTTTEO TO EXCELLENCE 

Circle Reader Action No. 356 












Copynghl © 1966 feWronix. Inc Al rights resen^d ICOOQ2 











This 32-node Mark III Hypercube has the 
computing power of 32 to 64 of the VAX 
1 1/780 minicomputers. 

128-node machine were constructed. 
The 128-node system has the perfor- 
mance of about 25 times the DEC VAX 
11/780 supermini computer. 

Mark III and llle 

In 1986 the JPL Hypercube Re- 
search Project designed and built the 
Mark III concurrent computer, based 
on the Motorola MC68020 32-bit micro- 


processor. Two four-node systems 
and two 32-node systems serve as test 
beds for developing diagnostics and 
software. Each Mark III node has a per- 
formance of between one and two 
DEC VAX 11/780 computers. Mark llle 
nodes, being designed with Weitek 
Floating-Point Processor daughter 
boards, should have a capability of 10 
MFIops per node. A concurrent com- 
puter assembled from 32 of these 
enhanced nodes should show perfor- 
mance in the range of a Cray-XMP 
supercomputer, at about 1/10th the 
cost. A 256-node system should per- 
form equal to or better than the next 
generation Cray machines. 

More and Better 

In the quest for more powerful 
computers, the Hypercube Research 
Project participants have a fairly clear 
view of their crystal ball. Dave Rog- 
stad, Principal Investigator at the 
Hypercube Project, doesn’t see any 
theoretical design limitations to add- 
ing more nodes to a Hypercube archi- 
tecture. Practical size could become a 
consideration, however. Says Rog- 
stad, “What's likely to happen in the 
future is not that we would increase 
the number of nodes, or even worry 
about making the nodes physically 
smaller; what's more likely is that the 


nodes themselves will be made from 
much more powerful and faster chips." 

Rogstad mentions some of Hyper- 
cube’s selling points: “The main 
reason why Hypercube is considered 
to be more cost effective is that we're 
using commercial, off-the-shelf micro- 
processor components. They tend to 
beafactorof 10 cheaper than the kind 
of components that goes into making 
Crays.” 

Having designed and built powerful 
Hypercube architectures, Rogstad and 
others participating in the Hypercube 
Project turned their attention to prov- 
ing the utility of their design. A cost 
effective computer loses its worth if 
it can’t easily be programmed, but 
Rogstad and his team have proven 
otherwise. 'We have demonstrated 
that you can hook up hundreds of 
microprocessors and realistically and 
easily program them on intensive com- 
puting problems, the kind of problems 
you buy Crays to attack.” 

Because scientific and engineering 
problems and their solutions are often 
parallel as well as sequential, the 
distributed processing inherent in 
Hypercube architectures offers ideal 
solutions. Using off-the-shelf com- 
ponents, Hypercubes promise super- 
computer performance at a fraction of 
the cost. □ 


Quality Research You Can Use Today 


00 

o 

00 

BUYER’S GUIDE TO 

BUYER’S GUIDE TO 

COST 

PROJECT 

ES TIMATING 

MANAGEMENT 

SOFTWARE 

SOFTWARE 


For The Manufacturing 
Construction and Process Industries 
To order your copy or for further informatic 

Also Individual Training 
n contact Nancy Tobias at (414) 962-6990, or 


write New Issues, Inc. 2720 North Frederick Ave., P.O. Box 11564/NTB, Milwaukee, WI 53211 


22 


Circle Reader Action No. 349 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 




DATA GENERAL ASKS: ARE YOU PLAYING 
RUSSIAN ROULETTE WITH YESTERDAY’S TECHNOLOGY? 


FOR ADVANCED COMPUTER SYSTEMS, TALK TO US. IT’S WHY SO 
MANY GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS HAVE CHOSEN DATA GENERAL. 


Government business is too criti- 
cal to be taken for granted. Too much 
depends on it. 

No wonder nineteen of the top 
twenty U.S. defense contractors have 
bought a Data General system. As 
have all the Armed Services and most 
major departments of the federal 
government. 

And to date, nearly thirty U.S. 
Senate offices and committees have 
chosen Data General. 

TODAY S BEST VALUE 

Why such unanimity? Because 
Data General offers a complete range 
of computer solutions for government 
programs, with one of the best price/ 
performance ratios in the industry. 

From our powerful superminis to 
the DATA GENERAL/One” portable. 


From unsurpassed software to our 
CEO® office automation system. Plus 
complete systems for Ada® and Multi 
Level Secure Operating Systems, and a 
strong commitment to TEMPEST. 

All Data General systems have full 
upward compatibility. And because 
they adhere to international standards, 
our systems protect your existing 
equipment investment. We give you the 
most cost-effective compatibility with 
IBM outside of IBM— and the easiest to 
set up and use. 


SOLID SUPPORT 
FOR THE FUTURE 
We back our systems with com- 
plete service and support. As well as 
an investment in research and devel- 
opment well above the industry norm. 

So instead of chancing yesterday’s 
technology, take a closer look at the 
computer company that keeps you a 
generation ahead. Write: Data General, 
Federal Systems Division, C-228, 4400 
Computer Drive, Westboro, MA 01580. 
Or call 1-800-DATAGEN. 




4 w Data General 

a Generation ahead. 

O I9R5 Data General Cocp . Westboro. MA Ada it a registered trademark ol the Department ot Defense (OUSDRE AIPO) 
» DATA GENERAL/One is a trademark and CEO is a registered trademark oi Data General Corporation 


Circle Reader Action No. 353 





Artificial 
Intelligence: 


Rendezvous with NASA 


O nce the near exclusive do- 
main of academia, Artificial 
Intelligence (Al) has begun 
to make its mark in a number of areas 
in the scientific and business com- 
munities. The development of prac- 
tical Al applications has been slow for 
decades, but new, powerful and less 
expensive computers have helped 
move Al and expert systems from the 
confines of the laboratory into the real 
world. 

Artificial intelligence generally re- 
fers to the use of computers to sup- 
plement or replace human reasoning 
in decision making processes. Dr. 
Henry Lum of NASA’s Ames Re- 
search Center explains that “Al is a 
very broad term; taken literally it tends 
to create a great deal of confusion 
about what Al actually is all about. The 
term ‘expert system’ is usually sub- 
stituted when speaking to most au- 
diences.” 

Artificial Intelligence now gets its 


share of headlines, but that hasn’t 
always been the case. Only a few 
years ago, most of us assumed that Al 
referred to the crossword puzzle entry 
for a three-toed sloth. Artificial In- 
telligence sounded like something 
that football coaches invoked at half- 
time to rally the troops. Suffice to say 
that Al had a recognition problem. 
More importantly, the vocabulary of Al 
probably kept a large number of poten- 
tial users at arm's length; Al is a world 
populated by terms such as first order 
predicate logic, inference engines and 
instantiation. Peering into this world, 
NASA saw the potential for using ex- 
pert systems to solve difficult prob- 
lems related to space flight and the 
development of the Space Station. A 
sampling of NASA’s current expert 
systems projects reveals that NASA is 
making a broad commitment to Al. 

One of NASA’s expert systems proj- 
ects, dealing with near term precision 
weather forecasting, seems to have 


great potential for further increasing 
safety in commercial airline flights. 
Other ambitious NASA Al projects in- 
volve with expert planning, payload 
integration, and machine learning. 


Expert System Weather 
Forecasting 

Space Shuttle operational weather 
forecasting at the Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC) is provided by the U.S. Air 
Force for the Cape Canaveral Forecast 
Facility. Forecasters have tours of 
duty ranging from two to four years. 
The expertise that they develop in 
predicting weather at this coast loca- 
tion leaves when their tour of duty 
ends. Operational forecasting is fur- 
ther complicated by the volume of data 
available from conventional weather 
data sources and from numerous 
specialized instrumentation systems ► 


24 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 



Multiple Pages Intentionally Left 

Blank 



While constructing short term weather forecasts it is diffi- 
cult to handle large volumes of data and determine which 
data sources are appropriate to use. 

In this context, the Thunderstorm Weather Forecasting 
Expert System (TWFES) project is developing a weather 
forecasting aid that captures the individual expertise of 
forecasters, and also provides a tool for weather event 
anticipation. Art Beller, manager of the TWFES project, 
expects that “the system is not going to replace the indi- 
vidual forecaster, it’s going to assist him by focussing his 
attention on anticipating certain events and telling him 
where to look for supporting data.” The initial emphasis on 
thunderstorm prediction is due to the fact that shuttle 
operations are strongly affected by lightning near the opera- 
tional areas. Beller explains that “At KSC there’s a 
thunderstorm everyday during the summer. Patterns begin 
to emerge; if there's a strong sea breeze off the coast, 
there probably will be no thunderstorms over the Cape; 
they'll be inland. Prevailing winds from the west give rise 
to other scenarios. The idea is to have a machine reason 
from the scenarios and then assist in the weather predic- 
tion process.” 

The system, which is still in the proof-of-concept phase, 
runs on a Symbolics 3640 and has a hybrid architecture 
utilizing both Zetalisp and the Automated Reasoning Tool. 
The prototype will identify and elaborate additional test 
scenarios, improve the user interface, and finalize the data 
interfaces. Beller hopes to add winter thunderstorms to the 
list of scenarios. "They’re especially interesting because 
they usually have lightning, wind, and precipitation— 
possibly hail— all of which strongly affect shuttle launch 
operations.” Current plans envision moving the TWFES into 
the operational setting of the Cape Canaveral Forecast 
Facility in 1988. 

Payload Integration and Checkout 

The Spacelab and Experiments Division of Payload 
Operations at the Kennedy Space Center has developed a 
real time data distribution network for use in the integra- 
tion and checkout of scientific payloads prior to their 
launch on the Space Shuttle. The Smart Processing of Real 
Time Telemetry (SPORT) project merges high speed Sym- 
bolic Lisp Processors and personal computers to existing 
payload checkout equipment via a 10 Mbit/sec local area 
network. The SPORT system was first used during level IV 
testing of the ASTRO-1 SPACELAB payload. 

The backbone of the SPORT system is a local area net- 
work following the IEEE-802.3 network standard known as 
Ethernet. Payload checkout equipment is attached to the 
network via network control processors. These processors 
encapsulate telemetry information into SPORT protocol 
packets for routing via DARPA's Standard Internet protocol 
and the T ransaction Control Protocols. Network application 
processors then remove these packets for use by applica- 
tions programs. 

Two classes of machines are used as Network Applica- 
tions Processors; IBM PC/AT’s for slower applications and 
Symbolic 3670’s for high speed applications. The PC’s low 
level interface routines are written in 8086 assembly 
language and Lattice C, while the high level data analysis 
portions are coded in Golden Common Lisp. The high 
speed applications programs are written in Symbolics 
Common Lisp and the Automated Reasoning Tool from 
Inference Corporation. 

Expert Planning and Scheduling 

Science and applications payloads are processed at KSC 
through a number of steps before the fly as part of an 
integrated Space Shuttle payload. Individual experiments 
are received at the Operations and Checkout building in the 
KSC Industrial Area. Following inspection and preparation 

NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


VAX™ POWER 

in your PC 


DSI-020/DSI-780 
PC COMPATIBLE 32-BIT 
COPROCESSING ENGINES FROM $995 


FEATURES 


1 Strong customer support 
1 Easy integration into all IBM 
PC models & compatibles 
1 32-bit wide intelligent 
graphics adapter available, 
programmable to 1280 x 960 
x 16 or 1080 x 813 x 256 


• Full 32-bit architecture with 
floating point support 

• Up to 16 megabytes of on- 
board RAM 

• MS-DOS operating system 

• Optimizing NATIVE compilers 
for C, Pascal & Fortran 


The DSI-02CV0SI-7B0 coprocessors are IBM PC XT/AT compatible 
single board. 167 MHr 32-bit computers which are based on the 
Motorola 68020 CPU and the 68881 FPU chip set The boards feature 
up to 16 megabytes of one wait slate. on-board, and 150 nsec parity 
error-detecting RAM Retresh logic permits operation in any IBM com- 
patible micro 

The OSI-02CVOSI 780 coprocessors support NATIVE high level optima 
mg languages in C. Pascal. Fortran and Basic, and come with 
Assembler/Lmker/Oebugger and Defmicon s proprietary Loader which 
runs under MS-DOS (v 2 x and 3 x) and handles 1/0 to the PC s 
resources 

The DSI-02Q/DSI-780 boards use an 8-bit or 16-bit data bus The 
boards automatically sense whether the host is an XT (8 bit bus), or 
AT (16-bit bus), and adjust the bus width accordingly 


TSI 800/874-2288 


503 / 345-7395 


MANUFACTURED BY 

DEFINICON SYSTEMS INC 


Circle Reader Action No. 358 


NEW SAFE-FRIT™ FUNNELS 


SAFE-LAB, INC. 

introduces its NEW fritted 
glass funnel. The 
SAFE-FRIT™ funnel 
features a threaded 
removable unbreakable 
polypropylene stem just 
below the fritted glass disc. 
This unique design 
eliminates the danger of 
broken glass funnel tips and 
allows easy and safe 
cleaning from both sides. 

The removable stem permits 
you to set the funnel top, 
with the filtered product, on 
bench top or directly inside 
an oven or desiccator for 
drying, without the danger of 
tipping or spilling. 
SAFE-FRIT™ funnels 
provide safely and economy 
in the laboratory. 




Call or write for a FREE catalog. 
Safe-Lab, Inc., P.O. Box 1290, 
Santee, CA 92071 
(619)448-9100 


Circle Reeder Action No. 419 


29 




in support areas, payload elements 
begin an assembly-line-like process 
that brings them together to form a 
compatible, functioning payload unit. 
Each phase of integration— experi- 
ment integration and Spacelab in- 
tegration-results in a progressively 
more complete, functional flight pay- 
load. Planning and scheduling is an 
important part of this process, and two 
expert systems are being developed to 
enhance existing capabilities: the Ex- 
pert Mission Planning and Replanning 
Scheduling System (EMPRESS) and 
the Planning Network (PLANNET). 


Eventually the systems may be 
integrated. 

Using the same tools and problem- 
solving heuristics (rules) as a KSC 
planning and scheduling expert, EM- 
PRESS will construct and maintain 
mission schedules. EMPRESS, devel- 
oped by NASA-KSC and the MITRE 
Corporation of Bedford, MA, will sup- 
port schedule planning by defining the 
time, resources, and task require- 
ments associated with processing a 
Space Shuttle. EMPRESS will also 
help the planner with unanticipated 
schedule changes. 


The principal objective of PLANNET 
(developed by McDonnell Douglas 
Astronautics-KSC with initial support 
from Georgia Tech’s Engineering Ex- 
periment Station), was to demonstrate 
the feasibility and application of expert 
system technology to the problem of 
daily or longer term planning and re- 
scheduling activities, including facili- 
ty and resource utilization. The initial 
demonstration addressed only a sub- 
set of the planning and scheduling 
activities, but continuing work will 
expand the prototype system to make 
it more realistic. 

Machine Learning and 
Control 

As part of KSC’s Knowledge-Based 
Automatic Test Equipment (KATE) 
project, LISP code has been written 
that automatically infers the structure 
of simple black-box circuits. After 
testing the circuit via a commercial 
real-world interface and building a 
table of corresponding inputs and out- 
puts, KATE builds a knowledge-base 
to monitor, diagnose and control the 
circuit, and draws the circuit diagram 
on a CRT. This is called “learning from 
observed performance,” and has direct 
application to the automatic creation 
of knowledge-bases to control and 
monitor hardware systems. 

To date, the system has been dem- 
onstrated on simple digital logic 
circuits and has been partially im- 
plemented for analog circuits. Cir- 
cuit control has been demonstrated 
through goal-oriented functions that 
search the knowledge-base for com- 
mands that can be changed to produce 
a desired output. All possible com- 
mand combinations are presented as 
options to the operator to meet his 
goal. This command technique elimin- 
ates the need for low-level canned 
procedures for component control. 
The KATE project will attempt to 
develop a complete automatic testing 
system for black-box devices. John 
Jamieson at KSC explains that “the 
objective is to build a complete con- 
troller monitor system that’s rooted 
in knowledge-based concepts. The 
system would be a sort of embryonic 
HAL from 2001 ; it talks, tells you what 
it’s going to do and what it does; it 
detects anomalous measurements, 
performs a diagnosis, locates broken 
parts and finally writes its own list of 
steps to get around the problem so 
that a system can return to a working 
operational configuration.” 

The projects described above are 
but a few of NASA’s current initiatives 
in expert systems. Future issues of 
NASA Tech Briefs will provide updates 
on these projects and explore other 
NASA activities related to artificial 
intelligence. □ 

NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


MARC GOES 
GRAPHIC 

Now the world’s most popular non- //c/’/lp' thP fTIOSt 
linear finite element analysis pro- , ” , .. . 

gram, MARC, incorporates the advan- dOVdllCBU TltlltB 
tages of interactive graphics. MENTAT, plp m p n f onft_ 
MARC's graphics pre- and post-pro- CICillCIU oUll~ 

cessor, lets you quickly generate models ware is easier 
and display your results. So, with one ... , 

set of integrated software, you can f/?3/7 YOU tlHIlK. 
analyze the full range of structural and heat transfer effects on 
ye Ikl |"V your designs-from linear to non-linear, simple 
to complex. 

CONVERSATIONAL, 

TAA MENTAT 
I actually 

responds to your level of ex- 
perience. It will conversationally 
prompt you as you learn; as 
you become an expert, it will 
help you only when you need it. 

This is the finite element 
analysis combination that does 
it all. No problem is too com- 
plex-or too simple-for MARC 
and MENTAT. Call 415-326-7511 
for more information or a 
personal demonstration. 

MARC Analysis Research Corporation 

260 Sheridan Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94306 
Offices in Japan, The Netherlands, Italy 

© 1986 MARC Analysis Research Corp MARC and MENTAT are trademarks of MARC Analysis Research Corp. 

Circle Reader Action No. 348 



Pictured is the nonlinear analysis of a drive train boot. 
MARC has also been used for such diverse applications 
as the vibration of a radial tire, the post-buckling of a 
pressure vessel, and the combined effects of stress 
and heat transfer on a turbine blade. 



TRANSFORM 

TOUR PC 
INTO A 

LISP 

MACHINE. 



Not long ago, a specialized 
LISP machine was your 
only choice for serious AI 
development and delivery. 

But now you can get LISP 
machine performance out of 
that ordinary IBM PC * sitting 
on your desk. With the Gold 
Hill 386 LISP System. 

You simply plug in the 
System’s HummingBoard “ — 
unique 386-based hardware 
designed specifically for the LISP 
environment . Then you add the 
System’s Golden Common 
LISP 386 Developer software. 

That’s all you need to trans- 
form your PC into a LISP 
machine. You can develop 
and deliver AI applications 
on your PC. And create your 
own expert systems. You’ll 
get the kind of LISP perfor- 
mance you thought was only 
possible in a system costing 
ten times as much. 

And if you don’t need the 
whole system, Gold Hill can 
still offer you AI solutions. 

You can get GCLISP 286 
Developer software for your 
PC.* And GCLISP 386 Devel- 
oper software will be avail- 
able for leading manufacturers’ 
386-based PCs. 

Tomorrow’s AI develop- 
ment tools for PCs are avail- 
able today from Gold Hill. 

We’ll prove it to you — just call 
to get the latest Gabriel Perfor- 
mance Benchmarks. You’ll 
be amazed to learn what your 
PC is capable of. Call toll-free: 


Gold Hill. The expert in AI on PCs. 1-800-242-LISP 


•The Gold Hill 386 LISP System requires an IBM PC XT. AT or compatible. GCLISP 
286 Developer Software requires an IBM PC AT or compatible. 

© 1986 Gold Hill Computers, Inc. Gold Hill, Gold Hill 386 LISP System. Golden 
Common LISP, GCLISP, and Developer are trademarks of Gold Hill Computers, 
Inc. IBM PC, XT and AT are registered trademarks of International Business 
Machines Corp. HummingBoard is a trademark of A. I. Architects, Inc. 



GOLDHILL 


In Mass.: (617)492-2071 
Gold Hill Computers. Inc. 
163 Harvard St., 

M Cambridge, MA 02139 


Circle Reader Action No. 341 






A close-up view of the four pressuriz- 
ed modules that will make up the 
baseline configuration of the Space 
Station. The Ada language has been 
selected for use In all Space Station 
software. 


NASA’s 
Ada Connection 


I n 1975, the Department of De- 
fense (DoD), seeing the need to 
consolidate some of the many 
software languages they were main- 
taining at that time, sought a multipur- 
pose standard language that could be 
used for embedded computer sys- 
tems. A standardized language would 
bring with it anumberof benefits, in- 
cluding that of reducing the costs of 
designing and implementing compi- 


lers and support software, as well as 
portability. 

The “High-Order Language Work- 
ing Group,” garnering worldwide in- 
put to the proposed language, devis- 
ed a series of documents, starting 
with STRAWMAN and running 
through STEELMAN, to define the 
language requirements. The design- 
ers took the opportunity to include 
some of the many advances in pro- 


gramming language technology. 
Such advances included software 
development methodology, software 
management techniques, software 
modularization and structuring, and 
software quality. 

With an emphasis on reliability and 
maintainability, the Working Group 
selected four contractors to produce 
preliminary designs. These fourcom- 
panies were then pared down to two ■ 


32 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 




and given a year to develop their 
designs. The Cii Honeywell Bull 
(Louveciennes, France) design was 
selected by DoD in 1979. It was 
primarily developed by Dr. Jean 
Ichbiah, and named Ada. 

NASA first became involved with 
Ada through the Office of Aeronautics 
and Space Technology, and then 
through Johnson Space Center, 
selected in 1 983 as one of two federal 
Beta test sites for DoD's newly- 
developed compilers. 

Ideally suited for the life-cycle of 
large, complex applications, Ada has 
been selected for the Space Station. 
One of Ada's strengths is its support 
for parallel, fault tolerant program 
modules-especially important forthe 
Space Station. At the Goddard Space 
Flight Center (GSFC), several projects 
are being used to assess Ada’s 
suitability for NASA use and to gain 
expertise in the language. 

GSFC’s Mission 
Operations and Data 
Systems Directorate 

Goddard’s Mission Operations and 
Data Systems Directorate (MO&DSD) 
is reviewing Ada and its support en- 
vironments underthe guidance of Bob 
Nelson. Pilot projects are being used 
to understand Ada’s impact on the 
software development life cycle. 
These include the Attitude Dynamic 
Simulator for the Gamma Ray Obser- 
vatory; the Multi-Satellite Operations 
Control Center simulator, and the 
Flight Dynamics Analysis System. 

Attitude Dynamic Simulator 
for Gamma Ray Observatory 

Developed concurrently in both Ada 
and Fortran, the Attitude Dynamic 
Simulator (ADS) project contrasts the 
software development process. The 
ADS models the Gamma Ray Observa- 
tory’s orientation in its dynamic 
rotations during torquing and 
maneuvers. With the software 
instrumentation process developed by 
Goddard’s Software Engineering 
Laboratory, several methods are 
available to measure productivity and 
the number of changes and errors. 

MO&DSD researchers are compar- 
ing the Fortran and Ada designs and 
the time required for their implemen- 
tation. Says Nelson, “They’ll change 
the specs when the projects are com- 
pleted to see what happens when the 
program is modified, how easy modi- 
fications are on both the Fortran and 
the ADA versions. To get an outside 
perspective, they'll bring in a different 
person to do those changes.” 

The ADS project is currently in the 
implementation phase. In the 


requirements and the design phases, 
the Ada domain has taken 10-20% 
more resources, according to Nelson. 
He adds, “The key is that the learning 
cycle is involved; this is a first project.” 

Other Ada Projects 
at Goddard 

The Flight Dynamics Analysis 
System project, due for completion in 
March, 1987, is another way the God- 
dard team is gaining Ada expertise. 
The project targets a spacecraft’s or- 
bit, determining its orbital location, 


orientation and velocity. Though the 
concept changes, the design is kept 
up to date because Ada’s modularity 
minimizes the extent of any 
modifications. 

The Multi-Satellite Operations Con- 
trol Center (MSOCC) simulates the 
functions of amission control center, 
processing simulated telemetry from 
a satellite and sending it commands. A 
small team for the MSOCC easily 
generated 10,000 lines of code, and 
showed high productivity figures in 
the latter stages of the program’s 
development, according to Nelson. ► 


Guild line 

At the very top 
of the measurement pyramid 



Direct Current Comparator Resistance 
And Temperature Bridge — 9975 



• 1 0 "« to 10 ’ ohms 

• 0 . 2 ppm accuracy 

• Linearity 0 02ppm 

• Thermal emfs eliminated 

Digital Teraohmmeter — 6500 



• Fully programmable 

• Automatic sensing of resistance range, 
integration time and threshold voltage 

• Range 100 kilohms— 10.000 teraohms 

• 1-1000V test voltage 

• Sofcal for on-board intelligence and front 

panel calibration , . 

• IEEE 488 and RS232C " I 

RAC #374 

Precision Digital Wattmeter — 7200 



Digital AC-DC Transfer Standard — 7120 



RAC #376 

• Fully programmable 

• Autoranging lOOmV-IOOOV 

• Frequency range-dc. 40Hz — 1 MHz 

• Direct reading V, V difference and ppm 

• Sofcal firmware for on-board intelligence 

• IEEE 488 and RS232C 
Digital Platinum Resistance 
Thermometer — 9540 



• Wide range in °C and °F 

• Variable zero set for full width analog 
recording 

• Hi-resolution temp deviations to 0.001 °C and °F 

• IEEE 488 

• Microprocessor based design 

Standard Resistors — 9330 




• Direct digital measurement of Power. 

Voltage Current and Joules • 0.001% stability per yr 1 

• 70ppm accuracy, all power factors • Accuracy to 0 0005% 

• DMJTC technique rac #375 * Traceable to National Standards 

• 6 vz digit resolution * 0 .M — 10 megohm in decade values 

• IEEE 488 ^ ^ RAC #376 

For over 25 years Guildlme's reputation for quality and precision has made them the instrument supplier 
for National Standards Laboratories in 27 countries as well as the metrology labs of Fortune 500 
companies Call us for more information on the instruments shown as well as the rest of the Guildline 
precision instruments family 

USA: Guildline Instruments Inc., 

4403 Vineland Road • Suite BIO • Orlando. Fla ■ 32811-7335 • (305) 423-8215 Telex 856443 

CANADA & OVERSEAS: Guildline Instruments Ltd., 

PO Box 99 • 21 Gilroy St • Smiths Falls. Ontario K7A 4S9 • Canada • (613) 283-3000 Telex: 053-3028 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


Note: Circle Appropriate Reader Action Numbers 


33 



7 " 

Every day COSMIC® 
says “Yes” to engineers 
who need software. 


YES, we supply over 1100 computer 
programs developed by the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
ready for your use. 

When you need tested, reliable and low- 
cost software, we can say YES to: 



In the foreground of this artist’s concept of the Space Station 
Is the solar dynamic power system. Solar array panels will also 
be used to generate electricity for the station. Pressurized 
modules for the crewmembers are sho wn In the center of the 
photo. 


• turbomachinery 

• control systems/robotics 

• aerodynamics 

• expert systems 

• structural analysis 

• heat transfer/thermal analysis 

• or dozens of other applications 


For further information, call or write: 
COSMIC 

The University of Georgia 
Computer Services Annex 
Athens, Georgia 30602 
Phone (404) 542-3265 





NASA 


Summarizing his Ada results, Nelson mentions “With the 
large, fully instrumented ADS project, we can show what 
the characteristics are and validate for project managers 
who have a very conservative nature. There is a reduced 
level of risk; there are a lot of benefits to using Ada in the 
long term. A lot of the benefit of Ada comes when other proj- 
ects can reuse some of the software.’’ 

He adds, “A lot of the experience we’re gaining from the 
smaller projects is helping us make decisions and plan for 
future Ada uses. One of the things I’m involved in is the 
Software Support Environment, a definition and develop- 
ment for the Space Station.” 

Ada and the Space Station 

Ada has been selected as the language for the Space 
Station Software Support Environment (SSE). An extensive 
software engineering environment such as Space Station 
includes a large number of tools; software development is 
much more than just the compiler— it includes 
requirements analysis, design tools and testing tools. Ada 
supports these well. According to Nelson, “Because the 
Space Station is expected to perform over a 20-30 year life 
cycle, we have to develop and acquire a sophisticated 
environment to support it." Ted Humphrey, an Aerospace 
Technologist in the Data Management Section at Johnson 
Space Center, says that “Development in both ground and 
on-board software will be written in Ada as long as a 
compiler is available.” “Exceptions to Ada will be allowed, 
but only when there is previously produced software that 
can be picked up and used again or for features that Ada 
doesn’t support well,” mentions Nelson. 

He adds, “We would like to minimize the amount of 
hardware-peculiar software so we can move to new hard- 
ware technology as it evolves. Tests here at Goddard prove 
Ada’s easy portability from one machine to another.” 

As pilot programs at Goddard increasingly prove Ada’s 
suitability to NASA and other aerospace applications, an 
intensive Ada instruction program is underway —and with 
encouraging results. Nelson is optimistic about Ada's 
future: “Project Managers ask me, as they’re in the 
procurement phase: ‘Do you think Ada is ready?' I think it 
is; we’ve shown that in the last year and a half through our 
different pilot projects. So I think we’re at the threshold of 
selecting Ada for other projects.” □ 


34 


Circle Reader Action No. 336 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 




NASA's 
Software 
Treasurehouse 


G enerating thousands of lines 
of code each year, NASA's 
programmers toil at their ter- 
minals, developing the most basic and 
most essential aspect of any modern 
automated system: the programs that 
enable computers to work. 

Recognizing that the fruits of this ef- 



fort should be disseminated as widely 
as possible, NASA established the 
Computer Software and Management 
Information Center(COSMIC) in 1966 
as a contract between the University of 
Georgia and Marshall Space Flight 
Center. Its purpose: to distribute 
NASA-developed software to industry. 
COSMIC's scope extended NASA- 
wide in 1967, with the University of 
Georgia continuing as the operator. 

As COSMIC celebrates its 20th an- 
niversary year, its library of available, 
applicable programs is 1200 strong, 
with approximately 20 new ones add- 
ed each month. Potential customers 
can purchase a catalog, select pro- 
grams that seem appropriate, and re- 
quest documentation to make a final 
determination. Software, purchased 
separately on either magnetic tape or 
floppy disk format, includes source 
code. 

NASA-subsidized, COSMIC's state- 
of-the art programs are available at a 
fraction of their development cost. 
Most programs in COSMIC's library 
cost $1000 or less, with some as low as 
$25. 


Purchasing a COSMIC program isn’t 
a single-event phenomenon; the 
Center’s staff helps clients adapt pro- 
grams to their own hardware. Should a 
software bug arise, COSMIC’s experts 
will track it down, or contact the pro- 
gram’s author for his input. 

NASA programs submitted for the 
library are reviewed by COSMIC's staff 
and compiled at the University of 
Georgia, often on the same type of 
equipment they were developed on. 
Documentation is reviewed for com- 
pleteness, and if the software has ap- 
plication outside of its original pur- 
pose, it is added to the library. 

Potential COSMIC programs should 
be submitted to the Technology Utili- 
zation Officer (TUO) at the appropriate 
NASA Center, who will forward them 
to COSMIC. According to John A. Gib- 
son, COSMIC’s Director, "We are look- 
ing for generalized programs that have 
as broad an application base as pos- 
sible." 

NASA employees or contractors in- 
terested in COSMIC’s programs 
should contact their TUO. COSMIC's 
address is given on page 42. 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


35 



PROM/PAL 

PROGRAMMING? 

I 'ram S2.iQ.00 


Finding a Low-Cost PROM or PAL* 
programmer is only half of the 
battle. Finding a company that 
won't desert you when you need 
support or service is the other half. 

Logical Devices Products cost you 
less because we offer the best price 
performance ratio in the market, 
and because once you buy our 
products you will experience less 
down time and more reliable 
operation than most other units. In 
addition you get features that were 
evolved from our years of experi- 
ence of serving people who 
program chips. 

We offer a wide range of products 
from dedicated programmers to 
universal software driven models. 



GANGPRO-8 production programmer. 

8 EPROMs to 27512 with RS-232 option. 

PROMPRO-8X universal portable. 
RS-232. Programs PROMs/PAL*s/Micros 

PALPRO-2X Low Cost PAL* only pro 
grammer. Dedicated. RS-232 unit. 

SHOOTER Low cost EPROM oiiiy” 
programmer. RS-232, Stand-Alone. 

PC-PRO IBM PC plug-in EPROM card" 
2716-27512 

ALLPRO pin driven software based 
universal unit, programs every 
imaginable fuse programmable IC. 

CAST boolean software/silicon compiler 
for PLDs. JEDEC output 

UV ERASERS FROM $49.95 


All products carry 90 day Warranty 
& 14 day Money Back Guarantee 


CALL 1-800-331-7766 

LOGICAL DEVICES INC. 


USA 

ENGLAND 

AUSTRALIA 


305 - 974-0967 

44272277323 

03560-1011 


•PAL IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF MONOLITHIC MEMORIES INC. 


Golden Oldies 


Because software becomes obsolete with time, COSMIC housecleans 
every two to three years, removing programs that haven’t been 
requested for five years. “Golden Oldies,” programs that have kept 
their relevance over time, are described here: 


SPAR — Structural Performance 
Analysis and Redesign (Engineering 
Information Systems, Inc.) SPAR is a 
system of computer programs designed 
to perform stress, buckiing, vibration, 
and thermal analysis of large linear 
finite element structural models. 
LAR-12213; LAR-12370; LAR-12371; 
LAR-12542; MFS-23944 
Circle 1 on the TSP Request Card. 

STAGSC-1— Structural Analysis of 
General Shells (Lockheed Missiles & 
Space Co.) The STAGSC-1 computer 
program is intended primarily for the 
practical engineering analysis of thin 
shell structures. These shell structures 
may contain a number of separate shell 
branches or segments connected to one 
another along their boundaries. 
HQN-10960; HQN-10962; HQN-10967 
Circle 2 on the TSP Request Card. 

PASCO— Structural Panel Analysis and 
Sizing-Code (NASA Langley Research 
Center). PASCO was developed for the 
buckling and vibration analysis and 
sizing of prismatic structures having an 
arbitrary cross section. PASCO is 
primarily intended for analyzing and 
sizing stiffened panels made of 
laminated orthotropic materials and is of 
particular value in analyzing and sizing 
filamentary composite structures. 

LA R- 13004; LAR-13164 

Circle 3 on the TSP Request Card. 

PAFAC— Plastic and Failure Analysis of 
Composites (NASA Langley Research 
Center). A three-dimensional finite- 
element computer program called 
PAFAC has been developed for the 
elastic-plastic analysis of fiber- 
reinforced composite materials and 
structures. LAR-13183 
Circle 4 on the TSP Request Card. 

FLAGR04— Advanced Crack 
Propagation Predictive Analysis 

(Rockwell International Corp.). FLAGR04 
was developed as an aid in predicting 
the growth of pre-existing flaws and 
cracks in structural components. 
MSC-18718; MSC-18721 
Circle 5 on the TSP Request Card. 

SINDA— Systems Improved Numerical 
Differencing Analyzer with Sinflo (TRW 
Systems Group). SINDA is a software 
system developed for solving physical 
problems governed by diffusion-type 
equations which can be modeled by 
lumped parameter representation. 
MSC-13805; MSC-18597; MSC-20891 
Circle 6 on the TSP Request Card. 

TRASYS II— Thermal Radiation Analysis 
System (Lyndon B. Johnson Space 
Center). TRASYS II is a computer soft- 


ware system with generalized capability 
to solve the radiation related aspects of 
thermal analysis problems. MSC-20448; 
MSC-21030 

Circle 7 on the TSP Request Card. 

General Thermal Analyzer (Rockwell 
International Corp.). The General 
Thermal Analyzer program solves 
transient and steady-state thermal 
problems using desk-top computers. 
MSC-20702; MSC-21140 
Circle 8 on the TSP Request Card. 

LOHARP— Lockheed Orbital Heat Rate 
Package (Lockheed Missiles & Space 
Co.). The LOHARP package was developed 
to calculate the temperature distribution 
of an orbiting space craft. MFS-23980 
Circle 9 on the TSP Request Card. 

DISCOS— Dynamic Interaction 
Simulation of Controls and Structures 

(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center). 
The DISCOS program was developed for 
the dynamic simulation and stability 
analysis of passive and actively 
controlled spacecraft. GSC-12422; 
GSC-12810 

Circle 10 on the TSP Request Card. 

ORACLS— Optimal Regulator Algorithms 
for the Control of Linear Systems 

(NASA Langley Research Center). This 
control theory design package was 
developed to aid in the design of 
controllers and optimal filters for 
systems which can be modeled by 
linear, time-in-variant differential and 
difference equations. GSC-13067; 
LAR-12313; LAR-12953 
Circle 11 on the TSP Request Card. 

NBOD2— Program to Derive and Solve 
Equations of Motion for Coupled N- 
Body Systems (NASA Goddard Space 
Flight Center). The NBOD2 computer 
program was developed to aid in the 
analysis of spacecraft attitude 
dynamics. NBOD2 is a very general 
program that may be applied to a large 
class of problems involving coupled N- 
body systems. GSC-12846 
Circle 12 on the TSP Request Card. 

IAC— Integrated Analysis Capability 

(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center). 
The objective of the Integrated Analysis 
Capability (IAC) systems is to provide a 
highly effective, interactive analysis tool 
for the integrated design of large 
structures. IAC was developed to 
interface programs from the fields of 
structures, thermodynamics, controls, 
and system dynamics with an executive 
system and a database to yield a highly 
effecient multi-disciplinary system. 
GSC-12992; GSC-12994 
Circle 13 on the TSP Request Card. 


36 


Circle Reader Action No. 347 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 




Golden Oldies 


SHABERTH— Thermal Performance of a 
Shaft Bearing System (SKF Industries, 
Inc.). The computer program SHABERTH 
was developed to predict the steady 
state and transient thermal performance 
of a multi-bearing shaft system 
operating with either wet or dry friction. 
LEW-12761 

Circle 17 on the TSP Request Card. 

QSONIC — Full Potential Transonic, 
Quasi-Three Dimensional Row through 
a Rotating Turbomachinery Blade Row 

(NASA Lewis Research Center). The 
QSONIC computer program has been 
developed for calculating the full 
potential, transonic quasi-three- 
dimensional flow through a rotating 
turbomachinery blade row. LEW-13832 
Circle 19 on the TSP Request Card. 


PANAIR— Predicting Subsonic or 
Supersonic Linear Potential Rows 
about Arbitrary Configurations Using a 
Higher Order Panel Method (Boeing 
Computer Services Co.). PANAIR (an 
abbreviation for "Panel Aerodynamics") 
is a state-of-the-art system of computer 
programs developed to predict inviscid 
subsonic and supersonic flows about an 
arbitrary configuration by means of a 
higher order panel method. ARC-11398; 
ARC-11499 

Circle 20 on the TSP Request Card. 


INCA— Interactive Controls Analysis 

(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center). 
The INCA program was developed to 
provide a user friendly environment for 
the design and analysis of linear control 
systems, primarily feedback control 
systems. GSC-12998 
Circle 14 on the TSP Request Card. 

TSONIC— Transonic Velocities on a 
Blade-to-Blade Stream Surface of a 
Turbomachine (NASA Lewis Research 
Center). This program obtains a 
transonic flow solution on a blade-to- 
biade surface between blades of a 
turbomachine. The flow must be 
essentially subsonic, but there may be 
locally supersonic flow. LEW-10977 
Circle 15 on the TSP Request Card. 

MERIDL— Velocities and Streamlines on 
the Hub-Shroud Midchannel Stream 
Surface of an Axial, Radial, or Mixed 
Row Turbomachine or Annular Duct 

(NASA Lewis Research Center). This 
computer program was developed for 
calculating the subsonic or transonic 
flow on the hub-shroud mid-channel 
stream surface of a single blade row of 
a turbomachine. LEW-12966; 

Circle 16 on the TSP Request Card. 


Three Dimensional Potential Row 
Program with Geometry Package for 
Generation of Input Data (McDonnell 
Douglas Corp.). A computer program for 
calculating viscous effects on the lifts 
and pressure distributions of arbitrary 

NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


three-dimensional configurations has 
been developed by combining a panel 
method, which calculates potential flow 
about arbitrary three-dimesional lifting 
configurations, with a two-dimensional 
boundary-layer method which is used in 
a strip-theory sense. LAR-12623 
Circle 21 on the TSP Request Card. 

GRAPE— Two Dimensional Grids About 
Airfoils and Other Shapes by the Use of 
Poisson’s Equation (NASA Ames 
Research Center) The GRAPE computer 
program was developed to incorporate a 
method for generating two-dimensional 
finite-difference grids about airfoils and 
other shapes by the use of the Poisson 
differential equation. ARC-11379 
Circle 22 on the TSP Request Card. 

PRORLE— The Eppler Program for the 
Design and Analysis of Low-Speed 
Airfoils (Stuttgart Univ.). The PROFILE 
computer program was developed as an 
aid in the design and analysis of low- 
speed airfoils. LAR-12727 
Circle 23 on the TSP Request Card. 

NCOREL— Nonconical Relaxation for 
Three-Dimensional Nonlinear 
Supersonic Potential Row (Grumman 
Aerospace Corp.). The NCOREL program 
employs a new computational technique 
for the prediction of inviscid, nonlinear 
supersonic aerodynamics. LAR-13346 
Circle 24 on the TSP Request Card. 

Hidden Line Computer Code (NASA 
Dryden Flight Research Center). The 


requirement for computer-generated 
perspective projections of three- 
dimensional objects by way of line 
drawings has escalated significantly in 
recent years. Mathematician David 
Hedgley of NASA’s Dryden Flight 
Research Facility has developed a new 
efficient solution to the hidden line 
problem, and has incorporated it into a 
Hidden Line Computer Code. ARC-11446 
Circle 25 on the TSP Request Card. 

SHADE— Shaded Color Picture 
Generation of Computer Defined 
Arbitrary Shapes (NASA Ames Research 
Center) The SHADE computer program 
was developed to provide for the 
generation of realistic shaded color 
pictures from computer defined arbitrary 
shapes. ARC-11496 
Circle 26 on the TSP Request Card. 

LONGUB — A Graphics Library for the 
Dec Vax Computer (Cal Tech/Jet 
Propulsion Lab.). This library is a set of 
subroutines designed for vector plotting 
to CRT’s and dot matrix printers. 

NPO- 16666 

Circle 27 on the TSP Request Card. 

ELAS— Earth Resources Laboratory 
Applications Software (NASA Earth 
Resources Laboratory) ELAS software is 
a geobased information system designed 
for analyzing and processing digital 
imagery data. ERL-10016; ERL-10017; 
ERL-10018 

Circle 28 on the TSP Request Card. 



New MT1 “Precision 81” Video Camera with its 1600 line resolution, multi- 
rate scanning of up to 2048 lines, 40 MHz bandwidth, high detail contrast 
and long term stability makes it ideal for instrumentation applications in image 
analysis, particle analysis, pattern recognition, inspection, dimensional 
measurements, and data acquisition. 

New MTI HR-2000 14” Video Monitor with its 2000 line resolution, auto- 
locking to multiple scan rates, 50 MHz bandwidth, variable enhancement, 
selectable inputs, and data input targets it for use in medical x-ray, video 
microscopy, military tracking systems, digital imaging 
and other instrumentation displays. 

Get full details in free catalog sheets. 

DAGE/MTI, Inc. 

208 Wabash, Michigan City. IN 46360 Ph219/872-5514 



Circle Reader Action No. 337 


37 




Computer 

Programs 



38 Grid-Optimization 
Program for Photovoltaic 
Cells 

39 Aerodynamic Prediction 
for Supersonic Canard- 
Tail Missiles 

39 Orbital-Lifetime Program 

40 Advanced Rotordynamic 
Nonlinear Transient 
Simulation 

40 Program for 
Experimentation with 
Expert Systems 

41 Listing Relationships 
Among Subroutines 


COSMIC: Transferring NASA Software 

COSMIC, NASA’s Computer Software Management and Information Center, 
is the one central office established to distribute software that is developed with 
NASA funding. COSMIC’s role as part of NASA's Technology Utilization Network 
is to ensure that NASA's advanced software technology is made available to 
industry, other government agencies, and academic institutions. 

Because NASA’s software development efforts are dynamic and ongoing, new 
programs and updates to programs are added to COSMIC’s inventory on a 
regular basis. Tech Briefs will continue to report information on new programs. 
In addition, the 1986 edition of the COSMIC Software Catalog is available with 
descriptions and ordering information for available software. Several new pro- 
grams for control systems/robotics, expert systems, thermal analysis, turbo- 
machinery design, structural analysis, and computer graphics are offered. 

For additional information on any programs described in this issue of Tech 
Briefs, circle the appropriate number on the TSP card at the back of the publi- 
cation. If you don’t find a program in this issue that meets your needs, you can 
call COSMIC directly at (404) 542-3265 and request a review of programs in your 
area of interest. There is no charge for this information review. 

COSMIC® 

Computer Services Annex, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602; Phone (404) 542-3265 
John A. Gibson, Director 


Computer 

Programs 

These programs may be obtained 
at a very reasonable cost from 
COSMIC, a facility sponsored by 
NASA to provide tested and 
reliable software to the public. 
For information on program 
price, size and availability, circle' 
the reference number on the TSP 
and COSMIC Request Card in 
this issue. 


Electronic Components 
Q & Circuits 


Grid-Optimization Program 
for Photovoltaic Cells 

Power loss due to electrical 
resistance and shadowing is 
minimized. 

The CELLOPT program was developed 
to assist in designing the grid pattern of 
current-conducting material on a photovol- 
taic cell. CELLOFT analyzes the parasitic 
resistance losses and shadow loss asso- 
ciated with the metallized grid pattern on 
both round and rectangular solar cells. 
Although CELLOPT can perform sensitivity 
studies, it is used primarily to optimize the 
grid design in terms of the bus bar and grid 


lines by minimizing the power loss. 

The collecting bus bar may be of the 
same metal and thickness as the grid lines 
or it may be "strapped”, i.e., thicker and of 
a different material. The bus bar is or- 
thogonal to the grid lines. A round cell may 
have one or two bus bars, and a rectangu- 
lar or square cell may have any number. 

The power-loss analysis in CELLOPT 
calculates the contact resistance; shadow 
loss; and resistances due to the photo- 
voltaic sheet, grid lines, and bus line. The 
optimization method follows a modified 
Newton-Raphson procedure. To optimize 
the grid design the designer may choose 
any two or all three of the following 
variables: bus-bar width, grid-line width, 
and grid-line spacing. 

Ihe user must supply such cell elec- 
trical parameters as the maximum voltage 
and current density, the resistivity of the 
metal and semiconductor sheet materials, 
and the locations of the bus bars. 
CELLOPT calculates the minimum total 
power loss for a given set of character- 
istics and tabulates such information as 
the component power losses, volumes, 
and shadows. 

CELLOPT is written in APL for interac- 
tive execution and has been implemented 
on a UNIVAC 1100-series computer. This 
program was developed in 1985. 

This program was written by Ronald E. 
Daniel and Thomas S. Lee of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory For 
further information, Circle 146 on the TSP 
Request Card. 

NPO-16804 


38 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


© Mechanics 


Aerodynamic Prediction for 
Supersonic Canard-Tail 
Missiles 

Pressure loads and moments 
are predicted. 

The LRCDM2 computer program was 
developed to calculate the pressure distri- 
bution at points on the surfaces of a com- 
plete supersonic missile. The missile can 
comprise up to two finned sections attach- 
ed to an axisymmetric body of circular 
cross section. LRCDM2 includes the ef- 
fects of vortex shedding due to the fore- 
body and forward fins, providing more ac- 
curate rolling moments. 

LRCDM2 is applicable for mach num- 
bers up to 6 and angles of attack up to 25 °. 
The predicted aerodynamic loads are in 
good agreement with actual measure- 
ments of flow characteristics. Experi- 
mental results are described for a rectan- 
gular wing, a delta wing, triform tail fins, 
and a canard-controlled configuration. 


The detailed static aerodynamic-load- 
ing analysis in LRCDM2 is based on su- 
personic paneling and line-singularity 
methods coupled with vortex-tracking 
theory. Two-dimensional nonlinear Carlson 
shock-expansion and supersonic-strip 
theories are combined with three-dimen- 
sional linear analysis to modify interfer- 
ence shells on the missile body. The vor- 
tex-trajectory calculations incorporate 
nose-vortex shedding and fin leading- 
and/or side-edge vorticity characteristics. 
An optional afterbody vortex-shedding pro- 
gram included in this package can be used 
alone or in conjunction with LRCDM2 to 
examine the effects of afterbody vorticity 
on the tail-fin pressure distribution. 

The input to LRCDM2 includes the size 
and shape of the missile, modeling options, 
the body orientation, and the flow condi- 
tions. The output from the program details 
the pressure distribution, aerodynamic 
loads, and moments. It also shows the 
cumulative effects of fin and body vortexes 
at control points across the body. 

LRCDM2 is written in FORTRAN IV for 
batch execution and has been implement- 
ed on a CDC Cyber 170-series computer 
operating under NOS with a central-me- 
mory requirement of approximately 270K 
(octal) of 60-bit words. This program was 
developed in 1985. 


This program was written by Marnix F. E. 
Dillenius of Nielsen Engineering and Re- 
search, Inc. for Langley Research Cen- 
ter For further information Circle 142 on 
the TSP Request Card. 

LAR-13527 

Orbital-Lifetime Program 

The long-term effects of small 
perturbations are predicted. 

The Orbital Lifetime Program (OL) an- 
alyzes the long-term motion of Earth-orbit- 
ing spacecraft at altitudes of up to 
2,500 km. It models perturbations to the or- 
bit caused by solar-radiation pressure, at- 
mospheric drag, and gravitational effects 
of the Sun, the Moon, and the oblate Earth. 
OL can be used to perdict the orbital life- 
time and decay rate of a satellite. 

The atmospheric-density models used 
in OL are the U.S. Standard Atmosphere 
for altitudes below 90 km and the Jacchia 
model for altitudes above 90 km. The Jac- 
chia model requires the solar flux and geo- 
magnetic index for the date of the orbit. An 
input file containing these values for 1984 
to 1998 is supplied with the OL package. 
The solar-radiation-pressure calculations 
in OL will predict the amount of time a 
spacecraft is subjected to the Earth's 
shadow. The input to OL includes space- 


NOBODY MEASURES UP TO TEAC 


Because Tfeac makes the most complete line of 
data recorders available anywhere. Over thirty dif- 
ferent models in three different formats. 

From the world's only VHS data recorders, to the 
worlds smallest 9-channel portable Philips cassette 
data recorder, to the world’s most comprehensive line 
of reei-to-reel recorders, Teac is the leader. 

Our exclusive line of VHS recorders is particu- 
larly suited to the inexperienced operator. 


With quick and easy set-up plus the convenience and 
economy of the VHS format And they 're available in 
one to twenty-one channels. 

Why do we make so many data recorders? 
Because our reputation is on the line. 


TEAC Corporation of America 
7733 Telegraph Rd 
Montebello, CA 90640 


. SR 90 



wvv'CvC* Cv V. 


MR-40 


TEAC, 

Instrumentation and Computer Products Division 

Circle Reader Action No. 380 


Cl 986 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


39 


CAM AC 

(IEEE-583) 



Your Standard 
Tools for 
Data Acquisition 
and Control 

For 15 years, KSC has been sup- 
plying users in laboratories, plants, 
and R & D facilities with practical 
CAMAC (IEEE-583) hardware and 
software tools for automation. The 
reason is simple. CAMAC, the inter- 
national standard for Computer Auto- 
mated Measurement And Control, 
provides modular real-time data ac- 
quisition and control solutions that 
can be implemented a step at a time. 

CAMAC features . . . 

Full Standardization. Specified by the 
IEEE, ANSI, and IEC. 

Open-end Architecture. Start as small 
as you like and expand when and 
how you want. 

Multicomputer Support. Interfaces 
for a wide range of computers, such 
as DEC, CDC, MODCOMP, Gould/ 
SYSTEMS, and Hewlett-Packard. 

High Data Rates. Data transfer rates 
to 348,000 bytes per second with 
DMA interfaces. 

Unsurpassed Selection of Process I/O 
Modules. From A/D and D/A con- 
verters and signal multiplexers to 
event counters and transient re- 
corders. 

Powerful Distributed Systems. Peak 
block rates up to three million 
data bytes per second over a fiber 
optic serial highway to as many as 
62 remote stations. 

Supporting Software. Easy to use 
CAMAC handlers, software drivers, 
and Process Control/Data Base System 

software packages. 

Field-proven System Design. Used in 
such facilities as Boeing, Nalco 
Chemical, Kimberley-Clark, Digital, 
NASA, Bell Labs, Martin Marietta, 
DuPont, and General Electric. 

Join the growing list of users who are 
specifying our CAMAC tools for their 
system development. Call us today. 


KineticSystems 

Corporation 

1 1 Maryknoll Dr., Lockport, I L 60441 
(815) 838-0005 
TWX: 910 635 2831 


craft physical characteristics, initial orbit 
parameters, and the launch date and time. 
OL calculates time histories of the orbital 
elements, total lifetimes, and decay rates. 
A spacecraft is considered “down" at an 
altitude of 64 km. OL also generates a file 
of plot data that can be put into a user- 
supplier graphics program for lifetime plots 
of altitude against time. 

OL is written in FORTRAN 77 for interac- 
tive or batch execution and has been im- 
plemented on a DEC VAX-series computer 
operating under VMS. This program was 
developed in 1985. 

This program was written by Lynne H. 

Orr of Langley Research Center For fur- 
ther information, Circle 143 on the TSP Re- 
quest Card. 

LAR-13557 


Machinery 


Advanced Rotordynamic 
Nonlinear Transient 
Simulation 

Loads and displacements 
are predicted for a variety 
of rotating machinery. 

The advanced rotordynamic nonlinear 
transient-simulation program, TRANSIM, 
was developed to predict the response of 
high-performance rotating machinery to a 
variety of forcing functions. The program 
works by modal superposition of rotor and 
casing subsystems (or two simultaneously 
rotating subsystems). The transient re- 
sponse of the system is calculated by nu- 
merical integration of the equations of mo- 
tion, performed in modal coordinates. The 
resulting data are transformed back into 
physical coordinates as required to deter- 
mine the user-requested loads and accel- 
erations as a function of time. TRANSIM 
has been used to analyze the Space Shut- 
tle main engine high-pressure fuel turbo- 
pump. 

TRANSIM allows the user to couple the 
rotor to the casing with linear and nonlinear 
interconnecting elements. Linear connec- 
tors between the two subsystems can ac- 
count for forces resulting from intergroup 
stiffness, damping, and effective inertia, as 
well as forces from rotating and fixed effec- 
tive inertia at a specified location. Stiffness, 
damping, and effective inertia forces can 
also be applied within (i.e., intragroup) 
either subsystem. 

Nonlinearities in the system are confin- 
ed to intergroup elements. These elements 
permit simulations of such rotordynamic 
phenomena as bearing deadband, tangen- 
tial rubbing (Coulomb), and piecewise- 


linear spring rates. Connector parameters 
can be made dependent on speed. 
TRANSIM simulates floating-ring seals 
with Coulomb damping, including the ef- 
fects of gyroscopic moments in the 
rotating subsystem. 

Forcing functions available for system 
excitation include rotating unbalance, 
speed-dependent sideloads between the 
rotor and casing, and a variable-frequency 
sinusoidal force applied to the casing. A 
stability-assessment algorithm determines 
the logarithmic decrement (or equivalent 
critical damping ratio) of the most predomi- 
nant modes via a multifrequency decay- 
rate analysis. 

TRANSIM requires uncoupled linear 
modal representations of the rotor and 
casing as inputs. The output from TFtANSIM 
consists of printed and plotted root-mean- 
square time histories of any linear and 
nonlinear intergroup elements, relative 
defections, and casing accelerations, as 
well as fast Fourier transforms of these 
responses. Intergroup-element-load time- 
history and orbit plots for any specified 
time slice can be made, as well as a com- 
plete time-history plot of the displacement 
of a floating-ring seal. Simplified vector 
analyses are performed on the intergroup 
loads to determine fixed and alternating 
components and fixed load or displace- 
ment angles. 

TRANSIM is written in FORTRAN 77 for 
batch execution and has been implement- 
ed on a CDC CYBER 800-series computer 
operating under NOS with a central- 
memory requirement of approximately 
222K (octal) of 60-bit words. This program 
requires the IMSL and DISSPLA commer- 
cial software libraries and is coded to sup- 
port an SC4020 plotter for graphics output. 
TRANSIM was developed in 1985. 

This program was written by David G. 
Becht of Rockwell International Corp. for 
Marshall Space Flight Center. For fur- 
ther information, Circle 107 on the TSP Re- 
quest Card. 

MFS-19939 


© Mathematics and 
information sciences 


Program for Experimenta- 
tion With Expert Systems 

Deductions are performed ac- 
cording to data and to rules 
set by the user. 

CERBERUS is a forward-chaining, 
knowledge-based system program useful 
for experimentation with expert systems. 
The inference-engine mechanism in 
CERBERUS performs deductions accord- 


40 Circle Reader Action No. 344 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 




Machines Corp. 


ing to a user-supplied rule set. Information 
is stored in an intermediate area, and the 
user is interrogated only when no appli- 
cable data are found in storage. Each 
assertion posed by CERBERUS can be an- 
swered with a certainty ranging from 0 to 
100 percent. The rule processor stops in- 
vestigating (or “firing") applicable rules 
when a goal reaches a certainty of 95 per- 
cent or higher. 

CERBERUS is capable of operating for a 
wide variety of domains. Sample rule files 
are included for animal identification, pixel 
classification in image processing, and 
rudimentary car repair for the novice 
mechanic. The user supplies a set of end 
goals or actions (for example; car needs 
oil; chemical is sulfur), which are obtained 
by a combination of assertions (engine 
runs hot, and water level is high; sample is 
yellow, burns, and is a nonmetallic solid). 
The system complexity is decided by the 
user’s rule file, since each assertion may 
be composed of previous assertions 
(water level is high when engine is off; 
choke is wedged open). 

The CERBERUS rule file is created by 
the user with an ordinary text editor in free 
format. The rule file may contain com- 
ments, equations, and rules. A rule con- 
sists of assertions (possibly linked by 
operands), a conclusion clause, and a 
strength factor. The strength factor is the 
percentage of the final conclusion to 
be determined by that particular rule. The 
initial rule file can be analyzed by 
CERBERUS to give a breakdown of voca- 
bulary, and tables of assertions, equations, 
and rules: CERBERUS provides options for 
tracing the network of rules as the program 
operates, logging all user replies, and re- 
counting the rules used to reach a given 
conclusion on an "as-fired" basis. 

CERBERUS is written in FORTRAN 77 
for interactive execution and has been im- 
plemented on a DEC VAX-series computer 
operating under VMS. The program is 
general in structure and should be trans- 
portable to other systems. CERBERUS 
was developed in 1985. 

This program was written by Steven W. 
Engle of Informatics General Corp. for 
Ames Research Center. For further infor- 
mation, Circle 78 on the TSP Request Card. 
ARC-11688 


Listing Relationships 
Among Subroutines 

Hierarchical charts of sub- 
programs are generated. 


The HIERARCHY program is a tool that 
NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


assists users in obtaining information 
about the relationships among subroutines 
in a computer program. HIERARCHY uses 
the FORTRAN source code and load maps 
generated by the Cray FORTRAN compiler 
to generate tables of attributes for each 
module, including input and output op- 
erations, entry points, arguments, and 
NAMELIST’S. These tables also describe 
the relationships of modules to modules 
and of modules to COMMON'S. 

The COMMON’S, both labeled and un- 
labeled, are checked for consistent length. 
HIERARCHY will note the frequency distri- 
bution of calls to other modules and library 
or service routines. The program gener- 


ates an optional hierarchical chart of sub- 
programs to show how they relate to the 
main program. HIERARCHY can accom- 
modate programs of up to 50 calls deep. 

HIERARCHY is written in FORTRAN 77 
for batch execution and has been im- 
plemented on a Cray X-MP computer op- 
erating under COS with a central-memory 
requirement of approximately 133K (octal) 
words. This program was developed in 
1984. 

This program was written by Clayton 
Guest of Informatics General Corp. for 
Ames Research Center. For further infor- 
mation, Circle 79 on the TSP Request Card. 
ARC-11609 


Circle Reader Action No. 359 


,ft\N are 


£ pats"®. bapd'f’Q C H 


;he<* 


mP c 




V>o'- sS ^ 

d® 9 '^a<' c ® C - c v,a9® v ^ 0 r'«'f' 


^>* dra 


rf n'-- 

S c <>* e Jra,i on 


POMP'S >° r PfNl cdr 

0 Ol P o Pl ° ,te ^ 

ph f AT* i,n 

:: 

1 JoU P s%!pa^' D 9 ,et 

§8 

§ x&fa* 

fa 

* ? * p >SS 


IBM PC. XT and AT are trademarks of international E 



HOW YOU 
CAN BENEFIT 
FHOM NASA’S 
TECHNOLOGY 
UTILIZATION 
SERVICES 



I f you’re a regular reader of TECH BRIEFS, then you’re already making 
use of one of the low- and no-cost services provided by NASA’s 
Technology Utilization (TU) Network. But a TECH BRIEFS 
subscription represents only a fraction of the technical information and 
applications/engineering services offered by the TU Network as a whole. 
In fact, when all of the components of NASA’s Technology Utilization 
Network are considered, TECH BRIEFS represents the proverbial tip of 
the iceberg. 

On the following pages, we’ve outlined NASA’s TU Network— named 
the participants, described their services, and listed the individuals you 
can contact for more information relating to your specific needs. We 
encourage you to make use of the information, access, and applications 
services offered by NASA’s Technology Utilization Network. You can 
save time and money by doing so. 


HOW YOU CAN UTILIZE NASA'S 

Industrial Applications Centers 

A nationwide network offering a broad range of technical 
services, including computerized access to over 100 
million documents worldwide. 


Y ou can contact NASA's network of Industrial Applications Centers (lACs) for 
assistance in solving a specific technical problem or meeting your informa- 
tion needs. The “user friendly” lACs are staffed by technology transfer experts 
who provide computerized information retrieval from one of the world’s largest 
banks of technical data. Nearly 500 computerized data bases, ranging from 
NASA's own data base to Chemical Abstracts and INSPEC, are accessible 
through the nine lACs, which are located throughout the nation. The lACs also 
offer technical consultation sen/ices and/or linkage with other experts in the field. 

You can obtain more information about these services by calling or writing 
the nearest IAC. User fees are charged for IAC information services. 


Aerospace Research Applications 
Center (ARAC) 

Indianapolis Center (or Advanced Research 

611 N. Capitol Avenue 

Indianapolis, IN 46204 

Dr. F. Timothy Janis, Director 

(317) 262-5003 

Kerr Industrial Applications Center 
(KIAC) 

Southeastern Oklahoma State University 

Station A, Box 2584 

Durant, OK 74701 

Tom J. McRorey, Director 

(405) 924-6822 

NASA Industrial Applications Center 

823 William Pitt Union 

University of Pittsburgh 

Pittsburgh. PA 15260 

Paul A. McWilliams, Executive Director 

(412)648-7000 

NASA/Southern Technology 
Applications Center 

State University System ol Florida 
307 Weil Hall 
Gainesville, FL 32611 
J. Ronald Thornton, Director 
(904) 392-6760 

NASA/UK Technology Applications 
Center 

University of Kentucky 
109 Kinkead Hall 
Lexington, KY 405066057 
William R. Strong, Director 
(606) 257-6322 


NERAC, Inc. 

Mansfield Professional Park 
Storrs, CT 06268 
Daniel U. Wilde, President 
(203) 429-3000 

North Carolina Science and Technology 
Research Center (NC/STRC) 

Post Office Box 12235 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
J. Graves Vann, Jr., Acting Director 
(919) 549-0671 

Technology Application Center (TAC) 

University of New Mexico 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 
Stanley A. Morain, Director 
(505) 277-3622 

NASA Industrial Applications Center 
(WESRAC) 

University of Southern California 
Research Annex 
3716 South Hope Street 
Room 200 

Los Angeles, CA 90007 
Radford G. King, Acting Director 
(213) 743-6132 
(800) 642-2872 (CA only) 

(800) 872-7477 (toll-free US) 


If you represent a public sector organization 
with a particular need, you can contact NASA's 
Application Team for technology matching and 
problem solving assistance. Staffed by profes- 
sional engineers from a variety of disciplines, 
the Application Team works with public sector 
organizations to identify and solve critical pro- 
blems with existing NASA technology. 


Technology Application Team 

Research Triangle Institute 
P.O. Box 12194 

Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
Doris Rouse, Director 
(919)5416980 


42 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


A SHORTCUT TO SOFTWARE: 

COSMIC® 


An economical source of computer programs developed by NASA & other gov’t, agencies. 


S oftware developed by the U.S. government may be 
applicable to your needs. To tap this valuable resource, 
contact COSMIC, NASA’s Computer Software Management 
and Information Center. Approximately 1400 computer 
programs and related documentation comprise the current 
library. New and updated programs are announced regularly 
in NASA Tech Briefs’ Computer Programs section, and 
COSMIC publishes an annual software catalog. 


More information about COSMIC’s services can be 
obtained by calling or writing: 

COSMIC' 

Computer Services Annex 
University of Georgia 
Athens, GA 30602 
John A. Gibson, Director 
(404) 542-3265 


HOW YOU CAN ACCESS TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER SERVICES AT NASA FIELD CENTERS: 

Technology Utilization Officers & Patent Counsels 

Each NASA Field Center has designated a Technology Utilization Officer and a Patent 
Counsel to facilitate technology transfer between NASA and the private sector. 

I f you need further information about new technologies presented in NASA Tech Briefs, you should request the Tech- 
nical Support Package (TSP) that accompanies the brief. In the event that a TSP is not available, you can contact the 
Technology Utilization Officer at the NASA Field Center that sponsored the research. He can arrange for expert assistance 
in applying the technology by putting you in touch with the people who developed it. 

If you want additional information about the patent status of a particular technology or are interested in licensing a NASA 
invention, contact the Patent Counsel at the NASA Field Center that sponsored the research. Be sure to refer to the NASA 
reference number at the end of the tech brief. 


Ames Research Center 

Technology Utilization Officer: 
Laurance A Milov 
Mail Code 204-10 
Moffett Field, CA 94035 
(415) 694-5761 
Patent Counsel: 

Darrell G. Brekke 
Mall Code 200-1 1 
Moffett Field, CA 94035 
(415)694-5104 

Goddard Space Flight Center 

Technology Utilization Officer : 

Donald S. Friedman 

Mall Code 702-1 

Green belt. MD 20771 

(301) 286-6242 

Patent Counsel: 

John O. Tresansky 
Mail Code 204 
Greenbelt, MD 20771 
(301) 286-7351 

Lyndon B. Johnson Space 
Center 

Technology Utilization Officer. 

Dean C. Glenn 

Mail Code EA4 

Houston, TX 77058 

(713) 483-3809 

Patent Counsel: 

Edward K. Fein 
Mail Code AL3 
Houston, TX 77058 
(713)483-4871 


John F. Kennedy Space Center 

Technology Utilization Officer. 

Thomas M Hammond 

Mail Stop PT-TPO-A 

Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899 

(305)867-3017 

Patent Counsel: 

James O. Harrell 
Mall Code PT-PAT 
Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899 
(305) 867-2544 

Langley Research Center 

Technology Utilization Officer: 

John Samos 
Mail Stop 139A 
Hampton, V A 23665 
(804) 865-3281 
Patent Counsel: 

Howard J. Osborn 
Mail Code 279 
Hampton, VA 23665 
(804) 865-3725 

Lewis Research Center 

Technology Utilization Officer 

Daniel G. Soltis 

Mail Stop 7-3 

21000 Brook park Road 

Cleveland, OH 44135 

(216) 433-5567 

Patent Counsel: 

Gene E. Shook 
Mail Code 60-2 
21000 Brookpark Road 
Cleveland, OH 44135 
(216) 433-5753 


Jet Propulsion Laboratory 

Technology Utilization Manager: 
Norman L. Chalfin 
Mall Stop 201-110 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91109 
(818) 354-2240 

NASA Resident Offfce-JPL 

Technology Utilization Officer 

Gordon S. Chapman 

Mail Stop 180-801 

4800 Oak Grove Drive 

Pasadena, CA 91109 

(818) 354-4849 

Patent Counsel: 

Paul F. McCaul 
Mall Code 180-801 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91109 
(818) 354-2734 

George C. Marshall Space 
night Center 

Technology Utilization Officer 
Ismail Akbay 
Code AT01 

Marshall Space Flight Center, 
AL 35812 
(205) 544-2223 
Patent Counsel: 

Leon D. Wofford, Jr. 

Mail Code CC01 

Marshall Space Flight Center, 

AL 35812 

(205)544-0014 


National Space Technology 
Laboratories 

Technology Utilization Officer. 
Robert M. Barlow 
Code GA-10 

NSTL Station, MS 39529 
(601)688-1929 


NASA Headquarters 

Technology Utilization Officer: 
Leonard A. Ault 
Code IU 

Washington, DC 20546 
(202) 453-1920 

Assistant General Counsel for 
Patent Matters: Robert F. Kempt 
Code GP 

Washington, DC 20546 
(202) 453-2424 


IF YOU HAVE A QUESTION . . . 

NASA Scientific & Technical Information Facility 


I f you have a general or specific question about NASA's 
Technology Utilization Network or its services and 
documents, you can contact the STI facility for assistance 
The STI staff can answer your questions, supply docu- 
ments and provide referrals to meet your needs. You can 
use the feedback card in this issue to contact STI directly. 


NASA Scientific and Technical Information Facility 

Technology Utilization Office 
P.O. Box 8757 
BWI Airport, MD 21240 
Walter M. Holland, Manager 
(301) 859-5300, Ext. 242, 243 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


43 




m Fly-By- Wire 

A Case of Bidirectional Technology Transfer 

By James E. Tomayko 


O ne of the prime benefits of the space program is 
the transfer of technology to such areas as 
materials science, medicine, and electronics. This 
often has been a one-way street. However, one NASA 
research program not only resulted in adapting space flight 
techniques to the realm of aeronautics, but also to using an 
advanced form of the aeronautical technique to prove a con- 
cept incorporated in the Space Shuttle. This double 
technology transfer was accomplished during the Digital 
Fly-by-Wire Program conducted at the Dryden Flight 
Research Center in Edwards, California, during 1970-1978. 
Phase One used Apollo hardware to establish fly-by-wire 
technology, and Phase II acted in part as a testbed for Space 
Shuttle software. 

The Concept of Digital Fly-by-Wire 

Digital fly-by-wire is a method of controlling an aircraft 
electronically rather than mechanically. From the Wright 
brothers until recently, the dominant way to move an 
airplane’s control surfaces (elevators, ailerons, rudder, 
flaps) has been with mechanical linkages from the cockpit 
control devices. For example, a pilot pulling back on his 
control stick moves a cable or rod attached to the base of 
the stick and connected to the elevators, usually through 



a hydraulic system that enhances the force of the pilot's 
pull, enabling him to easily move the control surface. In a 
digital system, the mechanical path to the control surface 
is broken. Devices are inserted to convert stick and rudder 
pedal manipulations to voltages. These voltages are 
measured and the data are entered into a set of control laws 
programmed into a digital computer. The computer out puts 
the appropriate commands to actuators that then control 
the force applied through the hydraulic system. With a suf- 
ficiently sophisticated set of control laws, the airplane can 
be made more "flyable.” 

The concept of digital control was applied in the man- 
ned space program. The only method of controlling the Mer- 
cury, Gemini, and Apollo manned spacecraft was by the use 
of rockets, both small thrusters for attitude control and 
minor orbit changes and large engines for major corrections 
to the flight path. The Mercury capsules had neither a digital 
computer nor an orbital maneuvering system, just attitude 
control jets that could be fired either by the astronaut or the 
ground controllers. The Gemini spacecraft contained a 
computer used as a back-up for the launch-vehicle guidance 
computer and for rendevous and reentry operations. Gemini 
had some lifting capability and could be maneuvered dur- 
ing descent within a "footprint” some 400 miles long and 
a few dozen miles wide by controlling its attitude. 
However, it was the Apollo program that most exten- 
sively used fly-by-wire techniques. The Apollo missions 
included a considerable amount of automatic 
attitude control, and that was accomplished using 
the computer to fire thrusters. The computer also 
calculated and conducted main engine burns for 
course corrections, orbit changes, and the like. Thei 


Fly-by -wire techniques of the future are simulated in 
the Ames Proximity Operations (Prox-Ops) Space 
Station mockup as an operator transfers an Or- 
biting Maneuverable Vehicle (OMV) to the Space 
Shuttle. Pioneering fly-by-wire technology 
originated with the Space Shuttle, shown here on 
Its Boeing 747 carrier plane, and Its partner, the 
Digital Fly-by-Wire F-8C. 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


45 


astronauts could control the 
spacecraft only through this digital 
system. 

Origins of the Digital Fly- 
by-Wire Program 

As the Apollo program scored its 
greatest successes in late 1968 and 
1969, a group of engineers at NASA's 
Dryden Flight Research Center con- 
sidered the use of digital control 
techniques for aircraft. There appeared 
to be obvious advantages to testing 
such a system, as digital fly-by-wire 
promised to revolutionize the design 
of high-performance aircraft such as 
the F-16 and the current X-29 with 
forward-swept wings. One advantage 
for such aircraft is in more precise 
maneuver control, another is increas- 
ed combat survivability due to the 
presence of redundant systems. Large 
commercial aircraft could benefit be- 
cause better control would mean a 
smoother ride for passengers and 
cargo. Also, weight and space savings 
could result. But before such systems 
were applied to either military or com- 
mercial flight, they had to have proven 
reliability. The success of the manned 
space program indicated that digital 
systems could be made reliable, but 
their use in controlling aircraft re- 
mained a problem to be solved. 

The key consideration in a digital 
system is the type and capabilities of 
the computer to be used in it. Due to 
reliability considerations, the Flight 
Research Center engineers wanted to 
have a redundant set of computers. 
However, the cost of developing and 
man-rating a new computer for this 
program was high. Therefore, the 
already-existing Apollo guidance com- 
puter with its inertial measurement 
unit and related devices became the 
digital system for the program. There 
was a disadvantage to using the Apollo 
system; it was developed exclusively 
for use on the Apollo spacecraft, with 
no thought of other applications. This 
meant that some significant adapta- 
tions needed to be made before it could 
work in an aircraft. Several advantages 
outweighed this consideration: 

—The Apollo computer was so care- 
fully constructed, with such attention 
to piece-part screening and testing, 
that it could be used confidently as a 
simplex system, with no redundancy, 
just as in the Apollo spacecraft. 

—Several Apollo missions were can- 
celled, making surplus (and already 
paid for!) equipment available. 

—The project could press on immedi- 
ately, due to existing Apollo con- 
tracts with Delco (digital hardware), 
the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory of 
the Massachusetts Institute of Tech- 
46 


nology (software), and Sperry (analog 
back-up devices). 

—Software development and support 
facilities were in place. Software, as 
learned during the Apollo experience, 
is often the pacing item in a project in- 
volving computers. The existence of 
tools to assist in software develop- 
ment was an important factor in the 
program's rapid implementation and 
success. 

Thus equipped, the conversion pro- 
cess began for what the Dryden engin- 
eers claim was the world’s first aircraft 
with “full authority” digital fly-by-wire. 


From Mechanical to Digital: 
The Metamorphosis of an 
Airplane 

The airplane chosen for fly-by-wire 
demonstrations was the Vought F-8 
Crusader. NASA acquired several of 


One advantage 
is more precise 
maneuver control. 


these aircraft for research purposes. 
One of NASA’s F-8s became the test 
aircraft for supercritical wing research. 
Two others were assigned to the fly-by- 
wire program. Dryden engineers re- 
moved the portions of the wing of an 
F-8A that folded for carrier storage and 
modified it further into a test-bed. 
Permanently grounded, this “Iron 
Bird” made possible the testing of the 
hardware and software associated 
with the program before clearing it for 
flight. A pilot could sit in the Iron Bird 
simulator and move control surfaces 
driven by equipment identical to the 
flight version. 

The first step in transforming the air- 
craft to a digital-controlled vehicle was 
breaking the chain of mechanical link- 
ages. To provide electrical inputs to 
the computer, linear variable differen- 
tial transformers (LVDTs) were install- 
ed to convert the mechanical stick and 
rudder pedal movements. Engineers 
installed LVDTs for pitch on the right 
side of the aircraft aft of the cockpit. 
Roll LVDTs were put on the left side 
of the airplane. Due to rudder cable 
stretching, the yaw transformers were 
at the base of the tail. When the pilot 
moved the stick or rudder, the portion 
of the mechanical cable that remained 
between the control device and its 
LDVT also moved, affecting the volt- 


age output from the transducer. The 
voltages were input to an interface unit 
that converted them to a format under- 
standable by the software. 

The next part of the conversion pro- 
cess was installing the surplus Apollo 
hardware. The Apollo guidance com- 
puter was afixed-point machine using 
16-bit words that had a cycle time of 
1 1 .7 microseconds, slower than most 
personal computers today. It came 
with 36k words of mixed memory and 
2k words of erasable memory. 

The Apollo spacecraft flew with 
two computers, one in the command 
module and one in the lunar excursion 
module. Their hardware was identical, 
but the software was necessarily dif- 
ferent. The astronauts communicated 
with the computer through a display 
and keyboard unit (DSKY) which con- 
tained a keyboard for entering num- 
bers and commands, and five-digit 
displays for data as well as warning 
lights. 

The F-8 carried a DSKY in the left 
gun bay, where a ground crewman 
could activate the flight control pro- 
gram before takeoff. The DSKY was 
a crude data entry and retrieval 
system, even for the 1960s, compared 
to the simplest home computer of the 
1980s, but Dryden engineers consider- 
ed it “pretty good compared to what 
we had later" in Phase II. This was 
because the DSKY allowed specific 
parameters stored in the erasable 
memory to be changed between flights. 
The Phase II software came from 
Draper on tape, with no interface 
capable of changing it. 

The software structure was quite 
similar to that used in Apollo. The pro- 
grams were divided into systems and 
applications programs. Systems pro- 
grams included the Executive, which 
essentially controlled the running of 
the other programs; Restart, which 
provided a graceful means of begin- 
ning the program cycle again after a 
hardware or software failure; and Ser- 
vice, which did some internal testing 
and other tasks. Flight control was the 
primary purpose of the applications 
programs. Draper took the system 
software directly from a load prepared 
forthe Apollo 14 flight, making it possi- 
ble for the developers to concentrate 
on the applications programs. 

Changing the actuator’s function in 
the hydraulic system was another 
modification to the F-8. Signals from 
the computer would travel through the 
interface unit and then to the actu- 
ators. Each control surface has secon- 
dary electro-hydraulic actuators driv- 
ing a metering valve in the primary 
hydraulic power actuator. The secon- 
dary actuators have redundant servo 
valves. In the Phase I program, three 
valves were present to move each 
hydraulic system. One was prime, and ► 

NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


did the actual work; the other two were 
back-up. In Phase II, all servos drive the 
hydraulics together. 

This set of components, the LVDTs, 
computer and initial measurement 
unit (IMU), software, interface unit, and 
actuators, complete the transition 
from a mechanical control system to a 
digital fly-by-wire system. However, a 
back-up system had to be provided. To 
prove the feasibility of fly-by-wire 
beyond question, the aircraft could not 
carry a mechanical control system of 
any sort. Because the electrical equip- 
ment was already in the design, an 
analog electronic back-up using a 
triply-redundant system was installed. 
Faults detected in the primary control 
system caused a switchover to the 
backup. Examples of such faults are a 
parity failure in the computer, software 
entering into an endless loop, an at- 
tempt to read data in a part of memory 
that contained no data, and others 
detectable by the primary system’s 
hardware or software. A restart or com- 
plete switchover would occur depend- 
ing on the fault’s severity or repetition, 
in all Phase I and Phase II flights, no 
automatic switchovers ever occurred. 
The engineers tested the back-ups by 
having the pilot manually change over 
to the analog system during several 
flights. 


The Phase I Flight 
Program 

Preparation for the Phase I Flight 
Program began with testing the digital 
equipment and its software on the 
ground. Those tests demonstrated 
some ways in which the concepts of 
the control laws needed changes 
before flight. For example, in early 
hardware tests, engineers used a hand 
controller from the lunar module in 
place of a stick. This was only a matter 
of convenience, even though it was 
known that the stick would be used 
later. This masked a problem that 
showed up in the Iron Bird when a real 
stick was used. The difficulty was 
"coarse quantization” of the inputs by 
the computer when the stick was 
moved. The minumum step size for 
signals created by the software caus- 
ed commands to the actuators in re- 
sponse to pilot movements to be sent 
in too-short increments. When this 
happened, the entire simulator would 
shake violently, with a frightening 
noise level. 

Despite the racket, the anomaly 
probably would not be catastrophic in 
flight, although the pilot would feel the 
aircraft maneuver in a very coarse stair- 
step fashion. A software filter was 
added to the programming to smooth 


out the actuator movements. This 
suggested two things to future digital 
control efforts: a high-fidelity simu- 
lator with actual hardware and soft- 
ware is of critical importance in veri- 
fying the total system, and software 
can often overcome hardware defi- 
ciencies or idiosyncrasies. 

When the actual flight tests finally 
took place, they were almost anti- 
climactic. In 42 flights totaling 58 
hours, the digital system operated 
without a failure or restart. Pilots could 
choose to fly the F-8 in either “direct” 
or “stability augmentation system” 
(SAS) modes. The latter provided feed- 
back to automatically reduce the pilot- 
ing task. Test pilots could even fly 
direct in one or two axes, and SAS in 
the remaining axes. This part of the 
program paved the way for using digi- 
tal systems to improve pilot perfor- 
mance in difficult-to-fly aircraft or 
spacecraft of the future. 

Transition to Phase II: 
Testbed for the Space 
Shuttle 

While the F-8 made aviation history 
at Dryden, NASA prepared for its 
next manned spacecraft program— 
the Space Shuttle. The concept of a 
reusable spacecraft dictated that the^ 



CLASSIC 

QUALITY 


Connor-Winfield oscillators keep you in 
tune with the proper frequencies. 

For your next R&D project or full-run production, 
C W can provide the quality and reliability you 
require in an oscillator. With our vast experience 
designing TCXO’s, OCXO's, VCO/VCXO's, and 
Clocks (ECL, CMOS, TTL, HCMOS), our engineers 
can customize our many standard models to 
meet almost any need. Frequencies range from 
1 Hz to 400 MHz and full military screening is 
available on most moaels. 

You can expect noteworthy speed of shipment, 
excellent service support, and all orders, large or 
small, are handled with equal importance. 

Can you afford not to call Connor-Winfield today? 


CONNOR-WINFIELD CORPORATION 

West Chicago, IL 6018S USA 
Phone 1-312-231-5270 TLX 270244 
Cable CONWINWCGO 

Keeping Pace with Progress 


Circle Reader Action No. 418 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


47 




vehicle should have the ability to con- 
trol its movement through the atmos- 
phere to a much greater extent than 
was possible in any previous manned 
program. To manuever during the glide 
portion of each Shuttle mission, the 
craft needed a control system for its 
moveable surfaces. Having separate 
control systems for space and the 
atmosphere would be unnecessary 
duplication. Therefore, a single digital 
fly-by-wire system would function in 
both space and during descent. The 
system became a fully integrated 
avionics system with a core of five 
general purpose computers involved 
in all spacecraft activities from launch 
processing to powered flight, on-orbit 
operations and reentry, glide, and land- 
ing. Not only would there be no mech- 
anical backup to this system, but no 
analog backup as well. This meant that 
the reliability of the primary system 
had to be extremely high, and that re- 
dundancy had to be established within 
it. In 1973, a three-computer configura- 
tion was chosen for the F-8 Phase II 
hardware. A fourth computer was sel- 
ected for backup. At the time, a similar 
hardware scheme was being consider- 
ed for the Shuttle, so a triplex system 
on the F-8 would give the Shuttle pro- 
gram a convenient vehicle on which to 
test both synchronization and redun- 
dancy management techniques. 

Contributions to the 
Shuttle Program 

The Phase II of the digital fly-by-wire 
program contributed to the Shuttle in 
several ways, at least one unplanned. 
The planned ways included computer 
synchronization, redundancy manage- 
ment, and the demonstration of data 
bus concepts that reduced the hard- 
wiring necessary in the control sys- 
tem. The need for redundancy in both 
the F-8 and Shuttle was due to the fact 
that each used a mass-produced, off- 
the-shelf general purpose computer, 
the IBM AP-101. Because the Shuttle 
would not have a back-up other than 
another computer of the same type, it 
was important that the avionics be 
able to function if one or more of the 
primary computers failed. Therefore, 
graceful reconfiguration of the primary 
system in flight depended on identify- 
ing whether a computer has failed and 
identifying the failure of any other 
mission-critical component (such as 
an actuator) so that its back-up could 
be engaged. 

One way to determine whether a 
computer has failed is synchroniza- 
tion. Because only one computer is 
needed to perform all the functions of 
controlling the F-8 or the Shuttle, the 
same program can run independently 
in each of the computers in the 
system. By starting the computers 
48 


simultaneously, each computer in the 
set should be at the same place in the 
software at the same time, with leeway 
for minute differences in hardware. In 
both the F-8 and the Shuttle, discrete 
signals are sent to each of the other 
computers at predetermined intervals. 
When the software is interrupted to 
check for synchronization, each com- 
puter sends a discrete signal to the 
others. The computers wait for the in- 
coming signals, reset the count on the 
discretes when both arrive, do a sec- 
ond read to check if the other com- 
puters did their resets properly, and 
then reset the interrupt clock timing 
the interval between synchronizations. 
If the signal from another computer 
does not arrive within a specified time 
interval, or is incorrect, the waiting 


The failed 
computer can try a 
restart, declare 
itself bad, or keep 
on, but the other 
computers ignore it 
until it properly 
synchronizes. 


computers send a message declaring 
the delinquent computer “bad” and go 
about the business of flying the air- 
plane. The failed computer can try a 
restart, declare itself bad, or keep on, 
but the other computers ignore it until 
it properly synchronizes. A failure of 
two computers causes an automatic 
switchover to the back-up control 
system. This entire process is done in 
less than 10 milliseconds, so short a 
time that the performance of the air- 
craft is not affected. The Shuttle 
system uses four computers in a 
redundant set instead of three, three 
discretes instead of two, waits 4 
milliseconds instead of 10, and stops 
on software cues rather than a count, 
but the concept remains the same as 
the method used on the F-8. 

Redundancy management is another 
area in which the F-8 program directly 
contributed to the Shuttle. Many sub- 
systems on both the F-8 and the Shut- 
tle are triplicated, not only the compu- 
ters. Signals from each of the three 
versions of the subsystem must be 
analyzed for error. The algorithm for 
evaluation consists of simple rules: if 


no failures, take the middle value of the 
three signals; if one failure, average 
the signals. Because the processes in 
the AP-101 could be scheduled, two 
periods of redundancy management 
were built into each software cycle. 
One period is used to make the signal 
selection, the next for fault detection; 
thus, failed channels are identified 
before the succeeding cycle begins. 

An unplanned area in which the F-8 
program contributed to the Shuttle 
was in the evaluation of pilot-induced 
oscillations that appeared on the fifth 
approach and landing test (ALT) flown 
by the shuttle Enterprise. After the 
problem with pilot-induced oscilla- 
tions appeared, a series of test-flights 
of the F-8 was scheduled to try to repli- 
cate the problem and experiment with 
solutions. These tests provided need- 
ed data to develop a solution. 

Proof of how the Phase II program 
helped the Shuttle was that out of the 
four computer failures in the first 50 
flights, none caused a switchover to 
the back-up system, and none caused 
any noticeable degradation in the 
handling characteristics of the aircraft. 
Therefore, the purpose and efficacy of 
a multiple-string digital system was 
proved. 

Wider Applications of the 
Technology 

The F-8 and Shuttle are contributing 
to the development of a new flight 
technology, the Control Configured 
Vehicle (CCV), which incorporates 
digital fly-by-wire. The F-16 uses active 
control by an analog system and is be- 
ing converted to digital fly-by-wire in 
the F-16/D models. The Navy’s F/A-18 
fighter also uses a digital fly-by-wire 
system. In the United Kingdom, a 
Jaguar fighter is part of a project to 
test a quadruplex digital system, and 
data bus concepts are being incor- 
porated on new commercial aircraft as 
well as military planes. An aircraft 
that directly benefited from the digital 
fly-by-wire project is the X-29 with 
forward-sweeping wings. First flown in 
December 1984, the plane uses Honey- 
well computers with the same basic 
control laws and redundancy manage- 
ment scheme developed in the digital 
fly-by-wire program. All of these proj- 
ects have proceeded with confidence 
because in the early 1970s an F-8 bor- 
rowed some space-age technology 
and repaid the loan with interest. 

James E. Tomayko is an Assistant 
Professor of computer science at 
Wichita State University, Wichita, KS. 
He teaches courses in software engin- 
eering, distributed computing, and the 
history of computers. Currently he is 
under contract with NASA to write a 
comprehensive history of the Agen- 
cy’s use of computers in space flight 
operations. □ 

NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 



Good programming isn't a matter of luck. It requires skill, perseverance and good programming tools. You already have 
the skill and perseverance; Janus/Ada provides the programming tools. Tools you can rely on in any project, in almost 
any MS DOS environment, with full portability to any other Ada system. With Janus/Ada, you get lucky in all the right 
ways; 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: Any Intel 86 family processor with 512K RAM, two floppy disk drives or a hard disk and DOS 2.0 or 

higher. 

COMPILATION SPEEDS: 8086/6MHZ:300 lines per minute; 80186/8MHZ: 500 lines per minute; 80286/8MHZ: 900 lines per minute 

(DOS 3.0) 

PRODUCT SUPPORT: Quarterly newsletters, 24 hour Bulletin Board, and a staff with over 20 man years of actual Ada programming 
experience. 

APPLICATIONS AND TOOLS: Assemblers, disassemblers, Ada source code, a Pascal to Ada translator, 8087 support, tutorials and 

more! 

AFFORDABILITY: Our Janus/Ada "C" Pak is available for $99.95 and contains the Janus/Ada Compiler and Linker, designed 

specifically for microcomputers and consumer tested since 1981. Our customers can upgrade to our development 
and embedded systems "paks" with 100% credit for this starter package. Our Janus/Ada Extended Tutorial is 
available for the same low price. We feature commercial and educational "site" licensing for all of our packages. 

ADA STANDARDIZATION: Janus/Ada source code can be ported to any validated Ada system and compiled. We offer a variety of 

tools and consultations to assist you in this process, if needed. 

JANUS/ADA USERS: Over 5,000 seperate sites use the Janus/Ada compiler for training, embedded systems and applications each 
day. We supply our tools to the U.S. Armed Forces, Fortune 500 companies and over 400 educational institu- 
tions, as well as to individuals like you. 


We've been making programmers lucky with our tools for over 5 years; isn't it about time you changed your luck? We'll 
even pay for the call! To place an order or receive our informative brochure, please call 1-800-722-3248. It'll make your day! ! ! 



Software, inc. 


CM Ct N M. ccr M> «. ■> Pm ut Ik 

ADA . a ir^nurk WiW U S DqtMMilMMi 
NS DOS . . ■N . i rt ti M 


© Copyright 1986 RR Software 


specialists in state of the art programming 


P.O. Box 1512 Madison, Wisconsin 53701 

(608)244-6436 TELEX 4998168 1-800-722-3248 

Circle Reader Action No. 351 




Suppliers Forecast 


Guildline Instruments, Inc., Orlando, FL, has developed a 
digital platinum resistance thermometer with a temperature 
range of -200 C to + 600 C. The 9540 B has an IEEE 488 GP-IB 
interface for systems or laboratory application. 

Circle Reader Action No. 329. 

Flexible Computer Corp., Dallas, TX, offers the FLEX/32 Multi 
Computer, with parallel processing designed for real time 
systems. The FLEX/32 supports ADA, C, and FORTRAN 
languages and has UNIX System 5 capabilities. 

Circle Reader Action No. 326. 

Systems Control Technology’s (Palo Alto, CA) Model C soft- 
ware facilitates modeling, analysis and control of dynamic 
systems. Block diagrams are drawn with a mouse. 

Circle Reader Action No. 327. 

Microcompatibles, Silver Spring, MD, adds the IBM- 
compatible Printmatic FORTRAN-callable printer driver to 
their graphics software line. Printmatic allows users to access 
the full capabilities of a dot-matrix or laser printer. 

Circle Reader Action No. 328. 

Honeywell’s Tabular Monitoring software package pretests 
monitoring options for transducer activity review. The package 
includes online data and derived (real-time) channel monitor- 
ing, and alarm condition recognition. The software can be in- 
stalled on Honeywell's H.TMS 3000 Test Management 
Systems. Circle Reader Action No. 301. 

KlnetlcSystems Corporation has a new CAMAC serial 
highway system for long distance ultra-high-speed data acqui- 
sition and time-critical process control. KineticSystem’s 
distributed I/O format allows data transfer within a single 
Serial Highway message, providing transfer rates five times 
greater than other real-time highway systems. 

Circle Reader Action No. 333. 

TRAQ Technology Inc., of Baton Rouge, LA, introduces TRAQ- 
NET, a "smart” data collection system that processes data for 
dBase III files. TRAQ-NET links up to 999 data capture devices 
in a multi-sharing network. Information gathered through the 
terminal and software can be communicated to a PC host im- 
mediately or stored at the work station for communication to 
the host at a more convenient time. 

Circle Reader Service No. 330. 

Inference Co., of Los Angeles, CA, offers expert systems 
technology for a new line of computer Integrated Manu- 
facturing (CIM) products under development by American 
Cimflex Corp. Inference's new products can be used for plant- 
floor control and information management at the automation 
workcell and machine levels. 

Circle Reader Action No. 331. 

MARC Analysis Research Corporation, Palo Alto, CA, pro- 
duces nonlinear finite element analysis software that 
simulates the effects of heat and stress on products and 
manufacturing equipment. MARC’s companion graphics inter- 
face program, a pre-and post-processor called MENTAT, 
generates models enabling users to 'see' the results of an 
analysis. The MARC/MENTAT combination runs on a wide 
variety of computers, including the leading engineering 
workstations. Circle Reader Action No. 323. 

Appllcon, a Schlumberger company, introduces their 
68020-based Bravo3 Manufacturing Workstation, a 32-bit UNIX 
system with a 19-inch high-resolution monochrome graphics 
screen. A mass-storage subsystem enables operation as a 
stand-alone unit or as part of an Ethernet-TCP/IP network. In- 
cluded is the COMPACT II Numerical Control programming 
language, a 2-D graphics system for blueprint creation and 
other mechanical and process documentation. 

Circle Reader Action No. 308. 


Aptec's recently introduced I/O Computer, the IOC System 
200, a special-purpose input/output computer, accelerates the 
throughput of l/O-intensive applications on DEC’S VAX/VMS 
minicomputers in excess of 50 times. In a typical application, 
the IOC efficiently supports up to a dozen high-performance 
peripherals and devices. It provides a 200 Mbytes/sec internal 
bus, programmable 12 Mbytes/sec I/O processors and high- 
speed mass memory with access rates up to 50 Mbytes/sec 
per memory board. Circle Reader Action No. 310. 

Gold Hill’s new 386 LISP System includes the HummingBoard, 
a 386-based plug-in board with up to 24 Mbytes of directly ad- 
dressable on-board memory for IBM PC XTs and ATs, and the 
Golden Common Lisp (GCLISP) 386 Developer. The Humm- 
ingBoard serves as a co-processor capable of executing 
GCLISP programs five times faster than an IBM AT. The 
GCLISP 386 Developer is a Common LISP programming en- 
vironment used for development and delivery of Al applica- 
tions. Circle Reader Action No. 311. 

Nlcolet Test Instruments (formerly Nicolet Paratronics) an- 
nounces four new dedicated probes for its 800 series logic 
analyzers, which support the 68008, 68010, and NSC800 micro- 
processors, and the IEEE-488 bus. The probes easily connect 
to the test unit, and disassemble collected data into 
microprocessor or GPIB mnemonics. All models include high 
impedance buffering, qualifiers to purge unwanted bus cycles, 
and disassembly software. Circle Reader Action No. 313. 

R.R. Software, combining microcomputing and military/ 
industrial contracting, offers products and services for 
microcomputer-based Ada. Janus/Ada, a compiler line for 
16-bit systems, and PasTran, an ANSI STD Pascal to ANSI STD 
Ada translator, were released in 1982. The company also sells 
other Ada related products, including an Ada tutorial, an 
embedded systems development package, and Ada applica- 
tion programs ranging from an editor to complete graphics 
capabilities. Circle Reader Action No. 314. 

Control Data Corporation announces two 1750A computers 
for the space and avionics markets. The computers will be 
based on Contrql Data's two-chip CPU running over 2 MIPS us- 
ing the standard DAIS floating point instruction mix. The CPU 
has received U.S. Air Force certification. Full form-fit and func- 
tion engineering units will be available in the second half of 
1987. Circle Reader Action No. 306. 

Data Precision’s new 640 Module and High Speed Sampling 
Probe, with the DATA 6000 mainframe, can make high speed, 
high precision measurements to 100 GHz equivalent time sam- 
ple rates with 16 bit resolution in the 1 GHz bandwidth. The 
probe can measure fast rise and settling times by digitizing 
data points 10 psec apart. 

Circle Reader Action No. 307. 

Digital Equipment Corporation and Systems Designers sign- 
ed a development agreement to share their Ada technologies 
and build a family of cross-compilers based on Digital’s VAX 
Ada programming language. The cross-compilers will support 
the MIL-STD-1750A, Motorola 68000 and Intel iAPX86. 

Circle Reader Action No. 324. 

MASSCOMP’s (Westford, MA) Scientific Laboratory System 
(SLS), a data acquisition computer system designed for 
laboratory applications, features RTUTM UNIX, for high perfor- 
mance, real-time scientific experiments. SLS includes 
Laboratory Workbench; mouse-driven software that eliminates 
programming through pull-down menus, pop-up displays, 
graphical icons and interactive controls. 

Reader Action No. 318. 

Vlslonics Corporation’s (Sunnyvale, CA) EE Designer II 
CAE/CAD integrated software package supports surface- 
mount design and multilayer layout. The software has the 
ability to create ground planes on either side of PC boards. 
User-definable features include trace width and pad sizes, pin- 
snap, block delete, macro save and multi-step pan. Fabrication 
drawings can be created with related text through the soft- 
ware's text editor and automatic board-dimensioning 
capabilities. Circle Reader Action No. 302. 


50 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) award- 
ed Brtmros* Corporation of Amarlca a Phase II research grant 
to develop a Real-Time X-ray topography system for quality 
control evaluations of epitaxial films of gallium arsenide 
(GaAs), gallium aluminum arsenide (GaAIAs) and mercury cad- 
mium telluride (HgCdTe) on various substrates in production 
environments. Potential applications include evaluating single 
crystal or large polycrystal substrates and epitaxial film 
materials. Clrclo Reader Action No. 312. 

Boeing Technology Services’ (Seattle, WA) night Systems 
Laboratory (FSL) has developed the new direct technical sup- 
port for programs or contractors, and can serve as an advisor, 
consultant or auditor. FSL also provides the New Simulation 
System (NSS), uses parallel processing architecture to 
develop more realistic flight simulators. 

Circle Reader Action No. 319. 

Ruoramlcs, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ manufactures 
Compu-Lube, a lubricant marketed for use on fine 
mechanisms on computers. Also new is Tufoil, an oil additive 
that lowers mechanical friction. Tufoil's chemistry includes 
suspended PTFE, or Teflon microparticles, giving it a friction 
coefficient of 0.02 on the National Bureau of Standards' steel- 
on-steel 4-ball test. Circle Reader Action No. 320. 


Advertiser’s Index 


Connor-Winfield Corporation . . . 

. .(RAC* 418) . . 

47 

Corning Glass Works 

. .(RAC 335) . . . 

19 

COSMIC 

. .(RAC 336) .. . 

34 

Ctrt-C 

. .(RAC 338) .. . 

14 

Dage-MTI 

. .(RAC 337) .. . 

37 

Data General Corp 

. .(RAC 353) . . . 

23 

Duramic Products Inc 

. .(RAC 355) . . . 

6 

Electronic Data Systems Corp. . . 

. .(RAC 334) .. . 

2 

ERIM 

. .(RAC 339) . . . 

8 

Fluoramics Inc 

. .(RAC 340) . . . 

1 

Gold Hill Computers Inc 

. .(RAC 341) . . . 

31 

Grumman Data Systems 

. .(RAC 363) . . . 

4-5 

Guildline Instruments Inc 

. .(RAC 373-378) 

33 

IBIS Systems Inc 

. .(RAC 343) . . . 

17 

KineticSystems Corp 

. .(RAC 344) . . . 

40 

Laser Precision Corp 

. (RAC 345) . . . 

3 

Logica 

. .(RAC 346) . . . 

12 

Logical Devices Inc 

. .(RAC 347) .. . 

36 

MARC Analysis Research Corp. . 

. (RAC 348) .. . 

30 

McDonnell Douglas Corp 

. (RAC 372) . . . 

. . .Cov.IV 

Microcompatibles Inc 

. .(RAC 389) . . . 

51 

New Issues 

. .(RAC 349) . . . 

22 

Nicolet Test Instruments Div. . . . 

. .(RAC 350) . . . 

7 

RR Software Inc 

. (RAC 351) . . . 

49 

Safe-Lab Inc 

. .(RAC 419) . . . 

29 

Symbolics Inc 

Systems Designers 

. (RAC 352) ... 

52,Cov.lll 

Software Inc 

. (RAC 354) . . . 

15 

TEAC 

. .(RAC 380) .. . 

39 

Tektronix Inc., Al Marketing . . . . 
Tektronix Inc., Integrated 

. (RAC 357) . . . 

. . Cov.ll 

Circuits Operation 

. .(RAC 356) .. . 

21 

Total Systems Integration 

. .(RAC 358) . . . 

29 

Visionics Corporation 

. .(RAC 359) . . . 

41 


• RAC stands for Reader Action Card. For further information 
on these advertisers, please circle the RAC number on the 
Reader Action Card elsewhere in this issue. This index has 
been compiled as a service to our readers and advertisers. 
Every precaution is taken to ensure its accuracy, but the 
publisher assumes no liability for errors or omissions. 


SCIENTIFIC/ENGINEERING 
GRAPHICS TOOLS 

for the IBM PC 

FORTRAN/Pascal tools: CRAFMATIC (screen graphics) 
and PLOTMATIC (pen plotter driver) 

These packages provide 2D and 3D plotting capabilities 
for programmers writing in a variety of FORTRAN/Pascal 
environments. We support MS, R-M and IBM FORTRAN 
and more. PLOTMATIC supports HP or Houston Instru- 
ment plotters. 

Don't want to program? Just ask for OMNIPLOT! Menu- 
driven, fully documented integrated scientific graphics. 
Write or call for complete information and ordering in- 
structions. 

CRAFMATIC - PLOTMATIC - OMNIPLOT [S| & [P] 



Microcompatibles, 301 Prelude Drive, Silver Spring, MD 20901 
(301 ) 593-0683 

Clrel* Reader Action No. 389 


NASA TECH BRIEF 
INDEXES 1981 & 1982 

$10.00 per copy 


Please send me copy(ies) of the mi 981 and 

copy(ies) of the 1982 Tech Brief Index. A 

check in the amount of $ is enclosed. 

Subscription ID Number (if appropriate): T 

Name 

Company 

Division 

Mail Stop 

Address 


Make checks payable to: “RMS Associates,” 
(NASA STI Facility, P.O. Box 8757 
Baltimore, MD 21240) 


NASA Tech Briefs, Special Edition 1986 


51 





At speeds of more than 200 mph, 
Symbolics ' can be the difference 
between winning and losing. 



When winnings everything, the fastest names 
in business turn to Symbolics. Just ask TrueSports 
Racing, the winning Indy 500 team. 

“During our practice runs at Indy this year, we went 
from 205 MPH lap speed to 214— just with a change 
of the small wings on the front of the car of 8/10ths of 
a degree. The Symbolics system lets us maximize our 
performance with corrections the human eye could 
never perceive!’ 

And now Symbolics can put your team on a winning 
track. We’ve slashed the cost of symbolic processing- 
while boosting performance and reliability. So now 
you can get unparalleled productivity at a surprisingly 
affordable price. 

Announcing Symbolics expanded 3600 Series 

Meet our new 3610AE applications delivery system, 
the entry-level 3620 and the mid-level 3650 develop- 
ment system. Each offers you the first implementa- 
tion of a CMOS/VLSI symbolic processor. And along 
with a 20-40% jump in performance, their single 
board processors deliver higher reliability, greater 
expandability, and lower life cycle costs— all in an 
office-size package. 

The total integration of Symbolics Genera™ soft- 
ware-including Symbolics Common Lisp™— makes 
the newly released 7.0 version your best choice when 
you need an extensive range of tools for development 
and delivery of artificial intelligence and other 
advanced applications. And the 3600 Series easily 
integrates symbolic processing into your existing 
systems— with a wide range of lan- 

I guages and networking protocols. 
Discover how Symbolics speeds 
solutions to TrueSports and companies 
like yours. Just return the coupon below 
I or call 1-800-237-2401, ext. 15 
(in Colo., 1-800-233-6083, ext. 15). 

Wfe’ll bring you a fascinating video and a complete 
information kit about the expanded 3600 Series. 
Symbolics. When you’re ready to pull ahead of the pack. 

symbolics 

* Your next step in computing™ 

Symbolics. Inc., Marketing Dept, 

11 Cambridge Center, Cambridge. MA 02142 

Res I want a practical solution to my application problems. 

Tell me how Symbolics can help. I'd like: 

□ More information about the 3600 Series. 

□ 1b talk with a Symbolics rep who will bring a 
^ videotape of customers’ successes with Symbolics 
□ To meet immediately with my Symbolics rep. 

□ 1b leam about becoming a VAR. 

My primary industry is: 

My application is: 

Name - 



_State_ 


-Zip_ 


Phone:. 


I^rnom 


_Best time to calk 


NT 12 | 


Symbolics. Inc.. Marketing Dept.. II Cambridge Center. Cambridge. MA 02142 





A COMPUTER MATERIALS CENTER 
LIKE NO PLACE ON EARTH. 


Because they're faster and more 
powerful than silicon chips, 
microchips made of gallium 
arsenide are the future of 
information processing. 

But when gallium arsenide is 
"grown"on Earth, imperfections 
occur that can render it useless. 
In gravity-free space, gallium 
arsenide can be made pure 
enough for all its applications: 
Small computers, fiber optics, 
satellite Earth stations. 


electronic defense systems. 

That's one reason why 
McDonnell Douglas is working 
with team members RCA, IBM, 
Lockheed and Honeywell to put 
a manned space station in orbit 
in the 1990s. 

For three decades, we've 
worked toward making a 
manned station operational. 
We've built space laboratories, 
flown space factories and tested 
space station frameworks. 


And we've developed the first 
gallium arsenide computer chip 
to be used as a microprocessor. 

Gallium arsenide microchips 
could revolutionize the power 
and economy of information > 
processing. And we think that's 
a very good reason to build a 
computer materials center 
like no place on Earth. 

For more information, write: 
McDonnell Douglas, Space Station, 
P.O. Box 14526, St. Louis, MO 63178. 



