^ 94-22532 


6 */ 

/I OS 


pcIPS 2.0: Powerful Multiprofile Image Processing 

Implemented On PCs 

O.M. Smirnov (Inst, of Astr. of the Russian Ac. Sci.) 

N.E.Piskunov (Obs. and Astrophys. Lab., U. of Helsinki) 


Over the years, the processing power of personal computers has steadily increased. Now, 
386- and 486-based PCs are fast enough for many image processing applications, and inex- 
pensive enough even for amateur astronomers. pcIPS is an image processing system based 
on these platforms that was designed to satisfy a broad range of data analysis needs, while 
requiring minimum hardware and providing maximum expandability. It will run (albeit 
at a slow pace) even on a 80286 with 640K memory, but will take full advantage of big- 
ger memory and faster CPUs. Because the actual image processing is performed by external 
modules, the system can be easily upgraded by the user for all sorts of scientific data analysis. 

pcIPS supports large format ID and 2D images in any numeric type from 8-bit integer to 
64-bit floating point. The images can be displayed, overlaid, printed and any part of the data 
examined via an intuitive graphical user interface that employs buttons, pop-up menus, and 
a mouse. pcIPS automatically converts images between different types and sizes to satisfy 
the requirements of various applications. 

pcIPS features an API that lets users develop custom applications in C or FORTRAN. While 
doing so, a programmer can concentrate on the actual data processing, because pcIPS as- 
sumes responsibility for accessing images and interacting with the user. This also ensures 
that all applications, even custom ones, have a consistent and user-friendly interface. The 
API is compatible with factory programming, a metaphor for constructing image processing 
procedures that will be implemented in future versions of the system (see Smirnov, Piskunov 
this conference). 

Several application packages were created under pcIPS . The basic package includes ele- 
mentary arithmetics and statistics, geometric transformations and import/export in various 
formats (FITS, binary, ASCII, GIF). The CCD processing package and the spectral analysis 
package were succesfully used to reduce spectra from the Nordic Telescope at La Palma. A 
photometry package is also available, and other packages are being developed. 

A multitasking version of pcIPS that utilizes the factory programming concept is currently 
under development. This version will remain compatible (on the source code level) with 
existing application packages and custom applications. 


101 


