@ Predicting Rocket or Jet Noise in Real Time 

Measurement data can be analyzed in real time. 

Stennis Space Center, Mississippi 


A semi-empirical theoretical model 
and a C++ computer program that imple- 
ments the model have been developed 
for use in predicting the noise generated 
by a rocket or jet engine. The computer 
program, entitled the Realtime Rocket 
and Jet Engine Noise Analysis and Pre- 
diction Software, is one of two main sub- 
systems of the Acoustic Prediction/Mea- 
surement Tool, which comprises 
software, acoustic instrumentation, and 
electronic hardware combined to afford 
integrated capabilities for real-time pre- 
diction and measurement of noise emit- 
ted by rocket and jet engines. [The other 
main subsystem, consisting largely of 
acoustic instrumentation and electronic 
hardware, is described in “Wireless 
Acoustic Measurement System,” which 
appears elsewhere in this section.] 

The theoretical model was derived 
from the fundamental laws of fluid me- 
chanics, as first was done by M. J. 
Lighthill in his now famous theory of 
aerodynamically generated sound. The 
far-field approximation of the Lighthill 
theory is incorporated into this model. 
Many other contributions from various 


researchers have also been introduced 
into the model. The model accounts for 
two noise components: shear noise and 
self noise. The final result of the model 
is expressed in terms of a volume inte- 
gral of the acoustic intensities attributa- 
ble to these two components, subject to 
various directivity coefficients. 

The computer program was written to 
solve the volume integral. The inputs re- 
quired by the program are two data files 
from a computational fluid dynamics 
(CFD) simulation of the flow of interest: 
the computational-grid file and the solu- 
tion file. The CFD solution should be one 
that has been obtained for conditions that 
closely approximate those of an experi- 
mental test that is yet to be performed. 

In the current state of development of 
the model and software, it is recom- 
mended that the observation points lie 
along a radius at an angle >60° from the 
jet axis. The software provides, and is 
driven via, a graphical user interface, 
which facilitates its use. Optionally, the 
program accepts additional input in the 
form of data on the measured sound 
pressure level as a function of frequency 


at a given far-field location, preferably at 
an angle of 90° from the jet axis. The 
user is prompted to use default empiri- 
cal constants or to choose constants 
based the measurement data. The user 
can view the results and compare them 
with other computational or experimen- 
tal data. Once satisfied with the results, 
the user can save a graph of the results 
in a file that can be imported into docu- 
ments. 

This program was written by Kader Frendi 
of the University of Alabama in Huntsville 
for Stennis Space Center. 

In accordance with Public Law 96-517, 
the contractor has elected to retain title to this 
invention. Inquiries concerning rights for its 
commercial use should be addressed to: 

Dr. Kader Frendi 
The University of Alabama 
5000 Technology Drive, Room THN264 
Huntsville, AL 35899 
Phone No.: (256) 824-7206 
E-mail: frendi@eng. uah. edu 
Refer to SSC-00215-1, volume and num- 
ber of this NASA Tech Briefs issue, and the 
page number: 


Computational Workbench for Multibody Dynamics 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


PyCraft is a computer program that 
provides an interactive, workbenchlike 
computing environment for developing 
and testing algoridtms for multibody dy- 
namics. Examples of multibody dynamic 
systems amenable to analysis with the 
help of PyCraft include land vehicles, 
spacecraft, robots, and molecular mod- 
els. PyCraft is based on the Spatial-Opera- 
tor-Algebra (SOA) formulation for multi- 
body dynamics. The SOA operators 
enable construction of simple and com- 


pact representations of complex multi- 
body dynamical equations. Within the Py- 
Craft computational workbench, users 
can, essentially, use the high-level SOA 
operator notation to represent the variety 
of dynamical quantities and algorithms 
and to perform computations interac- 
tively. PyCraft provides a Python-language 
interface to underlying C++ code. Work- 
ing with SOA concepts, a user can create 
and manipulate Python-level operator 
classes in order to implement and evalu- 


ate new dynamical quantities and algo- 
rithms. During use of PyCraft, virtually all 
SOA-based algorithms are available for 
computational experiments. 

This program was written by Abhinandan 
Jain of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-42891. 


NASA Tech Briefs, February 2007 


