
Carnegie Mellon University • 

Software Engineering Institute 




Juiy-Septenrjberl990 









Summary of SEI Accomplishments: 3Q90 


The Software Process Assessment Project selected nine corporations to receive 
training to offer assessment services commercially. 

NASA adopted the rate monotonic scheduling analysis approach for the Space Sta¬ 
tion Data Management System. The European Space Agency, On-Board Data Divi¬ 
sion, announced that the rate monotonic scheduling analysis approach will be the 
baseline methodology for its hard real-time operating system project. 

The User Interface Project completed an interim .9 release of Serpent. Several orga¬ 
nizations, including Telesoft, Digital, Sun, CECOM, and Air Force Electronic Sys¬ 
tems Division/Computer Resources Management Technology, have expressed strong 
interest in the planned Serpent Consortium. 

The Risk Program completed its feasibility study with a detailed plan in which mem¬ 
bers will evaluate existing methods of identifying, confronting, and resolving risk to 
develop new methods. 

Fall courses began in the Master of Software Engineering program at Carnegie Mel¬ 
lon University. The dean of the School of Computer Science recently approved re¬ 
placing the 24-month program with a 16-month curriculum. 

Students who attended the Software Development Studio in the spring and summer 
sessions delivered their product, the Medusa software tool, to the Wichita Division 
of Boeing Defense Group—on time and within budget. 

The Continuing Education Project is presenting the fourth offering of Software Proj¬ 
ect Management for Instructors this quarter and delivered an interim report for the 
Course Development Workshop to the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT). 

Beta testing began for the intelligent hypermedia tutoring system developed by the 
Advanced Learning Technologies Project. 

The Software Architectures Engineering Project and the Information Sciences Tech¬ 
nology Office (ISTO) of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
held a workshop on domain-specific architectures (DSSA) in July as part of an initial 
step toward the development of a DARPA research program in DSSA. 

A prototype SAME Description Language (SAMeDL) processor based on the SQL/ 
Ada binding was delivered by Intermetrics to the project manager of the Army Thcti- 
cal Command and Control System Common Hardware Software. 

Technology Applications created a new electronic mailing list intended to foster dis¬ 
cussion among researchers and practitioners from academia, government, and indus¬ 
try who are working on technology transition and innovation. 

Eleven new industry affiliates, one new academic affiliate, and five new resident 
affiliates joined the SEI this quarter. 

The fifth SEI Affiliates Symposium was held in September and included more than 
80 hours of presentations highlighting SEI programs, plans, and activities. The sym¬ 
posium was attended by 543 people from affiliate organizations. 

The Computer Emergency Response Tfeam (CERT) continued working with the In¬ 
ternet Engineering Task Force and produced the first draft of an Internet Security 
Policy- 


This section provides 
a summary of 
accomplishments from 
July-September 1990 








Table of Contents 


Software Capability Evaluation.1 Software 

Software Process Assessment.2 Engineering 

Software Process Measurement .2 Process 

Software Engineering Process Definition ....3 

Software Development Environments. 5 Software 

Software Architecture Design Principles. 5 Engineering 

Software Process Modeling.6 Methods 

Domain Analysis.6 

Application of Formal Methods .7 

Real-Tune Embedded Systems Testbed.9 Software 

Rate Monotonic Analysis for Real-Tune Systems .9 Systems 

User Interface.10 

Software for Heterogeneous Machines .11 


13 RISK 


Software Engineering Curriculum.15 Education 

Continuing Education.16 

Advanced Learning Technologies.17 


Software Architectures Engineering.19 Ada & 

Binding of Ada and SQL.20 STARS 

Study and Analysis for Ada 9X.20 Support 


Technology Applications 

Affiliate Relations . 

Empirical Methods. 




T'-, 


Aooession For 

"Fits 


GKA&I 
DTIC TAB 

Unanno’.inced 

Jus’. 1 f tc.ition.- 




a 

a 


By- 

Di.'t i-i'v.V. 


>n / 


Availability Codes 
'U>:/or 

Diet I Speolal 


23 

24 

25 


27 


29 


Technology 

Transition 


CERT 

Coordination 

Center 


For More 
Information 

































Software Engineering Process 


The Software Engineering Process Program focuses on improving the process of 
software development. Projects within the program are assessing the actual practice 
«n>f software engineering in the defense community, training organizations to gain 
management control over their software development processes, supporting the use 
of quantitative methods and measures as a basis for process improvement, and de¬ 
veloping improved methods for software process management. 


The Software Capability Evaluation (SCE) Project is responsible for refining a 
method for evaluating the software process capability of contractors. The project 
transitions this method to acquisition organizations wishing to reduce program risks 
and to improve their software suppliers’ product quality and performance on cost 
and schedule. 

In July, evaluation teams from the Air Force’s Electronic Systems Division, 
MITRE, and the Army’s Communications and Electronics Command participated 
in a Software Capability Evaluation training program held at MITRE in Bedford, 
Massachusetts. Project members presented an overview of the SCE method and 
led the teams through simulated visits to two contractor sites. 

In September, project members trained evaluation teams from the Joint STARS 
program, the Naval Air Development Center (NADC), and the Army Program Of¬ 
fice for Training Devices. The training program was held at the SEI. 

Project members visited NADC and Naval Weapons Center (NWC) in July and 
August to collect feedback on their use of the capability evaluation method over 
the past year. DoD experiences with the method are being incorporated in the 
usage guides that project members are developing. 

The Questionnaire Advisory Board met with project members in July to review in 
detail the software management and engineering practices covered in the draft of 
the capability maturity model released in June. The board, which is composed of 
seven government and industry professionals, met again in September to continue 
the review. Project members will incorporate the board’s comments in the next 
draft of the model. 

Project members were actively involved in the Affiliates Symposium. A one-day 
tutorial on the capability maturity model was attended by more than 100 partici¬ 
pants from industry and government. Other project members demonstrated a pro¬ 
totype version of AESOP (Assistant for Evaluating Software Practice), a software 
program designed to support assessment and evaluation teams. In another session, 
project members illustrated the essential features and capability of a Level 3 soft¬ 
ware company. After listening to a series of simulated interviews between the com¬ 
pany and a government capability evaluation team, the audience had to identify the 
strengths and weaknesses of the company. Following this session, project members 
gave a presentation on the usage status of SCE in the DoD. David Rugg from 
NWC then discussed NWC’s positive experience in using SCE in a recent source 
selection. 


Software Capability 
Evaluation 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 I 









Software Process 
Assessment 


Software Process 
Measurement 


The Software Process Assessment Project assists software organizations in launch¬ 
ing effective process improvement programs, characterizes and reports on the soft¬ 
ware engineering capabilities of defense contractors, and defines priority needs for 
software process improvement in the defense community. 

Project members acted as observers for self-assessments conducted by Tinker Air 
Force Base in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and by IBM Federal Sector Division 
(FSD) in Manassas, Virginia. The project frequently provides one or two observers 
experienced in assessments to attend an organization’s initial self-assessment. 

Initial vendor response to the project’s commercialization effort has been veiy posi¬ 
tive. In July, 69 people from 54 organizations participated in a one-day vendor 
briefing held at the SEI. Twenty-six organizations then submitted Service Develop¬ 
ment Proposals for consideration to become a commercial vendor who will offer 
assessment services. After reviewing each proposal, the Vendor Selection Commit¬ 
tee chose four organizations (Arthur D. Little, Inc.; Booz, Allen, and Hamilton 
Inc.; Software Productivity Consortium; and Technology Applications, Inc.) to 
attend the vendor training, which was held September 30 to October 5. An addi¬ 
tional five organizations (American Management Systems, Inc.; Contel; Dayton 
Aerospace Associates, Inc.; Digital Equipment Corporation; and pragma Systems 
Corporation) were selected to attend the second vendor training class, which will be 
held in January 1991. 

Version 2.0 of the assessment data analysis system (ADAS) was completed. The 
ADAS is a combination repository and analysis platform for assessment-related 
data and is used for (among other things) state-of-the-practice reporting. 

Preparations are nearing completion for the on-site phase of the Japanese maturity 
study, which will take place in October. The objective of the study is to better un¬ 
derstand Japanese software engineering capabilities from a process maturity per¬ 
spective. Process Program members will visit leading Japanese software organiza¬ 
tions. They expect to collect a large amount of data from responses to the maturity 
questionnaire. 


The Software Process Measurement Project (formerly the Software Process Devel¬ 
opment Project) advocates the use of measurement in the practice of software de¬ 
velopment and management. Tbward that end, it coordinates a steering committee, 
two working groups, and a best-practices study, all devoted to encouraging organiza¬ 
tions to use quantitative methods to improve their software processes. 

The Software Metrics Definition Working Group met for three days in August. The 
quality subgroup of that working group circulated a draft of its portion of a defini¬ 
tions report to about 640 reviewers, composed of members of the Software Acquisi¬ 
tion Metrics Working Group and subgroups, the metrics correspondence group, and 
SEI affiliates. More than 60 responses were received. 


2 SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 





Leaders of the Software Acquisition Metrics Working Group met in Los Angeles to 
revise the outline of a planned report, to evaluate written contributions, and to be¬ 
gin to write to the revised outline. James Rozum, the working group co-chair from 
the SEI, established a document register and process to track comments on the 
working group’s products. 

To encourage organizations to adopt measurement, project members are collecting 
best practices and motivations, which will be published in an SEI technical report. 
To further the collection, project members visited several sites considered to be 
leaders in software measurement. 

Project members made presentations to the Joint Logistics Commanders Computer 
Resources Management Committee, the IBM Software Technology Steering Com¬ 
mittee, and Ellemtel (a Swedish company). They also presented at the Second An¬ 
nual Software Quality Workshop and a Total Quality Management train-the-trainer 
course at the Defense Systems Management College. 

Project leader Stan Rifkin completed the text of the Software Engineering Process 
Group Guide (CMU/SEI-90-TR-24), co-authored with Priscilla Fowler of SEI Tech¬ 
nology Transition. This report is scheduled for release at the SEPG Workshop in 
November. He also visited the Naval Ocean System Center to help its process 
group revise its strategic action plan. 


The Software Engineering Process Definition Project supports process improve- •••••••••••••' 

ment through the maturation of the methods and technology associated with Software Engineering 

software engineering process definition. The project is developing the capabilities Process Definition 
required to support the definition and evolution of software processes within an 
organization. 

The project is currently supporting process definition and development at Standard 
Systems Center (SSC) at Gunter Air Force Base. The project is also exploring ad¬ 
vanced applications of process definitions through the Software Technology for 
Adaptable Reliable Systems (STARS) program. 

Planning for the development and implementation of enhanced processes was initi¬ 
ated during this period. Project members collaborated with SSC working groups to 
develop tactical action plans for developing, piloting, and implementing new or en¬ 
hanced processes. The action planning process is an essential part of a process im¬ 
provement initiative. Action planning builds support for the improvement effort 
among those organizations that are impacted, documents the problem and approach 
to a solution as seen by experts within the organization, and identifies the activities 
required to pilot and implement the proposed solution. 

Project members participated in problem identification and action plan develop¬ 
ment and review with SSC. They also conducted a structured technical review of 
the tactical plan of the SSC Project Management Working Group. 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 3 











Project leader Jim Over assumed the role of deputy chair for the STARS Process 
Working Group (SPWG). The SPWG provides recommendations to the STARS 
Program Manager to achieve the goals of the program related to process and pro¬ 
cess metrics. The SPWG will review the programs of STARS primes related to 
process and process metrics, examine the programs for unnecessary overlap, ex¬ 
amine the programs for uncovered areas of potential high leverage, facilitate and 
coordinate education and information interchange among the primes and other re¬ 
lated activities, and make recommendations to the STARS Program Manager for 
modifications to the program. Over and other project members participated in plan¬ 
ning activities associated with STARS. 


4 SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 








Software Engineering Methods 


The primary objective of the Methods Program is to improve the practice of soft¬ 
ware engineering by improving individual and team productivity through the identi¬ 
fication and transition to practice of emerging software technology. Promoting the 
appropriate use of this technology supports the SEI effort to transform software 
development from an ad-hoc, labor-intensive activity to a technology-supported 
engineering discipline. 


The Software Development Environments Project is assessing state-of-the-art com¬ 
mercial environment support for configuration management (CM) with the goal of 
moving toward a common CM model. 

The project has reviewed a number of commercial systems and identified three ma¬ 
jor CM concepts in recent commercial systems. These findings have been presented 
in an all-day tutorial entitled “Software Configuration Management: Advances in 
Software Development Environments,” which was presented at the SEI Affiliates 
Symposium and taped at the SEI Video Studio. The findings will be documented in 
four reports planned for 4th quarter, 1990. 

This quarter, project members began to investigate the integration of CASE tools 
with CM systems. Tools use their own data management schemes and provide their 
own multi-user and versioning support. The purpose of the investigation is to assess 
integration issues between tools and CM systems, and to identify appropriate inter¬ 
faces between them. Such interfaces are considered to be a stepping stone toward a 
common CM model. 

Project members were involved with a number of external activities related to CM 
systems. They contributed to the review of the European Computer Manufacturing 
Association (ECMA) reference model draft as part of a National Institute of Stan¬ 
dards and Technology (NIST) Integrated Software Engineering Environment Work¬ 
ing Group. They participated in a STARS/User Workshop and planning activities of 
the STARS Program. In cooperation with the CASE Technology Project, they 
started a survey of environment integrators in preparation for the Navy Next Gen¬ 
eration Computer Resources/Programming Support Environments (NGCR/PSE) 
Working Group effort. Project members also gave presentations at the Software 
Process Symposium and participated in the 2nd International Symposium on Future 
Software Environments. 


To develop a fundamental understanding of structures for the software architec¬ 
ture level of design, this project is describing basic design elements used in the 
description, analysis, and development of software systems. 

The project completed two technical reports this quarter. The first. Informatics for 
A New Century: Computing Education for 1990s and Beyond (CMU/SEI-90-TR-15), 
sketches the coming needs for information processing and analyzes the populations 
that will require informatics education. 


Software Development 
Environments 


Software Architecture 
Design Principles 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 5 









The second report, Prospects for An Engineering Discipline of Software (CMU/ 
SEI-90-TR-20), begins by examining the usual practice of engineering and the way it 
has evolved in other disciplines. This discussion provides an historical context for 
assessing the current practice of software production and setting an agenda for at¬ 
taining an engineering practice. 

Project leader Mary Shaw took part in the DARPA/ISAT (Defense Advanced Re¬ 
search Projects Agency/Information Science and Technology) summer study group. 
She also served as a member on the advisory Computer Science and Telecommuni¬ 
cations Board. In addition, her participation in a meeting for Principal Investigators 
at the Office of Naval Research provided an opportunity to disseminate her view of 
the software architecture problem. 


Software Process 
Modeling 


The Software Process Modeling Project is investigating techniques for modeling 
software development and maintenance processes. 

The project delivered a Statemate model of the Military Handbook for Mission Crit¬ 
ical Computer Resources Software Support (MIL-HDBK-347). Since then it has con¬ 
centrated on examining extensions to the modeling techniques developed 
previously. 

To date, the process models have concentrated on showing the flow that a single 
software change request followed as it progressed through the software develop¬ 
ment process to be incorporated into a software release. These models showed all 
the possible paths that could be taken by such a change request. 

The project has extended the modeling technique in two ways: 

• By applying significant new capabilities of Statemate to the model of the 
MIL-HDBK-347 process (expected to be completed next quarter), and 

• By examining how to upgrade the model to account for aggregate change re¬ 
quests (rather than individual change requests). 


Domain Analysis 


This project is developing and testing methods for performing domain analysis to 
support software reuse. The primary objectives of the project are to define a pro¬ 
cess and set of products to support the systematic discovery and exploitation of 
commonality across related software systems and to apply the process to a domain 
within the Army Tkctical Command and Control System (ATCCS). 

During this quarter, the project drafted a report that defines the process and the 
products of a feature oriented domain analysis (FODA) and provides a sample do¬ 
main analysis. This method of domain analysis will be used during the next phase 
to analyze the project movement control subsystems within the Army’s Advanced 
Tactical Command and Control System (ATCCS). 


« 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 









During this phase, project members performed the initial scoping activities of the 
domain analysis of movement control software. This software manages and con¬ 
trols the movement of tactical battlefield resources. It supports three planning 
activities: 

1) preparing movement requests 

2) coordinating those requests with the appropriate force level headquarters 

3) maintaining movement files 

The project has prepared a structure chart, context diagram, and domain terminology 
dictionary as part of this analysis. (Note: these three products are all defined in 
our domain analysis method.) 

During the quarter, project members participated in the following outside activities: 

The project provided three presentations at the Affiliates Symposium: these in¬ 
cluded a full-day tutorial on Software Reuse Technology, a demonstration and dis¬ 
cussion of the project at the Open House, and a one-hour briefing on the project as 
one of the regular Symposium tracks. 

Project member Sholom Cohen is participating in planning for the next phase of 
the DoD Software Technology for Adaptable Reliable Systems (STARS). 


The Application of Formal Methods Project is investigating various approaches by •••••••••••••< 

which DoD agencies and contractors may make use of formal software develop- Application of Formal 

ment methods. Methods 

This quarter, the project completed a survey of formal techniques appropriate for 
specification of MCCR systems and started work on a formal development method. 

The survey has been concerned with formal techniques appropriate for the specifi¬ 
cation of MCCR systems. We have concentrated solely on specification and have 
left development methods for later work. 

The project developed a number of criteria with which to judge the specification 
techniques. These criteria may also be used to match a system to the most appro¬ 
priate specification technique for the system. Project members also created a sam¬ 
ple generic avionics system specification using three specification techniques: Com¬ 
municating Sequential Processes, Temporal Logic, and an extended Vienna Devel¬ 
opment Method. 

The system development work currently under way uses the formal specification as 
part of the process for developing code. Generally, formal methods have been used 
to create a specification that has desirable properties, after which code is developed 
in an ad hoc manner. The project approach is to begin with the formal specification 
and. using a sequence of transformations, translate the specification into a notation 
specific to the programming language. Subsequent development adds code to this 
specification. The initial investigations are complete, and the project is now looking 
for more substantial examples to prove the approach. 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 7 










ooooooooooo 

Methods Program 
Reports 

July-September 1990 


Informatics for a New Century: Computing Education for the 1990s and Beyond 
(CMU/SEI-90-TR-15) 

Prospects for an Engineering Discipline of Software 
(CMU/SEI-90-TR-20) 

A Domain Analysis Bibliography 
(SEI-90-SR-3) 

For information on how to order modules and reports, see page 29. 


8 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 







Software Systems 


The goal of the Systems Program is to improve the development of real-time dis¬ 
tributed systems by integrating software engineering with systems engineering and 
reducing the risk of new technology. 


The Real-Time Embedded Systems Testbed Project is collecting, classifying, gener¬ 
ating, and disseminating information about software development for real-time em¬ 
bedded systems. 

The project has completed a series of tests using the Hartstone benchmarks, the 
results of which have been documented in a technical report, The Hartstone Bench¬ 
mark Results and Analysis Report (CMU/SEI-90-TR-7). The Hartstone results were 
obtained for six of the eight Ada compilers that the project has in-house: DDC-I, 
DEC VAX/VMS, Rational, System Designers, TeleSoft, and Verdix. 


Real-Time Embedded 
Systems Testbed 


A project member made a presentation based on project work on the Ada Compiler 
Evaluation Capability (ACEC) and Ada Evaluation System (AES) to the Ada Board 
on 29 June. (The ACEC was developed by Boeing under contract to the U.S. DoD 
and the AES by the U.K. MoD.) John Solomond, director of the Ada Joint Pro¬ 
gram Office (AJPO) indicated that the AJPO has decided to pursue, with the Brit¬ 
ish, a merger of the two test suites. 

The project has stayed in contact with the ACEC development. A project member 
attended the kickoff meeting of Version 3.0 in Dayton, Ohio on 2-3 July. 


The Real-Time Scheduling in Ada Project has changed its name to Rate Monotonic 
Analysis for Real-Time Systems to reflect its focus on the scheduling theory by that 
name. 


Rate Monotonic Analysis 
for Real-Time Systems 


Work is continuing on applying rate monotonic theory to the BSY-2 to identify and 
help solve potential performance problems. The BSY-2 program has become ex¬ 
tremely interested in RMS as a result of transition work by the project. 


Project members are continuing to support Next Generation Computer Resources 
(NGCR). Two project members are working with other NGCR task group mem¬ 
bers to prepare an issue paper for handling end-to-end priorities from a systems 
viewpoint. 


NASA has adopted the rate monotonic scheduling (RMS) theory for the Space Sta¬ 
tion Data Management System (DMS). Project members are providing input for 
amendments to the DMS requirements document to reflect the adoption of RMS 
by NASA, the result of significant project effort to transition RMS into practice. 


The European Space Agency, On-Board Data Division, has announced that the 
Rate Monotonic Scheduling Theory will be the baseline methodology for its hard 
real-time operating system project. The selection criteria include: guarantee that 
tasks with hard timing constraints will always meet their deadlines; attain a high 
degree of processor utilization; provide fast average response time for tasks with 
soft deadlines; account for inter-task communication; and other criteria, such as 
existence of tools/kemels, performance, maturity, etc. 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 9 








An ongoing effort of the project concerns the creation of a collection of instruc¬ 
tional materials on principles of rate monotonic scheduling theory. These materials 
were enhanced and extended for use in a tutorial that will be offered at Tri-Ada 90. 
These materials are also being transitioned to the Research Institute for Computing 
and Information Systems (RICIS), which will provide courses to NASA and NASA 
contractors. 

Project members are investigating issues involving real-time extensions to POSIX. 

The first draft of the real-time system chapter of the IEEE Futurebus + System De- 
sigyi Manual was submitted to the Futurebus + committee by Lui Sha of the SEI 
and Ragunathan Rajkumar of IBM Research. In addition, project members have 
been working actively with the Operating System Standard Working Group 
(OSSWG) and POSIX.4 communities to help ensure that the real-time computing 
needs will be properly supposed in POSIX.4. Currently, a proposal on multi-proces¬ 
sor task allocation was submitted by Douglass Locke of the Federal Sector Division 
of IBM and Lui Sha of the SEI. The rate monotonic interface is currently under 
development. 


Jser Interface 


The User Interface Project is developing Serpent, a user interface management 
system. Serpent separates the concerns of the user interface from those of the 
application, which allows integration of input/output technologies without modify¬ 
ing the functional portion of the application. 

An interim .9 release of Serpent has been completed and made available to the 
Serpent user community. The interim release includes the full Motif widget set 
and a usable snapshot of the editor. It also includes a generalized integration 
mechanism for Xt widgets. Substantial performance enhancements have been 
made to the Slang compiler. The project is now working on the 1.0 release, which 
will include visualization capability for all widgets within the editor, a totally revised 
set of documentation, and performance enhancements to the runtime system. 

Several organizations have expressed strong interest in the planned Serpent Con¬ 
sortium. Among these organizations are Telesoft, Digital, Sun, Communication and 
Electronics Command (CECOM), and Electronic Systems Division/Computer Re¬ 
sources Management Technology. Once feedback on a draft of the consortium 
agreement has been obtained from these organizations, a decision about whether or 
not to form the consortium will be made. 

The Affiliates Symposium was a success for the User Interface Project. Prior to the 
Symposium, project members sponsored a day of user interface development tools 
presentations, which brought together producers of the leading user interface tools 
(including TAE +, Serpent, Teleuse, DV Tools, and WinterP). In addition, a two 
day meeting was held with developers to generate a framework for the next genera¬ 
tion of tools. 

Project members attended the PI201 standards meeting at Danvers, MA, this quar¬ 
ter. There were previously two different efforts ongoing within the standards 
group. The 1201.1 group was working on standardizing toolkits and the 1201.3 


10 SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 




group, under a UI project member’s leadership, was working on standardizing 
UIMSs. The 1201.1 group is broadening its scope to include some UIMS issues. 

As a result, the 1201.1 and 1201.3 efforts might be merged. It is not clear when 
the issues will be resolved. Serpent, however, was presented as a standards 
candidate to the 1201.1 group. 

Mike Parsons, a West Point cadet who spent three weeks at the SEI, has completed 
the field artillery battery control demonstration on Serpent. He designed and im¬ 
plemented this complicated user interface using Serpent in about a week and a 
half. This demonstration will be installed in the standard Serpent demo suite. 


The Software for Heterogeneous Machines Project is developing tools and a meth¬ 
odology for building distributed, large-grained, concurrent applications running on 
heterogeneous machine networks. The project has developed Durra, a language for 
describing distributed applications as a set of task descriptions and type declarations 
that prescribe a way to manage the resources of the network. 

The project completed an implementation of the Durra communications task. 

This task allows dynamic routing of typed messages between Durra application pro¬ 
grams. Testing has been completed and the communications task has become a 
built-in task in Durra and runs as part of the runtime executive. 

Project members are customizing the EDGE graphics editor as a front-end tool for 
developing Durra applications. EDGE was developed at the University of Karls¬ 
ruhe by Frances Newbeiy. 

The Durra demonstration during the Affiliates Symposium was well attended and 
generated a number of inquiries for further information about Durra and Durra 
licensing agreements. The project had upgraded the network simulation demonstra¬ 
tion to allow the use of Serpent to build operator displays. This was one of the fea¬ 
tured demonstrations. \s a result of interest expressed at the Symposium, the proj¬ 
ect will explore ways to tape the standard demonstration. 

The project is exploring an activity to be done jointly by Hughes Aircraft, CECOM 
Center for Software Engineering, and the SEI. Project members are gathering ad¬ 
ditional information about the application (modeling and prototyping real-time 
applications) and will send a representative to the October CECOM Real-Time 
Technical Interchange Meeting. 


Hartstone Benchmark Results and Analysis 
(CMU/SEI-90-TR-7) 

An Analysis of Input I Output Paradigms for Real-Time Systems 
(CMU/SEI-90-TR-19) 

For information on how to order reports, see page 29. 


Software for 

Heterogeneous 

Machines 


ooooooooooo 

Systems Program 
Reports 

July-September 1990 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 11 






12 SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 





Risk 


The Risk Program is focusing on improving the management of risk in DoD pro¬ 
grams involving software-dependent systems. In this context, risk management is 
the identification, confrontation, and resolution of software-related risks. The pro¬ 
gram objectives are to establish a foundation for addressing software related risk 
and to strengthen the ability of organizations in the software community to evaluate 
and manage software-related risk. 


The Risk Program completed its feasibility study with a detailed plan for four 
phases in which members will evaluate existing methods of identifying, confronting, 
and resolving risk in order to develop new methods. The first phase culminated 
with an internal review of the program’s early concepts and planning and with a 
decision to proceed to the second phase, risk assessments. During this phase, the 
program is developing mechanisms for systematically identifying software technical 
risk. 

The program has continued its interaction with the software acquisition and devel¬ 
opment communities through awareness briefings and in-depth interviews. These 
interviews follow a structured format and questionnaire to extract information con¬ 
cerning risk management practice and problems, as well as issues that managers 
and practitioners face on specific projects. During this quarter, the program con¬ 
ducted interviews with three companies and five projects. 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 13 







SET Quarterly Update 3Q90 





Education 


The primary objective of the SEI Education Program is to increase the number of 
highly qualified software engineers by rapidly improving software engineering edu¬ 
cation throughout the education communities of academia, government, and indus¬ 
try. To accomplish this, the projects of the Education Program focus on accelerating 
the development of software engineering programs in academia and on enhancing 
opportunities for the continuing education of practitioners. 


A combined Educator Development/Continuing Education Workshop was held 
September 10 in Pittsburgh. The 86 attendees represented academia, government, 
industry, and the SEI. SEI staff members presented a curriculum module on un¬ 
derstanding program dependencies and an education materials package on reading 
computer programs (see page 17 for titles). Other sessions included panels on in¬ 
dustry needs and on academic and industry cooperation, and a description of one 
university’s cooperative effort with industry and the SEI. 

Fall courses began in the Master of Software Engineering program at Carnegie 
Mellon University. The core of the MSE program is based on the SEI Academic 
Series and a software development studio modeled on architectural studios. The 
dean of the School of Computer Science recently approved replacing the 24-month 
program with a 16-month curriculum. 

Students who attended the Software Development Studio in the spring and summer 
sessions delivered their product, the Medusa software tool, to the Wichita Division 
of Boeing Defense Group, Military Airplanes. Medusa provides window system 
capabilities to users of DEC VT-220 and VT-320 terminals. Medusa runs under the 
DEC VMS operating system and enables users to perform multiple computer tasks 
simultaneously from a single terminal. Medusa thus enhances end-user productivity 
without requiring additional capital investment for new workstations. In June, the 
students assisted Boeing systems managers in installing the tool and gave training 
to a group of approximately a dozen engineers. The product was delivered on time 
and under budget. Initial reaction to the tool was highly positive. 


The Software Engineering Curriculum Project is developing model curricula, pro¬ 
moting the growth of graduate software engineering programs in the academic com¬ 
munity, investigating the feasibility of undergraduate programs, and working to in¬ 
crease the amount of software engineering content in both undergraduate and 
graduate computer science programs. The project produces educational materials, 
including the Academic Series (formerly part of the Video Dissemination Project), 
a set of videotaped graduate-level courses available to universities who agree to 
offer them for academic credit. 


Software Engineering 
Curriculum 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 15 






During the fall semester, five Academic Series courses are being offered at the in¬ 
stitutions listed: 

Software Project Management - Regis College and University of Houston at Clear 
Lake 

Software Specification - Regis College, Eastern Michigan University, and East Ten¬ 
nessee State University 

Systems Design - Florida Atlantic University (six sites), Rose-Hulman Institute of 
Technology, and East Tennessee State University 

Software Verification and Validation - Florida Institute of Technology 

Software Creation and Maintenance - East Tennessee State University 

Project member Gary Ford participated in a workshop on “how computing educa¬ 
tion can help solve the software crisis” as part of the National Educational Comput¬ 
ing Conference [NECC] held in Nashville, Tennessee, on June 25-27. Ford pres¬ 
ented a special session at NECC, titled “Teaching a Software Engineering Project 
Course.” 

A call for papers has been released for the Fifth SEI Conference on Software Engi¬ 
neering Education, which will be held in cooperation with ACM and the IEEE 
Computer Society on October 7-8, 1991. The conference brings together college 
and university educators, industry educators and trainers, and other professionals 
concerned with the preparation of new software engineers and the continuing pro¬ 
fessional development of current practitioners. The conference invites submission 
of papers and panel proposals on any aspect of software engineering education or 
training at any level. Topics of special interest include design, formal methods, 
graduate software engineering education, and industry software engineering educa¬ 
tion and training. The deadline for papers is February 4, 1991. 

An Educator Development Workshop has been scheduled for October 9, 1991, fol¬ 
lowing the Conference on Software Engineering Education. 


Continuing Education 


The Continuing Education Project (formerly Video Dissemination Project) interacts 
with industry and government to increase the availability of high-quality educational 
opportunities in software engineering topics for software practitioners. The project 
produces two video-based series: the Continuing Education Series, whose courses 
are designed for clients’ in-house education; and the Technology Series, which pro¬ 
vides stand-alone presentations that promote awareness of emerging issues and 
leading-edge technologies. 

The fourth offering of Software Project Management for Instructors is being pres¬ 
ented this quarter. Nine individuals are participating; they represent the Defense 
Logistics Agency, Ford Aerospace, Fordham University, Israeli Aircraft, Lockheed, 
MITRE, and Standard Systems Center. Three of the attendees are SEI resident 
affiliates. The group will complete the course in October and receive 5.4 continu¬ 
ing education units. This session qualifies them to serve as learning facilitators for 
the course at their respective organizations. The SEI provides guidance in tailoring 
the course to meet the educational requirements of their organizations. 


li SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 






The project delivered an interim report for the Course Development Workshop to 
the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT). During the six-month workshop at 
the SEI, participants from AFIT, General Dynamics, and the University of Scranton 
developed five courses: Software Generation and Maintenance, Principles and 
Application of Software Design, Specification of Software Systems, Software Verifi¬ 
cation and Validation, and Software Engineering Concepts. The interim report dis¬ 
cusses accomplishments, lessons learned, and recommendations for undertaking 
such an effort in the future. A final report will be released in the spring as an SEI 
technical report. 

Project member Nancy Mead visited AFIT to attend dry-run presentations of the 
Software Engineering Concepts course, which will be offered in October. 


The Advanced Learning Technologies (ALT) Project is using hardware and software 
technologies to teach software code inspections. Interactive, technology-intensive 
training can be distributed economically to a broad audience and can provide an 
effective learning experience. 


Advanced Learning 
Technologies 


The beta test version of the CD-ROM disk was sent to the beta sites. Further re¬ 
view of the beta test and final production will be the handled by the SEI Technolo¬ 
gy Transition Program (see page 23 for further information). 


Reading Computer Programs: Instructor’s Guide and Exercises 
(CMU/SEI-90-EM-3) 

Understanding Program Dependencies 
(SEI-CM-26) 

For information on how to order modules and reports, see page 29. 


oooooooooo 

Education Program 
Reports 

July-September 1990 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 


17 









18 SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 







Ada & STARS Support 


As Ada use becomes more common in software-dependent systems, users will be 
faced with the benefits and problems of adopting more disciplined approaches to 
software engineering. The goals of the Ada and STARS (Software Technology for 
Adaptable, Reliable Systems) Support Effort are to remove technical and manager! 
al impediments to the adoption of Ada, to support the DoD STARS Program in 
technology development and transition efforts, and to explore the advantages and 
disadvantages of new software engineering approaches and paradigms made possi¬ 
ble by Ada language features. 


The Software Architectures Engineering (SAE) Project provides to DoD program 
offices improvements to the practice of software engineering by assisting in the de¬ 
velopment and insertion of new architectural and practice models where old models 
have proved inadequate. The project accomplishes this by assisting in the develop¬ 
ment of a new set of engineering optimizations (goals) in the application area and 
setting the requirements for models tunable to the new optimizations. The new 
models are packaged so that they can be adopted by practitioners in the area by 
extending the architectures to address possibilities precluded by the current model 
set. Project members are refining and maturing the new model sets by transitioning 
them to other projects and providing additional sources of reflection on their use. 


Software Architectures 
Engineering 


The SAE Project and the Information Sciences Technology Office (ISTO) of the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) held a workshop on do- 
main-specific software architectures (DSSA) in July to delineate the issues relevant 
to the creation and use of architectural-based software development approaches. 
The workshop was attended by 47 technical participants from industry, government, 
and academic institutions, and 7 observers from DARPA/ISTO and the SEI. The 
workshop was an initial step toward the development of a DARPA research pro¬ 
gram in DSSA. 


Since the workshop, SAE members have been involved in the production of the 
workshop proceedings for distribution to potential bidders in the program, a work¬ 
shop committee report for DARPA, and a bidders' conference to be held October 
1, 1990. The workshop proceedings will be used by DARPA to solicit research pro¬ 
posals to address DSSA in various application areas. 


The SAE Project explored the definition of a command, control, communications, 
and intelligence (C3I) model set with several organizations this quarter. Discus¬ 
sions were held with the Command Center Evaluation System (CCES) Project at 
Electronic Systems Division (ESD), a Strategic Air Command (SAC) group at Of- 
futt Air Force Base, and a group at ESD that is investigating the definition of a 
generic Command Center architecture. 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 W 












Binding of Ada 
and SQL 


Study and Analysis 
for Ada 9X 


During this quarter, SAE project members reflected on past and present project 
efforts, relating those efforts to the writings and practices of other engineering 
disciplines. The results of this effort provided the basis for the SAE Project SEI 
Affiliates Symposium presentation and Open House discussion group. These re¬ 
sults will be presented in a conference paper/presentation or SEI technical report. 

As part of the SAE Project’s continuing involvement with the Air Force Electronic 
Combat Office (AFECO), SAE project members are working with the Tri-Service 
Crossbow S Digital Simulation Steering Group Architectures Working Group. 

This effort will result in tin architecture and model set for the simulation of radar 
and electronic combat systems. 


The Binding of Ada and SQL Project, initiated at the request of the Ada Joint Pro¬ 
gram Office (AJPO), has investigated the problem of binding the Ada programming 
language with the Structured Query Language (SQL) database language. The solu¬ 
tion to this problem was the specification of the SQL Ada Module Extensions 
(SAME), an interface that permits an application program written in Ada to access 
and manipulate data controlled by a database management system (DBMS) using 
SQL. 

Work is continuing on the definition, implementation, and standardization of the 
SAME Description Language (SAMeDL). A meeting of the organizations imple¬ 
menting the SAMeDL was held at the SEI in July. 

A prototype SAMeDL processor was delivered by Intermetrics to the project man¬ 
ager of the Army Ihctical Command and Control System (ATCCS) Common Hard¬ 
ware Software (CHS). In support of ATCCS CHS, the Center for Software Engi¬ 
neering (CSE) at the Communication and Electronics Command (CECOM) has 
examined that processor and will be making recommendations to the CHS project 
manager. 

The first complete draft of the SAMeDL reference manual will be ready for an 
October release. It will be mailed to members of the International Standards Orga¬ 
nization Working Group on Ada, ISO/JTC1 /SC22/WG9, and to members of the 
American National Standards Institute Database Committee X3H2. An informa¬ 
tional brief will be given to X3H2 at their October meeting in California. 


The Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) has decided that a revision to the Ada lan¬ 
guage standard is required to maintain it as a standard (ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A). 
This revision process is commonly referred to as Ada 9X. The purpose of this 
project is to identify and evaluate potential areas for revising the Ada standard 
based on the experiences of software developers and compiler implementors. This 
project is providing an organizational framework to help guide revision activities. 

The SEI requirements team prepared a new version of the Ada 9X requirements 
document and distributed it to the Ada Distinguished Reviewers. A meeting of 
the Distinguished Reviewers in Washington in July provided feedback concerning 


2 » SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 







that version, and revision was done. The revised requirements were presented to 
the general public at a national SIGAda meeting in August, and comments were 
solicited from the general public. Feedback at the meeting indicated that most felt 
that the requirements were about “on track": about 10% thought them to be too 
conservative, about 10% thought them too extreme, and the rest thought them 
about right. 

Since then, a draft document has been prepared to track revision requests to show 
how (or if) they have been incorporated in the requirements process. 

The SEI recently hosted the STARS/USERS workshop in September. The work¬ 
shop was geared toward increasing communication between the STARS program 
and those who specify, buy, and use environments to build and maintain large- 
scale, software-dependent systems. At the workshop, users provided input to the 
STARS program plans and target organizations reviewed STARS program goals, 
objectives, and progress. In addition, the STARS program sought to validate its 
goals, objectives, and plans. The workshop featured an overview of the current 
direction of the STARS program, a discussion of key issues affecting the program, 
and the technical thrust of the contractor efforts to date. Eleven groups discussed 
and provided input to STARS regarding various aspects of reuse, process, interface 
standards, technology transition mechanisms, and plans for STARS evaluation. 

Several SEI staff members are participating in the Tier-2 planning process, which 
is the next step after the September workshop. 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 21 




22 SEI Quarterly Update 3090 







Technology Transition 


The Technology Transition Program is the focal point for SEI transition efforts. 
The program works with other SEI programs to match problems and solutions in 
the DoD software community. 


Technology Applications provides a link between DoD mission-critical application 
domains and ongoing SEI activities in technology evaluation, development, and 
transition. Technology Applications staff perform this role by working in collabora¬ 
tion with SEI programs to bring about the maturation, adoption, and 
institutionalization of SEI supported technologies and to reduce the time it takes 
for software engineering improvements to transition from research into practice. 
These efforts to mature and transfer technology are applied to DoD transition sites 
that are principally chosen for their ability to influence the further adoption of a 
technology throughout a larger community. The transition experiences are then 
used to enhance transition models, processes, methods, and tools that will benefit 
both the transition of SEI technology and the ability of MCCR organizations to 
absorb new technologies. 

The beta test began in this quarter for the intelligent hypermedia tutoring system 
developed by the Advanced Learning Technologies (ALT) Project. Technology 
Applications has been providing transition engineering support to this project for 
the last 18 months and will manage the beta test. Test sites include the A: - Force 
Standard Systems Center at Gunter Air Force Base, the Jet Propu’sion Laboratory, 
and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University The test will last for two 
months, and the sites will provide feedback on system form and function using data 
collection instruments developed by Technology Applications. When the test is 
complete, the ALT project team will use the results to modify the system prior to 
its public release, scheduled for the first quarter of 1991. 

In this quarter. Technology Applications created a new electronic mailing list in¬ 
tended to foster discussion among researchers and practitioners from academia, 
government, and industry who are working on technology transfer and innovation. 
The technology-transfer-list was created in collaboration with the Computer Re¬ 
source Management Technology (CRMT) program of the U.S. Air Force. 

Technology Applications began providing the project management and supporting 
transition infrastructure for SEI support of an Air Force Logistics Command 
(AFLC) activity that will plan and implement an extensive process-oriented soft¬ 
ware improvement effort. This project will involve Headquarters AFLC, five Air 
Logistics Centers, and the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center. The goal is 
to provide technical support to AFLC activities that will define common software 
processes, establish measuring and monitoring for the processes, establish technolo¬ 
gy transition processes, and identify organizational and training or educational 
needs. At this time the project is in the initial planning stages. 

SEI assessment of current and future avionics software issues within government 
and industry for the Air Force PAVE PACE Program was concluded and an SEI 


Technology 

Applications 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 23 






Affiliate Relations 


special report was written for the Air Force Wright Research Development Center. 
This assessment included an evaluation of several current or planned avionics soft¬ 
ware activities of DoD program offices and the contractors involved. Common con¬ 
cerns and issues were identified and recommendations made for improvements. A 
development road map was defined that would develop solutions to address the is¬ 
sues identified. These issues and solutions will be addressed through the PAVE 
PACE program, which attempts to improve the capability and ability of industry and 
government to develop avionics software in the future. 


The Affiliate Relations Function establishes and maintains SEI relationships with 
industry and government organizations. Affiliate Relations also negotiates and 
places, with the cooperation of the SEI Joint Program Office, government and in¬ 
dustry resident affiliates at the SEI. The SEI Education Program manages academic 
affiliates and visiting scientists from academia. 

Eleven new industry affiliates signed information exchange agreements during this 
quarter: Amherst Systems Inc.; Arinc Research Corporation; Arthur D. Little Pro¬ 
gram Systems; Ashton-Thte; CASElab, Inc.; Rockwell International, Collins Com¬ 
mercial Avionics Engineering; Science and Technology Associates; Strictly Business 
Computer Systems; Sumaria Systems, Inc.; The Analysis Group; and Xontech, Inc. 

Five new resident affiliates from the following organizations joined the SEI this 
quarter: two from Hughes Aircraft Company and one each from Defense Logistics 
Agency, Telesoft AB, and Universidad de Cantabria. Six resident affiliates con¬ 
cluded their work at the SEI during this quarter. As of September 30, 1990, thir¬ 
teen resident affiliates were working at the SEI: eight from industry, one from aca¬ 
demia, and four from the services and government agencies. 

Affiliate Relations conducted SEI Visitors Day on August 23. This event is held 
quarterly to accommodate the increasing requests for visits to the SEI. Eighteen 
representatives from industry, two from academia, and one from government at- 
'ended. The next Visitors Day is scheduled for November 15, 1990. Visitors must 
register for Visitors Day; walk-ins are not accepted. 

The fifth SEI Affiliates Symposium was held in September in Pittsburgh. The an¬ 
nual symposium is a key forum for exchanging information among software profes¬ 
sionals from industry, government, and academia. The symposium included more 
than 80 hours of presentation material that highlighted SEI programs, plans, and 
activities. Two keynote addresses were delivered: “DARPA Perspectives on Soft¬ 
ware Engineering,” by Dr. Barry Boehm, Director of Information Systems Technol¬ 
ogy Office, DARPA; and “Experiences Supporting Space Shuttle Software,” by 
Tony Marina, Manager, Onboard Space Systems, IBM. The symposium was at¬ 
tended by 543 people from affiliate organizations: 391 from industry, 129 from gov¬ 
ernment, and 23 from academia. A day of tutorials and workshops was followed by 
two days of briefings and conference sessions. 


24 SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 




Empirical Methods 


The Empirical Methods Function supports transition management of SEI technolo¬ 
gy projects by providing market research methods and materials, by conducting sur¬ 
veys and special studies, and by evaluating events or validating products of SEI 
projects. 

During this quarter, Empirical Methods staff and colleagues from Carnegie Mel¬ 
lon’s School of Urban and Public Affairs initiated three large-scale data collection 
efforts to further the National Software Capacity Study. First, data were obtained 
to estimate the labor supply and career patterns of scientists and engineers involved 
in software production in the U.S. Civil Service. Second, data collection began to 
estimate labor requirements to do post deployment software support (PDSS) and to 
analyze who is doing PDSS work for the Air Force and the Army. Third, data is 
being collected to update and improve the accuracy of the initial estimates of de¬ 
mand for Ada software production found in National Software Capacity: Near-Term 
Study (CMU/SEI-90-TR-12). All the material resulting from data collection and 
analysis will be incorporated in future capacity study briefings and reports. 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 


25 





26 SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 





For More Information 


lb order an SEI publication, send a written request accompanied by a preaddressed 
mailing label to: 

Software Engineering Institute 
ATTN: Publications Requests 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 


To be added to the Bridge mailing list, write to: 

Software Engineering Institute 
ATTN: Bridge Mailing List 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 


For information on opportunities for affiliation, contact: 

Software Engineering Institute 
ATTN: Mark Coticchia 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 
(412) 268-6138 
Internet: mec@sei.cmu.edu 


For further information about the SEI, contact: 

Message Center 
Software Engineering Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 
(412) 268-7700 


How to Order 
SEI Publications 


How to Get the 
SEI Magazine 


How to Become 
an SEI Affiliate 


How to Get 
Additional Information 


SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 29 










30 SEI Quarterly Update 3Q90 







































