N92-166I5 

THE NUTRITION ADVISOR EXPERT SYSTEM 


Scott M. Huse and Scott S. Shyne 

Rome Laboratory, Computer Systems 
Rome Laboratory, Communication Technology 


Abstract. The Nutrition Advisor Expert System (NAES) is an expert system written in the C Language 
Integrated Production System (CLIPS). NAES provides expert knowledge and guidance into the complex 
world of nutrition management by capturing the knowledge of an expert and placing it at the user’s 
fingertips. Specifically, NAES enables the user to: (1) obtain precise nutrition information for food items, 
(2) perform nutritional analysis of meal(s), flagging deficiencies based upon the United States 
Recommended Daily Allowances, (3) predict possible ailments based upon observed nutritional deficiency 
trends, (4) obtain a top-ten listing of food items for a given nutrient, and (5) conveniently upgrade the 
database. An explanation facility for the ailment prediction feature is also provided to document the 
reasoning process. 


INTRODUCTION 

The Nutrition Advisor Expert System (NAES) is an expert system written in the C Language 
Integrated Production System (CLIPS). The purpose of NAES is to emulate human expertise in 
the complex problem domain of nutrition analysis. NAES is a user-friendly, practical expert 
system with real application potential, e.g., nursing homes, hospitals, doctor’s offices, or home 
use. 

NAES allows even a novice user to: 

(a) quickly and easily obtain nutrition information on food item(s); 

(b) perform nutritional analysis on meal(s); 

(c) predict potential ailments based upon nutritional deficiency trends; 

(d) generate a top-ten listing of food items for a given nutrient; 

(e) conveniently upgrade the database of nutrition knowledge. 

NAES consists of a working memory of facts and rules in a knowledge base. The user can 
easily enter new food item facts into the database or delete existing facts. Consequently, the 
system can improve its performance with time. The system also features an explanation facility for 
the ailment prediction module. This important facility provides documentation detailing the 
reasoning process. 

In the development of this system, several artificial intelligence/expert system (AI/ES) 
techniques were utilized to increase system efficiency and reliability, e.g., fuzzy sets, certainty 
factors, uncertain evidence, modular design, and efficiency techniques in coding design. The 
methods by which some of these techniques were implemented in NAES is discussed in detail 
within the ‘ System Features ’ section of this paper. 

An expert system should be characterized by good performance, adequate response time, 
good reliability, understandability, and flexibility (Giarratano and Riley 1989). NAES possesses 


511 



each of these important qualities. It is capable of performing quick expert nutritional analysis witl 
a high degree of reliability and understandability. System flexibility is provided by a convenier 
and efficient mechanism for modifying the database of nutrition knowledge. 

INSTALLATION GUIDE 

NAES was written using CLIPS software, version 4.2 for the IBM PC. The software is availabli 
from the authors on a 5 1/4 inch diskette. In order to run the program, CLIPS must first bi 
installed on your computer. If it is not already installed on your hard drive, copy the CLIP! 
diskette(s) into a sub-directory named ‘CLIPS’. Run CLIPS by typing, ‘CLIPS’. 

Once CLIPS has been installed on your computer, you are ready to run the Nutritioi 
Advisor Expert System. Insert the NAES program diskette into drive A and from the CLIPS 
directory on your hard drive type, ‘copy a:nut .’ <RETURN>. This will copy the program into th< 
CLIPS directory of your hard drive. Next, type ‘CLIPS’ <RETURN>. This will bring up the 
CLIPS environment. NAES can then be loaded into the system by typing Toad “nut” 
<RETURN>. The program will load in about forty seconds, depending of course on yoit 
computer system. Wien the CLIPS’ prompt returns, the system is loaded and ready to run. Rur 
it by typing ‘(reset)’ <RETURN>, and then ‘(run)’ <RETURN>. The (reset) command initializes 
the system and the (run) command starts program execution. 

A main menu should appear with the following six options: 

(1) Food Item Information 

(2) Dietary Analysis of Meal(s) 

(3) Ailment Prediction Based on Nutritional Deficiencies 

(4) Top-Ten 

(5) Database Update 

(6) Exit 

To select an option simply enter the menu number followed by the <RETURN> key. 
SYSTEM FEATURES 

This section provides a detailed discussion of each of the features offered by the system. There are 
six menu options. A step-by-step explanation of how to use each menu option follows along with 
a discussion of implementation details. 

The first menu option is ‘Food Item Information’. Select this option if you are interested in 
obtaining nutrition information for a given food item. When you select this option you will be 
prompted to enter the name of the food item. Enter the food item and press <RETURN>. 

This module operates in a straightforward manner. The food item name entered by the user 
is simply matched against the foot item name field in the list of facts. The template used for food 
items is: 

(item <food name> <calories> <calcium> <iodine> <iron> <magnesium> <phosphorus> 
<sodium> cvitamin A> <vitamin Bl> cvitamin B2> cvitamin B6> <vitamin B12> <folic acid> 
<niacin> cvitamin O cvitamin D> cvitamin E>) 

If a match is found, the corresponding nutritional multi-field values for a standard serving 
are extracted by the system and displayed on the screen. If, on the other hand, the food item is not 
present in the database, the user is informed accordingly and instructed to use menu option five. 


512 


‘Database Update’, to update the database. Table 1 shows a sample run of this menu option. 


Enter Food Item: beef 


"beef’ 


Calories 

1481 

Calcium 

50 mg 

Iodine 

0 mg 

Iron 

15 mg 

Magnesium 

131 mg 

Phosphorus 

634 mg 

Sodium 

271 mg 

Vitamin A 

181 IU 

Vitamin B1 

0.23 mg 

Vitamin B2 

0.8999 mg 

Vitamin B6 

2 mg 

Vitamin B12 

Omcg 

Folic Acid 

0.07 mg 

Niacin 

18.1 mg 

Vitamin C 

Omg 

Vitamin D 

0IU 

Vitamin E 

0.6 mg 


Table 1. A run of ’Food Item Information' 

The second menu option is ‘Dietary Analysis of Meal(s)’. Select this option if you are 
interested in obtaining nutrition information for a meal or meals. When you select this option you 
will first be prompted to supply some personal data, f.e., name, age, and gender. If the gender is 
female and the age is greater than ten, the system will also inquire if you are pregnant. There are 
fifteen different categories that are utilized based upon sex and age. This information is necessary 
to determine the appropriate caloric and United States Recommended Daily Allowances (USRDA) 
guidelines. 

Once this information is provided, you will be prompted to enter the name and relative 
quantities of food items that you either have consumed or plan to consume. This information is 
categorized on two levels. The first categorization that takes place references the time of day that 
consumption occurs (breakfast, lunch, or dinner). The second categorization that occurs relates to 
the nutritional food group that the food item belongs to (meat, dairy, fruit and vegetable, or bread 
and cereal). If you wish to skip an entry, simply press <RETURN>. Once you have entered all of 
the necessary information, the system will quickly analyze the nutritional content of your meal(s) 
and display any nutritional deficiencies based upon your specific USRDA requirements. 

The implementation of this module is more complex than that of the Erst menu option. 
Each entered food item is asserted into the database in the fact form: 

(dayfood <food name> <quantity> <breakfastllunchldinner>). 

The <quantity> field in this fact represents the fuzzy sets: 

quantity = (very small, small, medium, large, very large) 

Each member of the fuzzy set represents a factor designed to alter the food’s relative 


513 





nutritional content based upon serving size. The translation formulas for each member of the fuzz ' 
set are shown in Table 2. 


very small 

= cnutrient conteno 

♦ 

0.50 

small 

= cnutrient content> 

* 

0.75 

medium 

= cnutrient content> 

* 

1.00 

large 

= cnutrient content> 

* 

1.25 

very large 

= cnutrient content> 

* 

1.50 


Table 2. Fuzzy set formulas 

Once all of the ‘dayfood’ items have been entered, the ‘dayfood’ facts are matched againsi 
the database of known foods. All of the calories, vitamins, and minerals of the entered foods are 
totaled and used to generate a fact containing the individual’s total nutritional intake for that day 
This ‘total’ nutritional fact is then asserted into the database in the form: 

(total <calories> <calcium> <iodine> <iron> <magnesium> <phosphorus> <sodium> 
<vitamin A> cvitamin Bl> cvitamin B2> cvitamin B6> <vitamin B12> <folic acid> <niacin> 
<vitamin C> <vitamin D> <vitamin E>). 

If a ‘dayfood’ fact does not match an already existing food item in the database, NAES will 
ask the user if the food item should be asserted into the permanent database of food items. This 
particular feature of the expert system is very important because it achieves a flexible methodology 
whereby the ability to Team’ and improve performance is realized. 

Once the new food is asserted, it becomes part of the system’s working knowledge base. 
The nutritional content of the new food item is also added to the ‘total’ food intake fact so that the 
complete dietary intake for that day can be used to correlate the nutritional deficiencies with the 
individual’s daily eating habits. 

Next, the system determines the person’s specific USRDA nutritional group by matching 
personal data against the database. The system will place the user in one of fifteen different 
categories based upon age and sex. The nutritional content of the entered food items is compared 
with the USRDA guidelines for that specific person. The system then generates another fact called 
‘deficiencies’. It is of the form: 

(deficiencies <calories> <calcium> <iodine> <iron> <magnesium> <phosphorus> 
<sodium> cvitamin A> cvitamin Bl> cvitamin B2> cvitamin B6> cvitamin B12> cfolic acid> 
cniacin> cvitamin C> cvitamin D> cvitamin E>). 

The system then informs the user of any deficiencies in his or her diet citing the calculated 
deficiency percentages. The deficient nutrient(s) and their respective deficiencies are then asserted 
into the database in the form: 

(def cnutrieno camount deficient>). 

This information is important because it can answer important health questions such as: 

(a) Am I consuming too many calories? 

(b) Do I consume appropriate amounts of all the essential nutrients? 

(c) What nutrients are lacking in my normal diet? 

Table 3 shows a sample run of menu option three, ‘Dietary Analysis of Meal(s), by an 
individual with dietary habits that are less than exemplary. 


514 




Please enter your name: Scott 
Please enter your age: 24 
Please enter your gender (m/f): m 

Quantities are: [very smaUlsmalllmediumllargelvery large] 

Enter breakfast meat group 
Enter breakfast dairy product 
Enter breakfast fruit and vegetable group 
Enter breakfast bread and cereal group 

Enter lunch meat group 
Enter lunch dairy product 
Enter lunch fruit and vegetable group 
Enter lunch bread and cereal group 

Enter dinner meat group beef 

Enter Quantity of "beef ' small 

Enter dinner dairy product 

Enter dinner fruit and vegetable group peas 

Enter Quantity of "peas" very small 

Enter dinner bread and cereal group 

The following is a list of your USRDA Deficiencies (%): 

55.97 Calories 

94.13 Calcium 

100.00 Iodine 

68.5 Magnesium 

35.19 Phosphorus 

93.79 Sodium 

91.28 Vitamin A 

74.38 Vitamin B1 

52.00 Vitamin B2 

25.00 Vitamin B6 

100.00 Vitamin B12 

86.87 Folic Acid 

9.84 Niacin 

85.55 Vitamin C 

100.00 Vitamin D 

97.00 Vitamin E 


Table 3. A run of ’Dietary Analysis of Meal(s)' 

These deficiencies are utilized by the third major component of this system, the ‘Ailment 
Prediction Based on Nutritional Deficiencies’ menu option. Select this option if you are interested 
in speculating about possible ailments that you may incur based upon the continuation of your 
observed dietary habits. The knowledge base for this predictive analysis option was derived from 
the ‘Nutrition Almanac’ (Kirschmann 1975). This reference notes the fact that nutritional 


515 




authorities have linked deficiencies in one or more nutrients to the appearance of a number ol 
diseases. Fortunately, most diseases caused by such deficiencies can be corrected when al 
essential nutrients are supplied. 

This option can only be executed if you have previously run menu option two, ‘Dietary 
Analysis of Meal(s)’. If you attempt to run menu option three, ‘Ailment Prediction Based or 
Nutritional Deficiencies’, without first running ‘Dietary Analysis of Meal(s)’, you will be directed 
to first run ‘Dietary Analysis of Meal(s)’. Assuming that you have previously run ‘Dietary 
Analysis of Meal(s)’, selecting menu option three, ‘Ailment Prediction Based on Nutritional 
Deficiencies’, will automatically generate a list of zero or more possible ailments that you may 
incur if you continue to maintain such dietary habits. Using the dietary information entered in 
menu option two, and selecting menu option three we discover that this particular individual runs 
the risk of contracting several diseases if he continues to maintain his observed dietary habits. 


Ailment: common cold 
Rating: quite possible 
% Deficient' Vitamin A 

91.28 % 

Vitamin B6 

25.00 % 

Vitamin C 

85.55 % 

Vitamin D 

100.00 % 

Ailment: rickets 


Rating: quite possible 
% Deficient: Vitamin D 

100.00 % 

Calcium 

94.13 % 

Phosphorus 

35.19 % 

Ailment: scurvy 
Rating: quite possible 
% Deficient Vitamin C 

85.55 % 

Ailment: pellagra 
Rating: possible 
% Deficient Vitamin B1 

74.38 % 

Vitamin B2 

52.00 % 

Niacin 

9.84 % 


Table 4. A run of 'Ailment Prediction Based on Nutritional Deficiencies' 

Table 4 is a sample run of menu option three, ‘Ailment Prediction Based on Nutritional 
Deficiencies’. Listed along with the possible ailments are the fuzzy ratings and percentage 
deficiencies justifying the possible ailment rating. 

This feature works quite efficiently due to the fact that each ailment is a rule. The left hand 
side of each ailment rule consists of nutrients that, if known to be consistently deficient in a 
person’s diet, may have a causal relationship with the given ailment. These deficiencies are 
asserted into the knowledge base by running menu option two, ‘Dietary Analysis of Meal(s)’. If 
all of the nutritional deficiencies are present, the ailment rule fires. 

The fuzzy rating explanation facility is based upon the average nutritional percentage 
deficiencies that were calculated in the ‘Dietary Analysis of Meal(s)’ feature. Ratings are assigned 
as shown in Table 5. 


516 





Average % Deficient 

Fuzzv Rating 

0-25 

Slightly Possible 

26-50 

Possible 

51-75 

Fairly Possible 

76-100 

Quite Possible 


TableS. Fuzzy ratings 


Menu option four, ‘top-ten’, generates a top-ten listing of food items for a given nutrient. 
When you select this feature you will be presented with a seventeen item list (calories and sixteen 
other key nutrients) from which you are to select one item. 

Once you have selected the item of interest, a “Working...” status message will appear. 
Shortly thereafter, an ordered list of the top-ten foods for that particular nutrient will be displayed 
on the screen. Table six is a sample run of this menu option. 


Vitamin C (mg) 


01 orange 

90.00 

02 baked potato 

20.00 

03 banana 

15.00 

04 peas 

13.00 

05 cornflakes 

8.80 

06 pot pie 

6.81 

07 apple 

5.20 

08 eggnog 

3.00 

09 whole milk 

2.44 

10 apple pie 

1.35 


Table 6. A run of 'Top Ten' 


Implementation of this feature was complicated by the need for a sorting algorithm. Once 
the user selects the nutrient of interest, the relevant index of the food item facts is known because, 
by design, there is a direct mapping between the list selection numbers and the food item template 
nutrition fields. A list is built consisting of all of the pertinent food item nutrient field values. 

Next, the numbers are recursively compared in pairs. Beginning at the head of the list, the 
smaller of the two numbers is removed to another temporary list while the larger of the two 
remains in the original list This process is repeated until finally only one number remains in the 
original list, and that number is the largest number of the original list That largest number is then 
asserted into a new ‘max ’ list. 

This process is repeated ten times, each iteration using a new list that did not include the 
previously identified and removed maximum value. Finally, an ordered max list of the top-ten 
highest numbers is created and then used to match against the database of food item facts. These 
top-ten food items are then displayed in order on the screen along with their respective nutrient 
percentages. 

Menu option five, ‘Database Update’, provides the user with a convenient mechanism for 
updating the database of food item facts. When you select this feature you may either: 

(a) add a food item to the database; 

(b) retract a food item from the database. 


517 




In order to add a food item to the database, you must be able to supply the necessar 
nutritional details for that food item. To retract a food item, you need only know the name of th" 
food item. 

This feature is important because it makes the system flexible. The scope of the pristin< 
database can easily be expanded and thereby improve overall performance. Also, database error: 
are also easily corrected through the retract and add options. 

Implementation of this useful feature was simple and direct. To add a food item fact to thi 
database, die user-supplied information is simply asserted using the food item template. To retrac 
a given food item, a match and retract is performed using the food item name. Table 7 shows i 
sample run for this feature. 


How would you like to modify the data base? 

1 . Add a food item 

2. Retract a food item 

Please select 1 or 2: 2 

Enter food name: plum 

"plum” has been retracted from the database. 


Table 7. A run of 'Database Update' 

The final menu option is ‘Exit’. Select this option only if you want to exit from the 
Nutrition Advisor Expert System and be returned to the CLIPS’ prompt. If you select this option 
inadvertently, simply type ‘(reset)’ <RETURN>, and ‘(run)’ <RETURN>. This will restart 
NAES. 

Implementation of the exit feature is accomplished quite simply through the system clear 
screen and halt commands. 

FINAL REMARKS 

The CLIPS expert system shell provided an excellent developmental environment for the 
exploration of automated knowledge-based reasoning in the application area of dietary analysis and 
nutritional guidance. The forward-chaining rule-based language provided inferencing and 
representation capabilities that allowed the programmers to create die code of the system with a 
very application-oriented architecture. Facts and rules in the knowledge base could easily be 
understood because their names directly related the functionality of the rule to the user. The built- 
in inference engine eliminated the need for the programmer to create any kind of a reasoning 
mechanism. Additional information can easily be added to the expert system by creating new rules 
and adding more facts. Through the use of familiar terms in the facts and rules and the elimination 
of building an inference engine, the CLIPS expert system shell allows a developer to create a full- 
blown expert system for practically any application in a relatively short period of time. 

REFERENCES 

Giarratano, J. and Riley, G. (1989). Expert Systems: Principles and Programming, PWS-KENT 
Publishing Company, pp. 8-9. 

Kirschmann, J. (1975). Nutrition Almanac, McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, pp. 108 - 166, 
185 - 220. 


518 




