^(/mi 



Final Report for Contract NAS5-01073 

NVI, Inc. 

Support of the Laboratory for Terrestrial Physics for Dynamics of the Solid Earth (DOSE) 

February 1, 2001 -July 31, 2001 



This final report for contract NAS5-01073 summarizes the accompHshments during the 
contract period. Under the contract NVI, Inc. provided support to the VLBI group at NASA's 
Goddard Space FUght Center. The contract covered a period of approximately eight years during 
which geodetic and astromctric VLBI evolved through several major changes. This report is 
divided into five sections that correspond to major task areas in the contract: A) Coordination 
and Scheduling, B) Field System, C) Station Support, D) Analysis and Research and 
Development, and E) Computer Support. 

A. Coordination and Scheduling 

Observing Support. Master observing schedules for 24-hr sessions and 1-hr Intensive sessions 
were created for all obser\mg years since 1979. The databases for the sessions during 1997 
through 2000 were reviewed to determine the actual network for each session, then the 1997 
through 2000 master schedules were modified to reflect the actual networks. At the end of the 
contract period coordination activities began for planning the master schedule for calendar year 
2002, including messages to the stations, special requests for special information, correlator 
estimates, and tape usage. 

The geodetic schedule files and intensive schedules that were observed during the contract 
period were created and posted to cddisa for the stations. The 2000 Annual Report for IVS was 
prepared for the CORE Operations Center, covering the period of March 1999 to December 
2000. 

Schedules for the NEOS and Intensives were generated under this contract through mid-June, to 
support USNO while a staff member was on leave. Test schedules for the Intensives were made 
using a 112 Mb/s fan-out mode, compared to the 56 Mb/s Mark III mode C then in use. The 
analysis report of the results (see Task 4) convinced USNO to switch to the new recording mode 
on June 1 . 

The Stafion Usage Chart was added to the IVS web site. The chart displays the number of times 
a station participate during the observing year and number of fimes a stafion participates in a 
particular session during the year. 

The available tapes at each station were counted using track and the master schedule was utilized 
to determine how many addifional tapes would be needed at each site. The tape shipping plan 
was updated and distributed twice (March and June) during this contract. 



Technical Liason. NVI organized the TOW (Technical Operations Workshop) held at Haystack 
Observatory in March. A presentation on the resources needed for continued expansion of the 
CORE program was presentvjd at the workshop. 

NVI provided the TVS Coordinating Center Director function. This included activities such as 
coordinating the 5"" IVS Directing Board meeting held at Goddard. NVI/ Raytheon supported 
editing, publication, and distribution of the 2000 IVS Annual Report during this contract. 

Support was provided for the CORE review panel meeting, held in February at GSFC. A web 
site was created, an e-mail list and archive was set up, and material for the panel was posted. 
Travel and meeting arrangements were coordinated. 

The joint proposal with A. Volvatch (Simeiz) to the Civilian Research and Development 
Foundation (CRDF) for support of the Simeiz station was completed and submitted. The first 
draft of the proposal was heavily revised and comments from the co-investigators were also 
incorporated. The budget form was filled in and the project narrative describing how the 
proposed funds would be spent was written. Volvatch traveled to Simpheropol to get his institute 
director=s signature and thirn to Kiev to submit the proposal hard copy before the submission 
deadline. 

B. Field System 

TOW 2001. NVI provided written materials, teaching and discussion section leadership for 
many sessions at the first IVS Technical Operations Workshop (TOW) Haystack Observatory. 
Topics covered included: operations, pointing, narrow track calibration, FS future plans, TOW 
feedback. FS wish lists, Mark IV decoder support and usage, and FS code development. 

FS 9.5. NVI distributed alpha and beta test versions of the version and incorporated bug fixes 
and feedback from users into successive versions. As of the end of the contract feedback was still 
coming in. The new version includes support for K4 equipment, dual sequential longitudinal 
recorder use, automated M.irk III/IV attenuator adjustment, and many other enhancements and 
bug fixes. 

New Installable Linux Kt^rnel for FS Use. NVI helped coordinate development of the new 
operational kernel (FS Linux 4), as of the end of the contract collaborative work on finalizing the 
new kernel continues with personnel from Metashovi Observatory in Finland. 

EVN TOG Meeting and Operations Workshop. NVI represented the VLBI group at the EVN 
TOG meeting and acted as one of the teachers for the associated EVN Operations Workshop. 
Topics covered by NVI at the workshop included: future FS plans, two head recorder support, 
and Mark IV decoder support. A plan was developed at the TOG meeting that may allow Semeiz 
to get a mark IV formatter by sharing the two spares in Europe, one astronomical and one 
geodetic, between the two communities. Discussion on this topic will continue. 



Mark III/IV Signal Levels NVI collaborated with personnel Haystack Observatory to develop 
new guidelines for signals levels in Mark III/IV racks. This work corrected a nearly 20 year 
misunderstanding on how signal levels should be set. 

VSI-S. NVI participated in discusses on the formation of the VLBI Standard Interface - Software 
(VSI-S). 

C. Station Support 

IVS Network Coordination. NVI supplied the Network Coordinator for International VLBI 
Service (IVS). The coordinator was responsible form monitoring network station performance 
and representing the stations to the IVS directing board. The Network Coordinator began a 
database of correlation clock offsets so that will possible to assess the impact of differences in 
the way correlators handle clock offsets on the accuracy of VLBI UTl estimates. 

Visited Stations to help improve performance: Fairbanks, Kokee Park, and Onsala.. NVI 

visited the listed sites to review operations, provide additional training, and upgrade and tine 
tune software. The visit to Kokee Park included install a more up to date kernel (FS Linux 3) 
than they had been using and installing the beta version of 9.5 so that they could support two 
tape drives. The trip to Onsii la was partly motivated by that station=s poor recent performance. 

General Support. NVI answer requests for support from stations regarding software and 
operations. 

D. Analysis 

VLBA Calibrator Surve}' Catalog. NVI/Raytheon developed a VLBA calibrator survey 
catalog based on 10 VLBA calibrator survey experiments. The survey experiments were 
processed through AIPS, databases were created, and the sessions were analyzed individually to 
fix problems like unreliablo detections. Analysis was performed to determine the best type of 
SOLVE VLBI solution to use to determine the survey catalog positions. NVI/Raytheon scientists 
were coauthors of a paper entitled "Very Long Baseline Array Calibrator Survey" presented at 
the American Astronomical Society meeting in San Diego. 

CORE Panel Meeting. NVI/Raytheon prepared a presentation on VLBI performance for the 
CORE panel meeting. The presentation discussed EOF precision from the best VLBI 
experiments, precision of subdaily EOF measurements, comparisons of EOF fi-om simultaneous 
VLBI experiments, and unniodeled sources of error. 

IVS Analysis Workshop, NVI/Raytheon made five presentations at the IVS Analysis 
Workshop held at Goddrird: 1) Current problems in VLBI data analysis and possible 
improvements, 2) On modeling ocean loading in VLBI, 3) EOF modeling: current status and new 
approaches, 4) GSFC Analysis Center Report and 5) Report on AIFS processing of VLBA 
correlator output. 



Calc/Solve Improvements. NVI/Raytheon upgraded Calc/solve so that it would run under the 
HP-UX 1 1.00 operating system. Solutions can now be run faster by a factor of 3-4. 

NVI/Raytheon upgraded dbedit to use a new LCODE, the number of samples used per sideband 
per change per observation provided by the latest version of Fourfit to refine the compution of 
ionospheric frequencies in SOLVE and remove group delay noise. 

NVI/Raytheon developed many new calc/solve utilities and enhanced various programs used in 
analysis of solve results. 

Investigation of Better Ocean Loading Models. NVI/Raytheon investigated the influence of 
ocean loading on VLBI results. Two approaches were followed: loading amplitudes were 
estimated from the VLBI data and different tidal models were compared. The comparison of 
different models showed that VLBI cannot discriminate in general between models, although a 
model may be better for certain sites. A presentation. "Determination of Ocean Loading 
Deformations Using VLBI" was made at the 2001 EGS meeting. 

Investigation of Hydrologic Loading Effect. NVI/Raytheon investigated the effect of 
hydrologic loading in VLBI analysis. A loading series was applied in VLBI analysis. It was 
found that the precision of baseline length measurements was improved by the expected amount 
on average. A presentation entitled, "Hydrologic loading in VLBI measured site displacements" 
was made at the 2001 EGS meeting. 

Altimeter Radiometer Land Contamination. NVI/Raytheon generated a Topex microwave 
radiometer radiance database for all the geodetic calibration sites. The variation of radiances 
along the track were examined to determine how closely it follows the variation of a model that 
assumes that the ocean/land radiance difference is a constant. This is the simplest model that can 
be used to derive a correction for land contamination. 



E. Computer Support 

Systems Administration. Computer hardware support was provided by Raytheon during the 
contract period. The following VLBI computer were supported: leo, virgo, lupus, gemini, ivscc, 
lyra, bootes, dorado, aleph, aquila. For Code 926, support was provided to geodesy, bowie, 
santafe, nereid, ishtar. 

An archive of all web pages- was made, in accordance with a NARA directive. The outgoing 
Clinton administration requested that a snapshot of all web pages up until January 20th be made. 
So far no request has been made for this archive, but indication was made that there would be. 
Web pages on gemini, lupus, ivscc, and bowie were included. 

Support for e-mail was done by installed and set up procmail (spam) filtering on virgo. A new- 
new IVS data center mirrori ng schedule was proposed and implemented. 



Hardware problems with cddisa entailed reconfiguration of NFS mounts on vlbi side. Some large 
filesystems previously hosted on cddisa were moved to local disks on bowie in order to free 
space on cddisa. All NFS mounts were re-directed accordingly. The changes were transparent to 
users. A total of approximately 35GB were moved and also checkpointed with an archive. 

Critical patches were installed on various machines, mainly pertaining to security fixes for 
various critical conditions, some involving buffer overflows of various system components. 

Software Support. Software support activities included: making backups and configuring 
parameters of backups for a reliable and robust system; updating or installing software as 
necessary such as Perl, plotting packages, compilers for Fortran and C, PGPLOT, Pine, HOPS, 
IDL, and utilities. Secure shell was installed on all machines as a security requirement. 

The script that filters mail for VLBI sessions was made more efficient and ftmctional with better 
error checking and multiple session addressing possible. The script that updates session web 
pages was modified to add more features and checking. 



