AFIT/EN-TR-01-02 
TECHNICAL REPORT 
November 2001 



MODELS, WEB-BASED SIMULATIONS, AND 
INTEGRATED ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES FOR 
IMPROVED LOGISTICAL PERFORMANCE 


Raymond R. Hill Jr., Air Force Institute of Technology 
S. Narayanan, Wright State University 
Edward F. Mykytka, University of Dayton 


GRADUATE SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT 
AIR FORCE INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE, OHIO 


DISTRIBUTION A. Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 


Report Documentation Page 


Report Date Report Type 

14 Dec 01 Final 

Dates Covered (from... to) 

June 1999 - Sept 2001 

Title and Subtitle 

Contract Number 

Models, Web-Based Simulations, and integrated 

Analysis Techniques for Improved Logistical 

Grant Number 

Performance 

Program Element Number 

Author(s) 

Project Number 

Hill, Raymond R., S. Narayanan, and Edward F. Mykyta 

Task Number 


Work Unit Number 

Performing Organization Name(s) and Address(es) 

Air Force Institute of Technology Department of 
Operational Sciences (AFIT/ENS) 2950 P Street, Bldg 

640 WPAFB, OH 45433-7765 

Performing Organization Report Number 

AFIT/EN-TR-01 -02 

Sponsoring/Monitoring Agency Name(s) and 
Address(es) 

Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute Attn: Dr. Frank 

Sponsor/Monitor’s Acronym(s) 

DAGSI 

Moore 3155 Research Blvd., Suite 205 Kettering, OH 
45420 

Sponsor/Monitor’s Report Number(s) 

Distribution/Availability Statement 

Approved for public release, distribution unlimited 

Supplementary Notes 

The original document contains color images. 






Abstract 

In February 1999, a team of researchers from the Air Force Institute of Technology, the Wright State 
University and the University of Dayton teamed with researchers within the Air Force Research 
Laboratory, Logistics Research Division, Logistics Readiness Branch to propose a research agenda 
entitled, "Models, Web-based Simulations, and Integrated Analysis Techniques for Improved Logistical 
Performance." This proposal was submitted in response to the initial Dayton Area Graduate studies 
Institute request for proposals under the Joint Air Force Research Laboratory/DAGSI Basic Research 
Program. The particular project supported as HE 15 within the Human Effectiveness Directorate and 
entitled Logistics Readiness. The proosal successfully competed and was selected for contract award. 
Between June 1999 and July 2001, the researchers from the collaborating institutes pursued a collective 
research agenda, one that was closely aligned with the missions of the AFRL Logistics Readiness Branch 
as well as other organizations within the United States Air Force. This final technical report summarizes 
the research efforts under the contract, AFIT-HE-99-10. This report includes descriptions of the 
accomplishments of the research as well as listings of the numerous papers produced, presentations made, 
and masters thesis completed diretly supporting, and supported by this research effort. 


Subject Terms 

Logistics, simulation, web-based simulation, JAVA, human factors, prognostics, ontology 



Number of Pages 

54 




The views expressed in this technical report are those 
of the authors and do not reflect the official policy of 
the United States Air Force, Department of Defense, 

or the US Government. 


a 



Preface 


In February 1999, a team of researchers from the Air Force Institute of Technology, the Wright 
State University and the University of Dayton teamed with researchers within the Air Force 
Research Laboratory, Logistics Research Division, Logistics Readiness Branch to propose a 
research agenda entitled, “Models, Web-based Simulations, and Integrated Analysis Techniques 
for Improved Logistical Performance.” This proposal was submitted in response to the initial 
Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute request for proposals under the Joint Air Force Research 
Laboratory/ DAGSI Basic Research Program. The particular project supported as HE 15 within 
the Human Effectiveness Directorate and entitled Logistics Readiness. The proposal 
successfully competed and was selected for contract award. Between June 1999 and July 2001, 
the researchers from the collaborating institutes pursued a collective research agenda, one that 
was closely aligned with the mission of the AFRL Logistics Readiness Branch as well as other 
organizations within the United States Air Force. This final technical report summarizes the 
research efforts under the contract, AFIT-HE-99-10. This report includes descriptions of the 
accomplishments of the research as well as listings of the numerous papers produced, 
presentations made, and masters thesis completed directly supporting, and supported by this 


research effort. 



Table of Contents 


Preface ii 

List of Tables v 

Executive Summary vii 

1. Introduction 1 

1.1 Proj ect Obj ective 1 

1.2 Project Management 2 

2. Background and Motivation 4 

3. Task Summaries 7 

3.1 Air Force Institute of Technology Tasks 11 

3.1.1 The Modular Aircraft Support System (MASS) 12 

3.1.2 Pallet Optimization 12 

3.1.3 Autonomic Logistics 13 

3.2 Wright State University Tasks 13 

3.2.1 Organization of AF logistics knowledge and processes (OLK) 13 

3.2.2 Development of modeling infrastructure (DIMI) 14 

3.2.3 Development of decision support systems for logistics applications (DLA) 14 

3.3 University of Dayton Tasks 15 

4. Task Accomplishments 16 

4.1 Air Force Institute of Technology 16 

4.2 Wright State University 21 

4.3 University of Dayton 31 

5. Follow-on Work 33 

5.1 Air Force Institute of Technology 33 

5.2 Wright State University 33 

6. Conclusions and Summary 34 

Bibliography 35 

Appendix A: List of Key Participants 36 

Appendix B: List of Technical Papers Produced 39 

Appendix C: Presentations Made 41 

Appendix D: Masters Theses Produced 43 


IV 



List of Tables 


1 Board of Directors 


Page 

3 


v 



List of Figures 


1 Conceptual Approach for Research Effort 9 

2 ALSim Object Interactions 17 

3 Robust Optimization Architecture 18 

4 Phase Inspection screen #1 23 

5 Components for Integrating Genetic Algorithms with Simulation 

Analysis 28 

6 Example Joint Density Function 32 


vi 



Executive Summary 


As the Air Force (AF) moves towards becoming an Expeditionary Aerospace Force (EAF) 
composed of Air Expeditionary Forces (AEFs), logistical issues, for both deploying and 
sustaining these forces, will drive the EAF vision. Models of logistics processes and integrated 
information technologies to support distributed logistics personnel are critical in supporting the 
EAF concept. Current logistics models cannot address the myriad of foreseen and unforeseen 
issues that the EAF concept presents. This research program develops a web-based, portable, 
and reusable environment for simulation modeling and analysis to provide the timeliness and 
relevance required to conduct the necessary analyses facing Air Force logisticians, planners and 
strategists. The Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute Aerospace Basic Research Program 
provided the opportunity for researchers at the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT), the 
Wright State University (WSU), and the University of Dayton (UD) to team together to realize a 
research agenda focused on the logistical challenges facing the modern United States Air Force. 
The overall goal was to develop model-based information technology systems that support 
predictive analysis using web-based simulations and tailored user interfaces to logistics 
personnel at different levels of abstraction. The proposed effort sought to: (1) develop theories 
and methodologies for integrating simulations with information support, (2) design, implement, 
and evaluate proof-of-concept analysis tools, (3) interface with ongoing efforts in the related 
programs in AFRL such as LOCIS that focuses on integrated technologies for infonnation access 
and integration, and (4) support operational and staff logistics development and planning 


organizations. 



The primary focus of AFIT research was to apply the results of the research to problems 
of particular interest to the Air Force. Four areas were investigated: support equipment 
utilization analysis, three-dimensional pallet optimization, the autonomic logistics process, and 
methodologies for robust optimization. The WSU focus was to extend a Java-based architecture 
for modeling airbase logistics systems and integrating optimization techniques with simulations 
for systems analysis to perform analysis of critical wing-level logistics command and control 
functions. The fundamental objective was to integrate modular simulations with dynamic data 
updates from real-time systems and enable proactive decision making by logisticians during 
execution monitoring through what-if analysis and alternative plan generation. Associated 
phases of research include identification of the shared corpus of operational and contingency 
logistics knowledge, development of object-based representation, design of multiple tailored user 
interfaces to the same underlying world model, and seamless integration of information from 
distributed heterogeneous data sources. The UD effort focused on critical information support 
and evaluation issues, particularly those that relate to an analyst’s ability to detennine the data 
requirements necessary to portray the myriad sources of variability and uncertainty encountered 
in a logistics and EAF environment. 


viii 



MODELS, WEB-BASED SIMULATIONS, AND INTEGRATED 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES FOR IMPROVED LOGISTICAL 

PERFORMANCE 


1. Introduction 

The Joint AFRL/DAGSI Aerospace Basic Research Program was created to encourage 
and develop greater and more effective collaboration between the Air Force Research 
Laboratory and Ohio’s graduate science and engineering schools. The Program is managed 
by the Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute, a collaborative organization involving The 
Ohio State University, the University of Cincinnati, the Air Force Institute of Technology, the 
University of Dayton, and Wright State University. 

In February 1999, faculty members from the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT), 
Wright State University (WSU) and the University of Dayton (UD) collaborated on a research 
proposal, “Models, Web-based Simulations, and Integrated Analysis Techniques for Improved 
Logistical Performance,” in response to a Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute (DAGSI) 
request for proposals. This proposal was in response to a Human Effectiveness Director 
(AFRL/HE) research topic in the area of Logistics Readiness (topic HE-15). That proposal led 
to the award of a two-year contract between DAGSI and the research team from AFIT, WSU, 
and UD. This technical report summarizes the results from that two year effort. 

1.1 Project Objective 

As the Air Force (AF) began moving towards becoming an Expeditionary Aerospace Force 
(EAF) composed of Air Expeditionary Forces (AEFs), logistical issues, for both deploying and 
sustaining these forces, were viewed as drivers to the EAF vision. Models of logistics processes 


1 



and integrated infonnation technologies to support distributed logistics personnel are critical in 
supporting the EAF concept. The belief was that current logistics models could not address the 
myriad of foreseen and unforeseen issues that the EAF concept presents. The proposed research 
program was to develop a web-based, portable, and reusable environment for simulation 
modeling and analysis to provide the timeliness and relevance required to conduct the necessary 
analyses facing Air Force logisticians, planners and strategists. Cross-spectrum research, basic 
to applied, was needed to meet the research demand. This effort covered that spectrum, from 
theory-development (e.g., pallet optimization models, web-based simulation, multi-abstraction 
models) to application prototyping (e.g., plan generation, footprint reduction, concept 
evaluations). AFIT’s and WSU’s past work with the AFRL LOGCAT and LOCIS programs 
provided an initial base of experience and web-based Java experiences helped promote rapid 
technology transition. Supporting operational customers (e.g., Air Staff, Battlelabs, AMC) made 
the applied aspects immediately relevant and pertinent. 

1.2 Project Management 

This project featured a three-tier approach to overall project management. These tiers consisted 
of a Board of Directors (BOD), research project management team (PMT), and Integrated 
Process Team (IPT) leaders for each task. This approach provided oversight functions, direction 
to the entire research process, seamless integration of the research efforts and products, and 
responsive reporting and technology demonstration efforts. 

The function of the BOD was to provide project oversight, ensure the relevance of the 

project, and provide a vehicle to promote outside agency understanding and appreciation of the 

research. The members of the BOD were representatives from various agencies to include the 

2 



principal investigators from each of the collaborative institutions within this research as outlined 
in the table below: 


Member Agency 

Representative 

Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) 

Lt Col Hill, Principal Investigator, AFIT 

Wright State University (WSU) 

Dr Narayanan, Principal Investigator, WSU 

University of Dayton (UD) 

Dr Mykytka, Principal Investigator, UD 

Air Force Research Laboratory 

Dr Thomas, Logistics Readiness Chief 


Scientist 

Air Force Research Laboratory 

Ms Masquelier, Logistics Readiness Branch 

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 

Dr Carrico, Program Manager, Advanced 


Logistics Program 

HQ AFMC 

Mr Shawn Lyman 


Table 1: Board of Directors 


The PMT was responsible for the overall management and direction of the research 
projects. The PMT consisted of the principal investigator from each of the participant 
institutions in this research effort with AFIT as chair and primary member responsible for the 
compilation of required quarterly progress reports and final project technical reports. The PMT 
ensured timely and accurate reporting of technical progress by AFIT, WSU, and UD and 
maintained the Master Milestone Schedule submitted with each quarterly progress report. IPT 
leaders reported directly to the appropriate member of the PMT. 

IPT leads were designated for each particular task accomplished within the scope of this 


research effort. The IPT lead was responsible for the management oversight, technical accuracy, 

3 




and overall quality of their task. They were responsible for final technical products and technical 
demonstrations of the activity. WSU tasks included the architectural design based on object 
modeling of the logistics domain, modeling infrastructure development, and implementation and 
evaluation of prototype decision support systems instantiated from hybrid modeling techniques. 
AFIT tasks included development of decision support systems for several applications including 
pallet optimization, autonomic logistics, and aerospace ground equipment analysis. UD tasks 
included development of input modeling and statistical analysis techniques realized in objects 
transitioned to the modeling architecture. 

2. Background and Motivation 

The demands placed on the modern American military have changed dramatically over the 
recent years. These changes are not only due to resource reductions, but also due to increasing 
operational requirements and strategic uncertainty. Most of these changes place new challenges 
on agile combat support, and specifically logistics command and control. Logistics command 
and control focuses on making the right resources and infonnation available to logisticians at the 
right place at the right time. Logistics readiness in the military impacts weapon system 
supportability and affordability, risk for operational logistics infonnation systems, logistics 
users’ decision-making capability, and, therefore combat support capability and mission 
effectiveness. 

To meet the changing needs, the Air Force is quickly evolving to a force more 
expeditionary in structure and function. Aerospace Expeditionary Forces (AEF) represents a 
complete warfighting package comprised of disparate yet completely inter-functioning 
components from across the AF infrastructure. An AEF provides the warfighting commanders 


4 



with on-demand combat capability, tailored to the situation at hand, and immediately available to 
meet any worldwide crisis warranting their deployment. 

The Expeditionary Air Force (EAF) concept poses critical challenges within the AF core 
competencies of lean logistics and rapid global mobility. The only viable way for AEFs to 
function is to initially deploy just the warfighting necessities and upon deployment have the 
capability to efficiently and effectively bring in additional assets on an on-demand basis. The 
challenge is to determine what is “necessary” and exactly how to implement the “on-demand” 
re-supply system. Rapid global mobility implicitly assumes sufficient airlift assets to bring an 
AEF into the fight. 

Eogistics challenges have risen to the forefront of the EAF implementation strategy. 
These challenges will not be solved immediately and in fact represent a significant amount of 
work for years to come. Logistics planners and implementers, from wing and squadron level and 
all the way to Air Staff and Joint Staff levels, will be hard pressed to implement, maintain, and 
evolve the EAF/AEF concept to meet current and future demands. 

The complexities of these challenges effectively prohibit exclusive use of “expert 
opinion” and legacy information systems. Models of logistics processes and integrated 
information technologies to support distributed logistics personnel are critical in supporting the 
EAF concept. A new generation of analytical tools, employing tailored views of pertinent 
logistics information, visualization techniques for rapid comprehension, and simulation and 
operational research tools for informed decision-making are needed. This research helped to 
advance the state-of-the-art in logistical analysis techniques while putting modeling tools in the 
hands of decision-makers requiring insight and information for EAF/AEF implementation issues. 
A Java-based environment developed in this effort, consisting of verified, validated, and re- 


5 



usable components that reflect the complexities in the logistics domain, has the potential to 
provide the capabilities to answer the complex questions facing modern logistics planners. 

Logistics planners at different levels from the WPAFB Headquarters level down to the 
various wing and squadron levels require infonnation systems tailored to their current needs 
providing insight into future logistics challenges posed by the AEF concept. Web-based 
technologies with tailored user interfaces and hybrid modeling techniques with capabilities of 
rapid assembly and deployment are needed to provide the required capabilities. AFRL's LOCIS 
program, complemented by the products of this research effort, will help to eventually realize 
such technologies. 

Advanced concepts and proposed process improvement initiatives are a driving factor in 
current EAF/AEF implementation planning. Budget and time limitations prohibit the 
prototyping and field testing of each and every proposed system or improvement. Virtual 
prototyping and testing is the modern way to address such proposals and limit the actual building 
and testing to viable alternatives. Using customer contacts within the AF Battlelabs, the 
Logistics Management Agency, and the AFRL, we prototyped applications in this research to 
describe and analyze prospective logistics systems and processes. These models became a part 
of the modeling infrastructure and were extremely well received by the participating logistics 
agencies. 

The need for this research was clear. The highly inter-connected, instant 

communications world of today can no longer be accommodated by the legacy approach to 

model building. The technical tasks undertaken in this effort included development of an 

ontology of logistics processes to support hybrid modeling methods, web-based simulations, 

optimization models for specific operational problems in the Air Force, and tailored user 

6 



interfaces for proactive decision making tools make numerous theoretical contributions and are 
practically beneficial. Our research helped to support logistics planners. The modeling 
environment provided applications and proof of concept tools to address immediate logistical 
issues, and the web-based, interactive simulations are at the forefront in future modeling and 
simulation initiatives within the DoD, the AF, and the commercial industry. 

3. Task Summaries 

The overall goal of this program was to develop and apply model-based information technology 
systems to support predictive analysis of logistics systems using web-based simulations and 
tailored user interfaces for logistics personnel at different levels of abstraction. The simulations 
and associated interfaces support what-if analysis, look-ahead, and integration with real-time 
information from distributed sources. The effort sought to: (1) develop theories and 
methodologies for integrating simulations with information support, (2) design, implement, and 
evaluate proof-of-concept analysis tools, (3) interface with ongoing efforts in the related 
programs in AFRL such as LOCIS that focuses on integrated technologies for infonnation access 
and integration, and (4) support operational and staff logistics development and planning 
organizations. The overall approach was based on a computational architecture implemented in 
the Java programming language. 

The proposed program leveraged on significant research and development expertise of 
the investigating team in the areas of object-oriented programming, interactive simulation, 
optimization, visualization, distributed computing, human computer interaction, logistics 
systems analysis and operational modeling for manufacturing and defense applications. An 
interdisciplinary team of faculty members and graduate students from systems engineering, 


7 



human factors engineering, and operational sciences worked together in the proposed research 
and technology development effort. 

Figure 1 illustrates the overall framework for this research. The three major components 
of this framework are the Organization of Logistics Knowledge (OLK), Development of an 
Integrated Modeling Infrastructure (DIMI), and Development of Logistics Applications (DLA). 
The underlying tenets of the research and an overview of each component with its constituent 
pieces follow. 

AF logistics is a large and complex domain involving logistics processes at different 
levels of abstraction. Models of logistics are useful in solving AF logistics sub-problems 
including aircraft acquisition planning, maintenance personnel allocation, and theater-level 
supply redistribution. Many models including simulation and optimization based methods have 
been developed for several sub problems characterizing and analyzing different aspects of the 
logistics operation. Most real world problems in AF logistics are highly complex and monolithic 
approaches to problem solving are inadequate. Hybrid modeling techniques that also explicitly 
accommodate human decision making through relevant information to support proactive 
decision making are critically needed. Integrating multiple modeling methods with information 
technology systems is made difficult by lack of common terminology and a common set of 
abstractions of the logistic processes. The research directly targeted this issue. 


8 




Figure 1: Conceptual Approach for Research Effort 

Using an interdisciplinary approach with a wealth of logistics domain experience by the 
DAGSI/AFRL participants, we developed a comprehensive reference model for problems in AF 
logistics. A reference model is a standardized description for purposes of modeling, design, and 
analysis (Biemens & Vissers, 1989; Arango & Prieto-Diaz, 1991). A related concept is that of 
an ontology, which is a specification of knowledge about a domain of application (Guarino, 


9 





1995). The domain analysis essentially captured the logistics knowledge and processes needed 
by the modeling methods and information technology systems shown in the research framework. 
A key issue is that the ontology developed during this process was derived specifically for 
purposes of integrating simulations, optimization methods, and infonnation technology systems 
for logistic systems analysis. 

For AF logistics analysis, we adopted predominantly an object modeling approach 
(Rumbaugh et ah, 1991). This approach was chosen because it facilitates a one-to-one mapping 
between real-world objects and their software abstractions, and because it enables explicit 
representation of system operation and control (Narayanan et ah, 1998). The object model will 
specify the objects and associated data important in analysis (e.g., aircraft, resources, sorties, 
courses of action, etc.), relationships between objects (including constraints used in optimization 
models), and behavior of objects due to logistic processes. In research on modeling logistics 
control situations in manufacturing and airbase systems, we previously effectively represented 
domain knowledge in terms of physical objects, decision-making or control objects, and 
information objects. The decision-making objects were organized along a hierarchy to model 
controllers at different levels of abstraction using the same underlying representation 
(Narayanan, et ah, 1994; Narayanan et ah, 1998). We leveraged the organization of the shared 
knowledge associated with real-time logistics control along this proven methodology. The object 
model was instantiated in the modeling infrastructure shown in the research framework and 
integrated for application of hybrid modeling methods for operational AF logistic problems. The 
modeling infrastructure was implemented using the Java programming language because of its 
support for object-based modeling, multi-threaded capability, distributed computing, tailored 

user interface capability on the Internet, and ease of use (Narayanan et ah, 1997). 

10 



Another major component of this research was to apply the modeling infrastructure to a 
variety of problems representing real-world AF problems. Initially, a set of problems involving 
modeling methods such as simulations and optimization were undertaken and then later 
expanded. During these efforts, the library of objects in the modeling infrastructure grew. Each 
of these applications had a basis in actual problems or areas of interest to the logistics 
community. 

Our goal in this research effort is to define an architecture from which component models 
and information technology systems for logistical applications could be rapidly assembled, 
validated, and employed to address important, relevant issues in logistics and related application 
areas. The resulting research efforts led to novel theoretical hybrid modeling methods, unified 
reference models for integrating descriptive models such as simulations with prescriptive 
techniques in optimization and resulted in much needed human-integrated problem solving 
techniques for supporting the EAF concepts. The modeling infrastructure along with the 
applications to operational AF logistics led to viable solutions to complex problems facing the 
Air Force and their move into an EAF environment. 

Feedback obtained through the application of the modeling infrastructure to logistics 
applications were used in further refining the infrastructure thus leading to robust, flexible, and 
powerful integrated tools for improved logistical performance. An overview of the subtasks 
involved in OLK, DIMI, and DLA, and an overview of real-world applications where we 
demonstrated our concepts are outlined in the following section. 

3.1 Air Force Institute of Technology Tasks 


11 



AFIT’s major technical activities involved applying the knowledge from the logistics domain 


analysis efforts to problems of particular importance to the Air Force. 

3.1.1 The Modular Aircraft Support System (MASS) 

The Modular Aircraft Support System (MASS) will design, build, and demonstrate proof-of- 
concept aerospace ground equipment (AGE), multi-functional in design, in modular, multi¬ 
function carts. Utilization of MASS components promise to increase AGE affordability and 
reduce airlift requirements for a deploying AEF. Numerous operational and conceptual issues 
surround MASS development and MASS utilization by an operational unit. This activity will 
expand the Modeling Infrastructure by developing modeling tools to examine and provide 
developers and operators insight into MASS utility. 

3.1.2 Pallet Optimization 

The Logistics Contingency Assessment Tool (LOGCAT) will improve wing-level deployment 
planning and re-planning. The Unit Type Code Development, Tailoring and Optimization 
(UTC-DTO) includes packing 463L cargo pallets. Efficient pallet optimization can reduce total 
pallet requirements, enhance load-master efforts, improve resource allocation planning, and 
improve AF responsiveness. Current optimization approaches are two-dimensionally focused 
while a pallet employs a three-dimensional (3-D) space (length, width, and height). Estimation 
approaches use layers of two-dimensional bins, using bin-packing optimization approaches for 
each layer, to build to the entire pallet. This approach requires strong assumptions about the 
items within each layer. Modern computing techniques can accommodate a direct, 3-D approach 
provided appropriate mathematical formulations of the problem and problem solution techniques 
are defined and implemented. This activity sought to address the theoretical and computational 
issues in the 3-D packing problem. 

12 



3.1.3 Autonomic Logistics 

Autonomic Logistics (AL) is the innovative concept of Strike Warfare Support for the 21 st 
century. AL moves logistics functions from a reactive to a proactive mode utilizing advanced 
diagnostics and support processes. As a key enabler for the Joint Strike Fighter, AL must be 
fully examined and understood before the JSF is operational. This task addressed the AL 
process and sought to first define the AL domain developing abstractions of its key processes 
and applying these to key AL concepts. This was followed by efforts to extend the work, 
expanding the operational utility of the AL software models and demonstrating the capabilities 
of JSF to examine and resolve key AL issues. 

3.2 Wright State University Tasks 

WSU’s major technical activities of the research included: (1) Organization of AF logistics 
knowledge and processes (OLK), (2) development of modeling infrastructure (DIMI), and (3) 
development of decision support systems for logistics applications (DLA), which also includes 
implementation and evaluation of tailored user interfaces for integration with human decision 
makers in the logistics domain. Each of these activities is described in more detail below. 

3.2.1 Organization of AF logistics knowledge and processes (OLK) 

The Organization of AF logistics knowledge and processes (OLK) task includes (a) domain 

analysis, (b) object modeling, (c) optimizationAveb-based simulation components identification, 

and (d) decision support system specification. In this context, domain analysis is the process of 

identifying and organizing knowledge about a class of problems in AF logistics to support the 

description and solution to those problems. This analysis was conducted through results from the 

published literature (Popken, 1992; Narayanan et ah, 1997), field studies at operational sites, and 

13 



interviews with AFRL researchers. Through object-oriented analysis and design, we organized 
the entities, their behavior and interrelationships. Components needed for web-based simulations 
including clock, statistical distributions, random variables, inter-process communication, user 
interfaces, & objects ©f representing logistical entities, as well as optimization components such 
as operators used in genetic algorithms or hooks to math programming packages were identified. 

3.2.2 Development of modeling infrastructure (DIMI) 

The Development of modeling infrastructure (DIMI) task included (a) specification of design 
goals, (b) architectural design and implementation, and (c) evaluation. Design goals of the 
modeling infrastructure (MI) included support for hybrid analysis techniques, interactive systems 
support, modular and reusable software abstractions, and tailored user interface connectivity. 
Design specifications were developed using unified modeling language (UML) and 
implementation was done using Java on a variety of systems ranging from SGI workstations to 
personal digital assistants (e.g., Palm pilot). Palm pilot type devices facilitate the ability of on¬ 
site logisticians to input real-time data from operational environments. Generic interface classes 
were developed and specialized for the different applications. The MI was evaluated in terms of 
how well it represented prototypical scenarios for the suite of AF logistic applications addressed 
in this effort. 

3.2.3 Development of decision support systems for logistics applications (DLA) 

The development of decision support systems for logistics applications (DLA) task included (a) 
identification of a suite of representative applications from AF logistics, (b) development of 
models, (c) generation/refinement of generic software abstractions in the modeling 
infrastructure, (d) model application, (e) design, implementation, and evaluation of tailored user 


14 




interfaces in decision support systems, and (f) generating recommendations for hybrid modeling 
methods improvement and for informed decision support in real-world problems. In addition to 
the applications involving aerospace ground equipment analysis, wing-level deployment re¬ 
planning, and specifically pallet optimization previously identified as falling within AFIT tasks, 
other applications for which AFRL's LOCIS program is useful were considered during the 
research. Appropriate models such as simulations or optimization techniques were developed 
when deemed necessary. The software abstractions in the MI were used for analysis using these 
simulation/optimization methods. User interfaces were developed for the applications and 
tailored for different users. These were evaluated empirically using operational participants. 
Evaluative measures include the extent to which the interfaces are usable and are effective in 
integrating solutions from different modeling techniques. 

3.3 University of Dayton Tasks 

UD’s efforts directly supported the applied research of WSU and particularly AFIT. Their task 
extended the theoretical input modeling constructs of the architecture and addressed critical 
information support and evaluation issues relating to modeling and simulating the myriad 
sources of variability and uncertainty encountered in the logistics and EAF environment. 
Accurate data models are needed to assess the validity of simulation and decision-support 
models and utilize these tools effectively for planning and analyses. Current models generally 
have enormous data demands, typically requiring complete specification of the joint distribution 
of complex multivariate inputs, or imply structures unlikely to be encountered in the real-world 
logistics and EAF environment. This task focused on the development of multivariate data 
models that require only the limited information about inputs expected to be available for 


15 



predictive logistics analysis, namely data that portrays the marginal distributions of the inputs 
and a measure of the correlation between them. 

4. Task Accomplishments 

The previous section of this report laid out the agendas for each of the research tasks. In this 
section we summarize the accomplishments under each of the research tasks for this research 
effort. 

4.1 Air Force Institute of Technology 

The MASS modeling and analysis effort looked at such issues as flight-line travel time, just-in- 
time delivery of support equipment, and examined the sensitivity of MASS reliability to 
measures of operational capability of the deployed force. Model results suggest that the MASS 
system will effectively replace legacy ground equipment as there will be little to no impact on 
mission accomplishment. Further, due to the reduced volume requirements to transport the 
MASS, as compared to the larger, single function legacy units, MASS offers significant 
reductions in logistics footprint requirements. Although still a research and development project, 
sensitivity studies on engineered MASS reliability data show little sensitivity in terms of fielded 
unit requirements due to less than expected reliability levels. 

The pallet packing work developed a true 3-dimensional packing formulation. The 3- 
dimensional packing problem is an extremely difficult combinatorial optimization problem that 
has vexed optimization researchers for a long time. The best past formulation efforts used stacks 
of 2-dimensional packs yielding a quasi-3-dimensional packing formulation. This initial effort 
seems to have at least cracked the initial code and is even getting answers using a non-linear 
code applied to the exact fonnulation for small problems. Due to the combinatorial explosion 


16 



for even modest sized problems, a genetic algorithm solution technique was tested for larger 
problems, again applied to the exact fonnulation. 

The Autonomic Logistics modeling effort focused on building the modeling infrastructure 
component required for the modeling, with less emphasis provided to the conduct of analysis. 
The resulting initial model was named the ALSim (for Autonomic Logistics Simulation). The 
end result was a modeling infrastructure built in Java containing the fundamental classes and 
objects with which to conduct effectiveness analyses for autonomic logistics questions. The 
high-level design in terms of the model object interactions is depicted in Figure 2 below. 



An additional task, supplemental to the basic three previously described, was dubbed the 

robust optimization effort. A particularly perplexing challenge for planners involves 

considering multiple competing scenarios for which a single overall solution is required. We 

would like to evaluate the trade-offs among these many disparate scenarios in a systematic 

17 









fashion, but instead, we have mostly settled for group-based reconciliation. We thus define a 
robust force solution as that solution “providing the best overall outcome as evaluated with 
respect to some set of scenarios each of which has an associated likelihood of occurrence.” We 
treat this multi-scenario space as a composite of the component scenario spaces where each 
component space contributes relative to its likelihood of occurring or relative to its importance 
weight. We then employ a meta-heuristic, such as a genetic algorithm, to search the composite 
multi-scenario space for a “maximizing” solution. Such a solution is robust across the 
component scenarios (with respect to the particular component scenario weights employed). The 
evaluation of any solution in the multi-scenario space is itself a composite function of the 
individual scenario evaluations of that solution. The following Figure 3 outlines the overall 
architecture of our robust optimization. 



Figure 3: Robust Optimization Architecture 

This effort culminated with using a genetic algorithm to search for a robust solution for 
three force planning scenarios where each candidate solution is evaluated using the Combat 


18 






Forces Analysis Model, a large scale linear programming model used by the Air Force for 
weapons allocation and force structure planning. 

Initial work on the MASS task led to a request from the Air Force’s Air Mobility 
Command to develop and prototype a comparative methodology for sizing a support equipment 
force. In particular, AMC personnel were struggling with how best to determine how many of 
the new Self-Generating Nitrogen Servicing Carts (SGNSC) to deploy. Current beliefs within 
the Air Force maintenance community are that there is an over-abundance of support equipment, 
all of which must be maintained. Intrigued by the utilization study results emanating from the 
MASS task, AMC asked AFIT to apply a similar methodology to detennining how to size a 
SGNSC force. This study was undertaken, completed, and briefed (via the thesis defense by 
MacKenna) to the study sponsors. Significant findings in this study included the potential to 
reduce the fielded force by approximately 25% and the insight (previously overlooked) that 
equipment utilization studies must specifically address maintenance personnel utilization as well 
as the purely equipment utilization information normally collected. 

The pallet optimization work was extended into a search for and design of a new 
heuristic for solving the 3-dimensional pallet-packing problem. This new heuristic was designed 
to mimic human intelligence as applied to a 3-dimensional packing situation. Human packing 
behavior was observed and a set of rules was developed based on these observations. These 
rules were then implemented within a solution algorithm, and the algorithm was run against a 
myriad of test problems. These problems were both benchmark problems from the academic 
literature and randomly generated problems of varying difficulty. Overall results were 
comparable to the best know solutions but were obtained at a fraction of the processing costs 
associated with other solution approaches. 

19 



The initial Autonomic Logistics effort focused on building an initial, high-level 
simulation model of the ALSim. The next step was to develop a methodology for adding 
modeling detail to the prognostics health maintenance (PHM) component of the ALSim. The 
initial effort simply calculates the instance the PHM detects degraded perfonnance of a JSF line 
replaceable unit as a constant percentage of the items actual failure time. Increasing model 
fidelity requires adding a probability of detection curve, variable detection time, allowing for 
false positives, and learning curve effects. While the ideal approach to adding these features 
involves analyses and models based on actual data, that data is simply not available. To 
overcome these deficiencies, a simulation was developed to generate a PHM component sensor 
signal suitable for analysis. The Signal Generator is a very generic simulation that builds a 
sensor signal. Once the signal is generated it needs to be analyzed to detennine if and when 
component failure can be predicted. The basic premise is to be able to predict impending failure. 
Discriminant analysis or building an artificial neural network seem best suited to analyzing the 
signal data. The basic approach of both analysis methods is distinguishing between various 
populations. In PHM, we differentiate between a component in a healthy state and a component 
in a failure state. Neural networks tend to have higher accuracy rates than discriminant analysis 
because neural networks use nonlinear functions. However, predicting healthy versus failing 
components is currently a one-dimensional problem (sensor signal). With this in mind, the 
neural network analysis and discriminant analysis should lead to similar classification 
accuracies. The goal is to use the resulting neural network to build two separate distributions (or 
possibly two sets of distributions at different realized failure times) to incorporate directly into 
ALSim, rather than using a constant percentage of failure time to model prediction of failure or 


degradation. One distribution would be used in modeling the uncertainties in the actual time a 

20 



failure or degradation is predicted. The other distribution introduces the reality of false positives 
(predicting a failure or degradation for a healthy component) into the model and allows for 
modeling the uncertainties in time for these events. 

The robust optimization efforts continued again using CFAM and three notional force 
planning scenarios. However, the current effects focused on comparing meta-heuristics 
applicable to robust optimization. In particular, we compared the performance of a genetic 
algorithm (past year efforts) with the performance of the OptQuest meta-heuristic solver. 
OptQuest is based on a heuristic called scatter search and employs a neural network evaluator as 
a means for reducing the number of solution evaluations performed. Research results indicated 
the OptQuest heuristic outperformed the genetic algorithm heuristic. 

4.2 Wright State University 

WSU tasks focused on the infrastructure needed to develop model-based information technology 
systems that support predictive analysis using web-based simulations and tailored user interfaces 
to logistics personnel at different layers of abstraction. These include: (1) Organization of AF 
logistics knowledge and processes (OLK), (2) development of modeling infrastructure (DIMI), 
(3) development of decision support systems for logistics applications (DLA), which also 
includes implementation and evaluation of tailored user interfaces for integration with human 
decision makers in the logistics domain. 

Through field studies and interviews with logisticians at two air bases, and decision 
making activity analysis using observation and semi-structured interviews with production 
superintendents of operational F-16 maintenance units at Hill AFB, UT, we developed a better 
understanding of command and control decisions made by squadron commanders in logistics 


21 



planning. These studies along with review of material associated with the LOCIS program at 
WPAFB, led us to organize logistics knowledge and processes of relevance to planning. 

This domain knowledge became the basis of the development of the modeling 
infrastructure, which is essentially a set of classes and a hierarchy of objects implemented using 
an object-oriented programming language, Java. Objects from the infrastructure can be 
instantiated to model squadron-level maintenance planning. The instantiated model supports 
decision support at three different levels: (1) infonnation presentation only, (2) minimum level 
of support for interactive analysis, and (3) highly interactive system. The decision support 
system takes as input data from simulation runs for prototypical AEF scenarios and provides 
tailored user interfaces depending on levels of support. Both the simulation components and user 
interfaces were programmed using the Java language. 

Two modes of decision support were instantiated for the task of aircraft selection under the 
AEF scenario. One mode simply presented information, while the other provided more 
interactive decision support based on a methodology developed by a WSU student, Todd Kustra, 
for his master’s thesis. These systems were evaluated using maintenance personnel from the 
445 th Air Force Reserve Squadron and Air Force Materiel Command familiar with the elements 
of aircraft selection. Results showed that the interactive decision support system significantly 
decreased the time to complete the task, but did not conclusively demonstrate performance 
accuracy improvement or increased confidence in the generated solution. Figure 4 shows a 
phase-inspection screen developed for this system. 

Kustra’s thesis made practical contributions to information systems research by outlining a 

methodology for creating decision support systems in complex logistics planning. Contributions 

include uncovering decision support needs for the organizational strata of front line supervisors, 

22 



applying current naturalistic decision theory to the logistics arena, and defining a level of 
interaction between the decision maker and the decision support system that accommodates sub¬ 
goal variation while maintaining the structure of the knowledge-based framework. 



Figure 4: Phase Inspection screen #1. 


Use of Image theory to identify decision activity greatly increased the level of detail and 
understanding of the decision process of Production Superintendents. Standard methods for 
identifying decision subtasks do not necessarily direct the method in which those tasks will be 
incorporated into the decision support system. Uncovering the image states of the subject matter 
experts led to the acquisition of two types of decision strategies. These decision strategies, once 
identified, not only changed the order of presentation, but highlighted significant structural 
changes to the algorithms used in providing computer-aided suggestions to the user. 


23 






































Decision support needs for line supervisors in logistics have been largely deferred in 
favor of high visibility management where the infonnational needs are more globally oriented, 
integrating vast amounts of data combined with uncertainty and a heterogeneous perspective. 
Lower levels of management have different needs for decision support than upper level 
managers, but remain just as dependent on infonnational computer support. Large problem 
spaces, even at the squadron level complicate the thorough examination of data and hinder the 
process of shortfall identification, repeat or recurring problem analysis, and determination of 
system patterns on which quality decision making depends. Impactful decision support 
incorporating satisficing heuristics may enable a more direct and immediate application of 
supervision on the production of aircraft sortie generation and on overall squadron production. 

Application of current naturalistic decision theory to the logistics arena provides a 
human-centered perspective that takes advantage of the organic teleological processes inherent 
in human mental schemas. Providing information constrained to fit these processes allow 
decision makers more direct application of pertinent information to affect the generated solution 
within the context of the knowledge-based framework. Fonnalization of the decision makers 
natural choice strategies to evaluate decisions based on compatibility and profitability, adoption 
or progression, abbreviates the decision process reducing internal complexity and confusion, 
thereby reducing decision time. 

The third contribution of the research is the further clarification of the role of humans in 
the human-machine system. By defining a level of interaction between the user and the decision 
support system, image states and goal directed behavior inherent to logistics organizations can be 
applied to the decision process while taking advantage of computer processing speed to identify 


patterns, process heuristics, and make computations. Sub-goals can be evaluated visually, using 

24 



the computer to display graphical representations of information patterns while leaving the 
option to examine the data individually. Progress towards a realistic, useful generated solution 
can be monitored, assessed, and altered, allowing the decision maker to review the solution’s 
compatibility with projected needs. 

In the experiment, the Interactive Decision Support System (IDSS) suggested that greater 
speed can be realized in the decision process. Kustra’s thesis anticipated an increase in 
performance, confidence, and trust in the generated solution, which did not materialize in the 
study. Due to the low number of participants, only general conclusions can be drawn from the 
research to include a suggested increase in solution generation time using the decision support 
system. 

We integrated visualization interfaces developed for simulation with the decision support 
system. We also explored approaches towards integrating human reasoning with soft computing 
and simulation for logistics systems perfonnance analysis. Specifically, we developed an 
approach that integrates genetic algorithms with discrete-event airbase simulations for exploring 
the solution space in the context of aircraft repair time analysis. 

Simulation is a powerful tool often used to test the viability of resource combinations to 
successfully achieve a given mission. Popken (1992) notes with logistics that the high levels of 
complexity and entity-interactions as well as uncertainty make strictly analytical solutions intractable. 
However, simulation does not require the simplifying assumptions needed by analytical models, and can 
handle system complexity and interactions, and account for uncertainty as well. Hence, simulation is a 
powerful instrument for studying the consequences of different choices for "what-if' analysis in fields 
such as airbase logistics. It can be applied to determine the reactions of an airbase under differing 

conditions with various types and amounts of available resources. 

25 



Although simulation plays a crucial role in understanding systems in AF logistics, it is "not a 
design tool" (Mollaghasemi and Evans, 1994). While simulations provide the benefit of aiding decision¬ 
makers, developing realistic simulations of military systems is a complex and formidable undertaking. 
Evolutionary learning is necessary to increase the flexibility of simulation and optimization to deal with 
parameters which may be complex or discontinuous, and to manage multiple, conflicting system 
objectives (Lu et al, 1991). 

Statistical methods, such as designed experiments and the resulting response surface 
methodologies have been successfully applied to integrate optimization with simulation. 

However, when solution spaces are rugged, as found with most complex dynamic systems, then 
systematic techniques such as response surface methodology may not provide the type of results 
desired. Evolutionary computation methods such as genetic algorithms, because they operate on 
the “characteristic space” of a problem, and can potentially leam what types, levels, and 
combinations of parameters are found in the stronger solutions and are thus insensitive to 
solution topologies. 

Figure 5 illustrates the framework for integrating genetic algorithms with simulations for 
the exploration of the solution space. The solution explorer consists of five major modules: the 
Input Specifier, the Simulator, the Encoder/Decoder, the Genetic Algorithm Iterator, and the 
Final Solution Set Generator. 

Genetic algorithms fit into the framework by creating new designs based on the results of 
initial designs and the analyst's goals for the system. The analyst provides these as input into the 
Input Specifier. This input includes data files of the set of initial designs, a quantitative fitness 
function that embodies the performance objectives of the system, and the parameters for the GA 


26 



such as number of iterations and rates of mutation and crossover. The initial design population 
may be manually generated "best guesses" by logisticians, or automatically generated using a 
range of values for different system parameters, and may include the number of times to simulate 
each design to boost statistical confidence. 

The Input Specifier is tightly coupled with the Simulator so that the data files are 
understood and the system parameters needed to evaluate the fitness function are tracked. The 
Simulator executes the system model for the given designs and evaluates the perfonnances based 
on the fitness functions. If designs are evaluated more than once, an average fitness is 
calculated. This data is then passed to the Encoder/Decoder. The Encoder/Decoder receives the 
designs and their corresponding fitness values from the Simulator. It orders the design 
parameters under study. If desired, the parameters can be translated from decimal to binary, 
octal, or other number-bases. These parameters are then fashioned into strings of GA 
chromosomes. Each string begins with a key that marks the size of individual genomes on the 
chromosome. For example, in the chromosome"2132704", the first character, "2," is the key that 
says all genomes are two characters long. The parameters encoded in this chromosome are 13, 

27 and 4. In the context of the repair time analysis problem, “13” could represent the encoded 
number of aircraft, “27” the encoded number of mechanics of a particular type, and “04” the 
encoded number of equipment of a specified type. Decoding works in the opposite direction of 
encoding, breaking the chromosome into genomes, translating between number-bases, and 
structuring the new parameter values so that they can be read by the Simulator. 

The GA Iterator receives the design chromosomes and fitness values from the 
Encoder/Decoder. Using the stochastic binary tournament method, two chromosomes are 


27 



selected randomly from the population, the fittest is reproduced for the next generation, and 
mutation and crossover with the other chromosome produce necessary variation. These next- 
generation chromosomes are fed into the Encoder/Decoder and then into the Simulator. This 
process of Simulator-Encoder-GA Iterator-Decoder continues until the Solution Explorer reaches 
a terminating condition or generation, or the GA Iterator converges on a design, at which point 
the Final Solution Set Generator presents the final generation of designs to the analyst for further 
study. 


28 




Interactive 

Analyzer 




Figure 5. Components For Integrating Genetic Algorithms With Simulation Analysis. 


All the modules for the solution explorer were implemented using the Java programming 
language. The architecture contains classes that provide the infrastructure for any simulations 
(e.g., random number generators, simulation clock, event calendar, etc.), classes to model an 
airbase (e.g., aircraft, scheduler, failure generator, maintenance resources, subsystems, 
information, etc.), and classes useful for the GA implementation. 


29 



































To evaluate the effectiveness of the components of the system, a realistic repair time 
analysis problem was considered, applied to JADIS, and analyzed. The case study was 
conducted on a FX-99 scenario, a prototypical problem in repair time analysis. Statistical 
analysis was performed on the recorded fitness values to determine if significant improvement 
had occurred. Improvement was detennined as significant increase in the average fitness value 
of one generation over that of a preceding generation. 

From the Mann-Whitney test (p = 0.002), one could see that the solution explorer leads to 
significant improvement over the initial designs with just one iteration of the GA. Beyond that, 
however, the GA does not cause meaningful improvement from one generation to the next. 

These findings are supported by the Tukey test which also shows that additional improvement 
after the first generation may require more iterations. This suggests that, the GA becomes less 
effective over time as it approaches a potentially near optimal solution set. The GA produces a 
significant improvement over the original design population in just one generation but the 
magnitude of improvement decreases rapidly after that point. Details of the study can be found in 
Schneider, et ah, In Press. 

Overall the solution explorer explores the design space, saving the analyst from this tedium, 
and presents a final solution set that outperforms the original. The analyst would thus have had 
an opportunity to conduct a detailed analysis on each solution to determine which best met the 
combination of quantitative and qualitative goals. In JADIS, simulation is coupled with a front- 
end optimization routine that uses GA, which saves time by pruning the search space for the 
analyst. As it uses the genetic algorithm, it does not operate on design parameters directly but 
improves the entire population of alternatives under consideration without concern for 


30 



mathematical functions that may not be continuous or even available. The final results from the 
optimization process showed improvements of the initial designs. 

4.3 University of Dayton 

The University of Dayton tasks focused on the modeling and generation of multivariate 
random variables within simulations of logistics systems. The major objective was to evaluate, 
develop, and implement valid models to characterize the dependence between variables whose 
relationships are only known partially, that is, characterized only by their marginal distributions 
and a measure of the correlation between them. 

An exhaustive review of the literature uncovered only a small amount of research in this 
field and confirmed the initial conjecture that existing methods for generating correlated random 
variables assume or imply a specific joint distribution for the random variables generated. 

Careful examination of the resulting joint distributions also showed these to very often be very 
somewhat irregular in nature and inconsistent with common modeling intuition. (For example, 
the following figure depicts the joint probability density function implied by applying a common 
method for generating random vectors of this type when applied to two random variables that 
each have standard normal marginal distributions and a Spearman’s rank correlation of 0.8. The 
fact that certain combinations of the two variables cannot be obtained from this joint distribution, 
especially near their respective means, is surprising and highly counterintuitive.) 


31 




Figure 6: Example Joint Density Function 


Since an unexpected joint distribution (or at least one inconsistent with the real-world 

phenomena being modeled) would obviously render a model invalid, the types of joint 

distributions commonly encountered in logistics simulations were next investigated, using data 

obtained from AFRL/HESR. The resulting analysis revealed, somewhat serendipitously, that no 

combinations of even any two variables in the data sets examined had the type of structure that 

was the primary subject of this research. That is, the variables examined either were 

independent, functionally related, or conditionally related. In each case, sufficient information 

existed so that appropriate joint distributions could be inferred from the known relations between 

the variables and, more importantly, so that they could be simulated validly using standard 

random variate generation methods. Thus, the potential problem envisioned by this portion of 

32 





















































the research was a non-issue for the types of logistics systems being simulated and no special 
purpose methods for random variate generation or analysis are required to ensure model validity. 
Research in the broader area originally proposed continues independently, building on the 
foundation developed in this research project. 

5. Follow-on Work 

5.1 Air Force Institute of Technology 

The research effort completed under the auspices of DAGSI has yielded follow-on research. 
AFIT has one student examining the fundamental algorithms that are required to realize PHM. 

A fundamental assumption of PHM is that advanced sensors will be able to detect, and more 
importantly predict, impending failures. This assumption is based on the belief that a component 
failure will be preceded by some indication that the failure is eminent. If advanced sensors can 
be trained to detect these tell-tale signs, then advanced mechanical and avionic systems can be 
produced that provide a level of “health” awareness. Unfortunately, little has been done in the 
area of algorithm research and development to achieve the promise of PHM. AFIT research is 
focused precisely on this problem. 

In addition, work continues on extending the ALSim model. The goals for this model 
include eventually providing a model useful for those program offices involved in prognostics 
and autonomic logistics. Since such efforts are planned not only for existing aircraft, but also for 
future aircraft, there is a real potential for providing a useful tool for ALSim and PHM-related 
analyses. 

5.2 Wright State University 


33 



The Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Human Effectiveness Directorate has funded a 
small-scale follow-on effort to WSU through KLSS (Kelley’s Logistics Support Systems), a 
Miami Valley Industry as a contract vehicle. This effort is aimed at supporting research on real¬ 
time interactive scheduling in Air Force logistics. Work has continued on the modeling 
infrastructure under the DAGSI funded effort to incorporate additional features in supporting 
real-time interactive scheduling. 

On a related research topic, Intel Corp. has funded an effort that enabled the use of the 
architecture to a supply chain problem involving modeling of logistic processes. Subhashini 
Ganapathy from WSU completed her master’s thesis in this area in Summer 2001. 

In addition, WSU teamed with AFIT, KLSS, and Boeing to submit a large proposal to the 
Navy on modeling Naval logistics. Although the proposal received positive reviews, it was not 
funded. 

6, Conclusions and Summary 

The DAGSI sponsored research effort, Models, Web-Based Simulations, and Integrated Analysis 
Techniques For Improved Logistical Performance, provided an incredibly beneficial research 
opportunity to the faculty and student members involved in the research. The combination of 
theoretical examinations coupled with applied research into actual Air Force problems provided 
an ideal synergy for the particular expertise each of us brought to the effort. 

The overall research program was to be evaluated on the extent to which the research 
results are used in Air Force systems, the number of refereed papers, number of masters thesis 
and Ph.D. dissertations completed. The appendices to this report provide a gauge of how well 
we accomplished our goals. Appendix A lists the numerous participants in this effort. Appendix 


34 



B lists the 11 technical papers produced through the research accomplished. These papers 
represent archival journal entries and submissions as well as national and international 
conference proceedings. Appendix C lists the 23 presentations made to publicize this research. 
These presentations include technical interchanges as well as well- kn own national and 
international conferences. Finally, Appendix D lists the 10 Masters theses supported by and 
produced related to this research. 

Bibliography 

Lu, S. C-Y., Tcheng, D. K., and Yerramareddy, S. (1991). Integration of simulation, learning 
and optimization to support engineering design. Annals of the CIRP . 40(1), 143-146. 

Mollaghasemi, M. and Evans G. W. (1994). Multicriteria design of manufacturing systems 
through simulation optimization. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics . 24(9), 
1407-1411. 

Popken, D. A. (1992). An object-oriented simulation environment for airbase simulation. 
Simulation . 59(5), 328-338. 

Schneider, N. L., S. Narayanan, C. Patel, T. Carrico, and R. Hill. (In Press). Integration of 
genetic algorithms with airbase simulations for repair time analysis. International Journal of 
Industrial Engineering . 


35 



Appendix A: List of Key Participants 


A.l Principal Investigators, Faculty Members. 

HILL, RAYMOND R., Jr., Lt Col, USAF, Associate Professor of Operations Research, Dept 
of Operational Sciences (AFIT/ENS); B.S., Mathematics, Eastern Connecticut State University, 
1983; M.S., Air Force Institute of Technology, 1988; Ph.D., The Ohio State University, 1996. Lt 
Col LTill’s research interests include simulation and optimization with ongoing funded research 
performed for multiple AF Battlelabs, Air Staff agencies, the LMA and AFRL/HES. Tel. 
937.255.6565 Ext. 4323 (DSN 785); FAX 937.656.4943 (DSN 986); e-mail: ray.hill@afit.edu 

MILLER, J. O., Lt Col, USAF, Assistant Professor of Operations Research, Dept of 
Operational Sciences (AFIT/ENS); B.S., United States Air Force Academy, 1980; M.B.A., 
University of Missouri at Columbia, 1983; M.S., Air Force Institute of Technology, 1987; Ph.D., 
The Ohio State University, 1997. Lt Col Miller’s areas of interest include simulation, operational 
modeling, and ranking and selection methods. Tel 937.255.6565 Ext. 4326 (DSN 785); FAX 
937.656.4943 (DSN 986); e-mail: john.miller@afit.edu 

MOORE, JAMES T., Ph.D., Associate Professor of Operations Research, Dept of Operational 
Sciences (AFIT/ENS); B.A., Mathematics, University of Colorado, 1974; M.B.A., The 
University of Wyoming, 1978; M.S., Operations Research, Air Force Institute of Technology, 
1981; Ph.D., Mechanical Engineering (Operations Research), The University of Texas at Austin, 
1988. Dr. Moore's research interests include optimization, mathematical programming, integer 
programming, scheduling, and heuristic search methods. He has done sponsored research for Air 
Force Studies and Analyses Agency, Air Mobility Command, Air Force Materiel Command, Air 
Force Space Command, United States Strategic Command, and US Army Recruiting Command. 
Tel 937.255.6565 Ext. 4337 (DSN 785); FAX 937.656.4943 (DSN 986); e-mail: 
james. moore@afit. edu 

KOUBEK, RICHARD, J. Ph.D., Formerly Professor and Chair, Department of Biomedical, 
Industrial, and Human Factors Engineering at Wright State University; Ph.D., industrial 
engineering, Purdue, 1988. He recently became Department Head of Industrial and 
Manufacturing Engineering at Penn State. Dr. Koubek's research interests are in human 
computer interaction, usability, and cognitive ergonomics. He has published numerous refereed 
technical articles in these areas and has directed research projects funded by National Science 
Foundation, Office of Naval Research, and the US Postal service. He is Editor of the 
International Journal of Cognitive Ergonomics and is a member of the Editorial Board for the 
International Journal of Human Factors in Manufacturing and the International Journal of 
Human-Computer Interaction. He has recently co-edited two books— Design of Computing 
Systems: Cognitive Considerations and Design of Computing Systems: Social and Ergonomic 
Considerations. Tel 937.775.5045; Fax 937.775.7364; e-mail: rkoubek@cs.wright.edu . 

NARAYANAN, S., Ph.D., P.E., Associate Professor and Interim Chair, Department of 
Biomedical, Industrial and Human Factors Engineering at Wright State University; Ph.D., 

36 




Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 1994. Dr Narayanan’s 
research interests are in modeling and analysis of complex systems and understanding and aiding 
human decision making through computational tools. His domains of interest include logistic 
systems, remote vehicle command and control, discrete manufacturing, and navigation of large, 
multi-media information sources. He has published over 50 technical articles in these areas and 
obtained sponsored research of about $2 million as a principal investigator in the last five years 
from AFOSR, AFRL, State of Ohio, Intel Corp., and LEXIS-NEXIS. Tel 937.775.5046; Fax 
937.775.7364; e-mail: snarayan@cs.wright.edu . 

MYKYTKA, EDWARD F., Ph.D. Professor, Dept, of Engineering Management and Systems, 
University of Dayton; B.S., Mathematics, University of Dayton, 1976; M.S., Industrial 
Engineering, University of Iowa, 1978; Ph.D., Systems Engineering, University of Arizona, 
1983. Dr. Mykytka’s research interests include simulation modeling and analysis, quality and 
reliability improvement, and applied statistics. He has supported major modeling, analysis, and 
education efforts for the C-17 Systems Program Office, AMC, the Defense Modeling and 
Simulation Office, and other DoD agencies. Tel 937.229.2238; FAX 937.229.2698; e-mail: 
emykytka@engr. udayton. edu 


A.3 Principal Investigators, Masters Students 

AFIT (MS Thesis Completed) 

Brian Ballew 
Erhan Baltacioglu 
Barry Bennett 
Gokay Bulut 
Reginald Festejo 
James MacKenna 
Michael Malley 
Rene Rebulanan 

WSU (MS Thesis Completed) 

Todd Kustra 
Subhashini Ganapathy 


UP 

Brian Rizzoli 

A.4 Principal Investigators, Air Force Research Laboratory 

CHRISTOPHER K. CURTIS, AFRL/HESR, (937) 255-6718, Chris.Curtis@he.wpalb.af.mil . 
Current position is Advance Logistics Project Air Expeditionary Force (ALP-AEF) Initiative 
Program Manager. Will also become the Deputy Program Manager for Logistics Control and 
Information Support (LOCIS). Received BSEE in 1985 from University of Cincinnati. 


37 








BARB MASQUELIER, AFRL/HESR, (937) 656-7005, Barb.Masquelier@he.wpafb.mil . 
Barbara L Masquelier is a senior industrial engineer for the Logistics Readiness Branch, Air 
Force Research Laboratory. Her major research interests include enhancement of human 
performance in complex logistics systems, applications of wearable computer technology, and 
information requirements analysis. She has a M. S. in Logistics Management from the Air Force 
Institute of Technology and a B. S. in Human Factors Engineering from Wright State University. 

MATTHEW TRACY, AFRL/HESS, (937) 255-8360, Matthew.Tracy@he.wpafb.mil 
Matthew C. Tracy II is a senior mechanical engineer for the Sustainment Logistics Branch, Air 
Force Research Laboratory. His major research interests include enhanced support equipment, 
reliability measurement methodologies, and application of advanced program management 
techniques. Positions have ranged from aircraft maintenance to system program office support 
and laboratory program management. He has a M. S. in Management Science and a B. S. in 
Mechanical Engineering from the University of Dayton. 


38 



Appendix B: List of Technical Papers Produced 


N. L. Schneider, S. Narayanan, C. Patel, T. Carrico, and R. Hill. 2001. Integration of genetic 
algorithms with airbase simulations for repair time analysis. Accepted by International Journal 
of Industrial Engineering. 

T. Kustra & S. Narayanan. (Abstract Accepted, Full Chapter Under Review). A decision support 
system for logistics systems analysis using image theory and work domain analysis. For 
Handbook of Cognitive Task Design, E. Hollnagel (Ed.), Lawrence Erlbaum. 

O’ Fearna, F. C., R. R. Hill and J. O. Miller. 2001. A Methodology to Reduce Aerospace Ground 
Equipment Requirements for an Air Expeditionary Force. Accepted for publication by 
International Journal of Logistics: Research and Applications. 

MacKenna, J., R. R. Hill, and W. Cunningham. 2001. Using Simulation to Determine Support 
Equipment Inventory Levels. Submitted to Journal of Logistics, November 2001. 

Baltacioglu, E., J. T. Moore, and R. R. Hill. 2001. The Distributor’s Three Dimensional Pallet- 
Packing Problem: A Human Intelligence-Based Heuristic Approach. Submitted to European 
Journal of Operational Research. April 2001. 

Hill, R. R. and G. McIntyre. 2000. A Methodology for Robust, Multi-Scenario Optimization. 
Phalanx, Vol 33, No. 3, September 2000. 

N. L. Schneider, S. Narayanan, C. Patel. (2000). Integrating genetic algorithms and interactive 
simulations for airbase logistics planning. Soft Computing in Industrial Applications, Suzuki, Roy, 
Ovaska, Furuhashi and Dote (Eds), Springer-Verlag, London, UK, 309 - 317 

Miller, J. O., M. Malley, and R. R. Hill. 2001. Modeling Prognostic Health Management for the 
Joint Strike Fighter. Proceedings of the 10 th Annual Industrial Engineering Research 
Conference, Dallas, TX, 20-22 May 2001. 

Hill, R. R., G. McIntyre, and S. Narayanan. 2001. Genetic Algorithms for Model Optimization. 
Proceedings of Simulation Technology and Training Conference (SimTechT) 2001, Simulation 
Industry Association of Australia, Canberra, Australia, May 28-31 2001. 

S. Narayanan, 2001. Presented an invited keynote tutorial on “web-based interactive 
simulations” at the IASTED’s advanced simulation and modeling conference in Marbella, Spain, 
2001 . 

Hill, R. R., J. O. Miller, and G. A. McIntyre. 2001. Applications of Discrete Event Simulation Models 
to Military Problems. Accepted for publication in Proceedings of the 2001 Winter Simulation 
Conference, B. A. Peters, J. S. Smith, D. J. Medeiros and M. W. Rohrer, eds.. Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers, Washington DC. 


39 



S. Narayanan. 2000. Web-based simulations'. Introductory Tutorial, Proceedings of the 2000 Winter 
Simulation Conference, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Washington DC. 


40 



Appendix C: Presentations Made 


“Incorporating Utilization Information to Size Aircraft Support Inventories” R. Hill, Institute for 
Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS) Conference, Miami, FL, 5-8 
Nov, 2001. 

“Applications of Discrete Event Simulation Modeling to Military Problems” R. Hill, G. 

McIntyre and J. O. Miller, 2001 Winter Simulation Conference, Washington, DC. December 
2001 . 

“Genetic Algorithms for Model Optimization” R. Hill, G. McIntyre, and S. Narayanan, 
Simulation Technology and Training Conference (SimTechT) 2001, Canberra, Australia, May 
28-31 2001. 

“The Distributer’s Three-Dimensional Pallet-Packing Problem: A Human Intelligence-Based 
Heuristic Approach”, R. Hill, E. Baltacioglu, and J. T. Moore, Military Operations Research 
Society Symposium, Annapolis, MD, 12-14 Jun 01. 

“Applications of Discrete Event Modeling to Military Problems” G. McIntyre, J. O. Miller, and 
R. Hill, 2000 Winter Simulation Conference, Orlando, FI. December 2000. 

“Modeling the Modular Aircraft Support System for Improved Air Force Logistics” R. Hill, R. 
Festejo, and J.O. Miller, Industrial Engineering Research Conference 2000, Cleveland OH, 23 
May 2000. 

“Modeling the Joint Strike Fighter’s Autonomic Logistics System” J.O Miller, R. Rebulanan, 
and R. Hill, Industrial Engineering Research Conference 2000, Cleveland OH, 23 May 2000. 

“A Methodology and Experiment Using Robust, Multi-Scenario Optimization Techniques” R. 
Hill, B. Bennett and G. McIntyre, 68 th Military Operations Research Society Symposium, US Air 
Force Academy, June 2000. 

“Modeling Prognostic Health Management for the Joint Strike Fighter” J.O. Miller, M. Malley, 
and R. R. Hill. Industrial Engineering Research Conference 2001, Dallas, TX, 20-22 May 2001. 

“Web-based simulations” S. Narayanan. 2000 Winter Simulation Conference, Orlando, FI. 
December 2000. 

“Models, Web-Based Simulations, And Integrated Analysis Techniques For Improved Logistical 
Performance” Project Team, Technical Interchange with AFRL/HES, October 1999. 

“Models, Web-Based Simulations, and Integrated Analysis Techniques For Improved Logistical 
Performance” Project Team, Technical Interchange with AFRL/HES, March 2001. 

41 



“Models, Web-Based Simulations, And Integrated Analysis Techniques For Improved Logistical 
Performance” R. Hill, Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute Aerospace Basic Research 
Program Symposium, February 2000. 

“Models, Web-Based Simulations, And Integrated Analysis Techniques For Improved Logistical 
Performance” R. Hill, Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute Aerospace Basic Research 
Program Symposium, February 2001. 

“Robust Multi-Scenario Optimization of an Air Expeditionary Force Structure Applying Genetic 
Algorithms to the Combat Forces Assessment Model” B. Bennett. Department of Operational 
Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio, Thesis Defense, 

March 2000. 

“An Analytical Comparison of the Reduced Footprint of the Modular Aircraft Support System 
(MASS) vs. Current Aerospace Ground Equipment (AGE)” R. Festejo. Department of 
Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio, Thesis 
Defense, March 2000. 

“The Distributor’s Three-Dimensional Pallet-Packing Problem: A Mathematical Formulation 
and Heuristic Solution Approach” B. Ballew. Department of Operational Sciences, Air Force 
Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio, Thesis Defense, March 2000. 

“A Simulation of ALS Using Java Programming Language” R. Rebulanan. Department of 
Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio, Thesis 
Defense, March 2000. 

“Requirements-Based Methodology For Determining Age Inventory Level” J. A. MacKenna. 
Department of Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, 
Ohio, Thesis Defense, March 2001. 

“Robust Multi-Scenario Optimization Of An Air Expeditionary Force Structure Applying Scatter 
Search To The Combat Forces Assessment Model” G. Bulut. Department of Operational 
Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio, Thesis Defense, 

March 2001. 

“A Methodology For Simulating The Joint Strike Fighter’s (JSF) Prognostics And Health 
Management System” M. Malley. Department of Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of 
Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio, Thesis Defense, March 2001. 

“The Distributer’s Three-Dimensional Pallet-Packing Problem: A Human Intelligence-Based 
Heuristic Approach” E. Baltacioglu. Department of Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of 
Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio, Thesis Defense, March 2001. 


42 



Appendix D: Masters Theses Produced 


T. W. Kustra. 2000. A methodology to develop interactive decision support systems for complex 
United States Air Force logistics planning. Department of Biomedical, Industrial, & Human 
Factors Engineering, Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio. 

S. Ganapathy. 2001. Model-based decision support system for supply chain analysis. Department 
of Biomedical, Industrial, & Human Factors Engineering, Wright State University, Dayton, 

Ohio. 

Bennett, Barry. 2000. Robust Multi-Scenario Optimization of an Air Expeditionary Force Force 
Structure Applying Genetic Algorithms to the Combat Forces Assessment Model. Department of 
Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio. 
AFIT/GOR/ENS/00M-02 

Festejo, Reginald. 2000. An Analytical Comparison of the Reduced Footprint of the Modular 
Aircraft Support System (MASS) vs. Current Aerospace Ground Equipment (AGE). Department 
of Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio. 
AFIT/GOR/ENS/00M-13 

Ballew, Brian. 2000. The Distributor’s Three-Dimensional Pallet-Packing Problem: A 
Mathematical Formulation and Heuristic Solution Approach. Department of Operational 
Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio. 
AFIT/GOR/ENS/OOM-01 

Rebulanan, Rene. 2000. A Simulation of ALS Using Java Programming Language. Department 
of Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio. 
AFIT/GOR/ENS/00M-19 

MacKenna, James A. 2001. Requirements-Based Methodology For Determining Age Inventory 
Level. Department of Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson 
AFB, Ohio. AFIT/GLM/ENS/01M-15 

Bulut, Gokay. 2001. Robust Multi-Scenario Optimization Of An Air Expeditionary Force Force 
Structure Applying Scatter Search To The Combat Forces Assessment Model. Department of 
Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio. 
AFIT/GOR/ENS/01M-03 

Malley, Michael. 2001. A Methodology For Simulating The Joint Strike Fighter’s (Jsf) 
Prognostics And Health Management System. Department of Operational Sciences, Air Force 
Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio. AFIT/GOR/ENS/01M-11 


43 



Baltacioglu, Erhan. 2001. The Distributer’s Three-Dimensional Pallet-Packing Problem: A 
Human Intelligence-Based Heuristic Approach. Department of Operational Sciences, Air Force 
Institute of Technology, Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio. AFIT/GOR/ENS/01M-02 


44 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 074-0188 

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of the collection of information, including 
suggestions for reducing this burden to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, 

Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to an penalty for failing to comply with a collection of 
information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 

PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 

1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 
14-12-2001 

2. REPORT TYPE 

Technical Report 

3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 

Jun 1999-Sep 2001 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

AFIT-HE-99-10 

Models, Web-Based Simulations, and Integrated Analysis Techniques for Improved 5 b GRANT NUMBER- 

Logistical Performance 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 


6. AUTHOR(S) 


Hill, Raymond R., S. Narayanan, and Edward F. Mykytka 


5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAMES(S) AND ADDRESS(S) 

Air Force Institute of Technology 
Department of Operational Sciences (AFIT/ENS) 

2950 P Street, Building 640 
WPAFB OH 45433-7765 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute 
Attn: Dr. Frank Moore 
3155 Research Blvd., Suite 205 
Kettering, Ohio 45420 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED. 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

AFIT/EN-TR-01 -02 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 

DAG SI 


11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 



14. ABSTRACT 

In February 1999, a team of researchers from the Air Force Institute of Technology, the Wright State University and the 
University of Dayton teamed with researchers within the Air Force Research Laboratory, Logistics Research Division, Logistics 
Readiness Branch to propose a research agenda entitled, “Models, Web-based Simulations, and Integrated Analysis Techniques for 
Improved Logistical Performance.” This proposal was submitted in response to the initial Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute 
request for proposals under the Joint Air Force Research Laboratory/ DAGSI Basic Research Program. The particular project 
supported as HE 15 within the Human Effectiveness Directorate and entitled Logistics Readiness. The proposal successfully 
competed and was selected for contract award. Between June 1999 and July 2001, the researchers from the collaborating institutes 
pursued a collective research agenda, one that was closely aligned with the mission of the AFRL Logistics Readiness Branch as well 
as other organizations within the United States Air Force. This final technical report summarizes the research efforts under the 
contract, AFIT-HE-99-10. This report includes descriptions of the accomplishments of the research as well as listings of the 
numerous papers produced, presentations made, and masters thesis completed directly supporting, and supported by this research 
effort. 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 

Logistics, simulation, web-based simulation, JAVA, human factors, prognostics, ontology 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

a. REPO 

b. ABSTRA 

c. THIS PAGE 

RT 

CT 

u 

u 

u 



ABSTRACT 


18. NUMBER 
OF 

PAGES 


19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

Raymond R. Hill Jr., Lt Col, USAF (ENS) 

19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code) 

(937) 255-6565, ext 4323; e-mail: Ray.Hill@afit.edu 


46 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 



























47 



