(VIASA 



FREEDOM ifihii 



=^ -N 



Space Station Evolution 
Beyond the Baseline 



SSF Growth Concepts & Configurations 




William M. Cirillo 

NASA Langley Research Center 

SSFO/APO 

August?, 1991 



.,.T„.,, 



i 



Space Station Engineering 



.LanCSSFO- 






' %•,'-.} ' 



V/1 



in 

O 
pi 

. O 

5 

D 

> 


m 



OBTECTIVES 

There are three primary objectives for the Space Station Freedom (SSF) Growth Concepts and Configurations study task. 

The first objective is the development of evolutionary SSF concepts consistent with user requirements and program constraints. In 
the past this objective has been met by defining separate evolution growth concepts for the support of different classes of user 
missions, such as multidisciplinary research and development concepts and Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) transportation node 
concepts. The approach that is now being used is to derive the full set of user mission requirements for both R&D and SEI and 
integrate them into one set of SSF evolution concepts, referred to as continued development phases. 

A detailed discussion of SSF user requirements and an overview of the methods used to derive the requirements for the 
restructured SSF is provided in a paper by Kevin Leath, Rudy Saucillo, and Karen Brender entitled, "Evolution User Requirements 
for the Restructured Space Station" enclosed in this volume. The final results of their analysis conclude that independent of which 
user mission model (SEI or R&D) is used, the total end user requirements are nearly identical. The results indicate that 
approximately 150 kW of power, a crew of 13-14, and additional laboratory volume equivalent to the first U.S. Laboratory module are 
required to meet future user needs. In addition, orthogonal growth structure is required to support SSF systems and user needs. 

The second primary objective is to ensure the feasibility of the proposed SSF evolution concepts at the system level. This includes, 
but is not limited to, an assessment of SSF evolution flight control analysis, logistics assessment, maintainability, and operational 
considerations. 

The final objective is to ensure compatibility of the baseline SSF design with the derived evolution requirements at both the system 
and element (habitat modules, power generation equipment, etc.) levels. 



I.-1 



• ft 1^^^^ —-.—...,^....-.,.--.-.^^^ ^ ^^ ___— _ FREEDOM //f/ff --v 

SSF Ewolution Conflgyration Assessment '^^ ^ 

Objectiwes 






Develop evolutionary concepts for Space Station Freedom 
consistent with user requirements and program constraints 

Ensure feasibility of evolution concepts at the system level 
(controllability, logistics, maintainability, etc.) 

Ensure compatibility of baseline design with evolution 
requirements at the system (e.g., configuration) and 
element (e.g. habitation module) levels 



Space Station Engineering — LaRC SSFO- 



PRODUCTS 

The main product of this study is the development of SSF evolution configuration phases and growth hardv/are elements. Each 
evolution phase description will provide an overview of functional capabilities, physical characteristics, and performance 
characteristics. The physical characteristics include the identification of each phases mass, inertias, ballistic coefficient, and center of 
gravity. Each of these items is used to drive the Langley Research Center's in-house performance analysis tool, IDEAS 2. IDEAS 2 
has the capability to perform simulation of vehicle flight dynamics, orbital lifetime, and reboost propellant assessment. In addition, 
graphic representations of the various evolution concepts are provided to further enhance study and design activities. 

The primary source for collection of configuration analysis is the SSF Engineering Data Book, which was developed and is 
maintained at Langley Research Center. 

Another important product of this study is the development of element growth concepts. This includes performing cost and weight 
trades, assessing the impacts on the baseline design of either incorporating or not incorporating the different growth elements, and 
performing a preliminary operational assessment. This process will allow the identification of critical scars that need to be included 
in the baseline SSF design, as well as, provide for an initial input to the subsystem designers for detailed design-for-growth activities. 






NASA 



FREEDOM f/f/^f 



SSF Evolution Configuration Assessinent 

Products 



« Configuration descriptions of evolution phases and growth 
elements 

■ Primary input to the Engineering Data Book and 
associated data books 

- Groundrule data for distributed systems and operations 
tasks 

« Element growth concepts including cost and weight trades, 
impacts on baseline design, operational impacts, and 
Impacts of non-inclusion of design accommodations 

- Allows identification of "critical scars" and provides 
subsystem designers a "running start" on detailed 
design-for-growth activities 






Space Station Engineering — LaPC SSFO. 



APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY 

The approach used to develop the SSF evolution configurations has three primary steps. The first step involves the completion of 
the individual SSF advanced studies to the point where configuration inputs to the study are critical. As an example, the module 
pattern trade study which is currently being conducted has several trades, such as node to module interface concerns and remote 
manipulator reach access, which can be assessed independent of overall SSF configuration design. On the other hand, such trades as 
module pattern impact on SSF flight attitude and viewing obstruction assessments, can only be performed using an integrated SSF 
configuration which takes into account the results of other trade studies that are being conducted concurrently. 

The second step is integrating all of the trade studies which are currently being conducted into a large number of potential 
configuration options. 

The third step is using a tiered. Figure of Merit (FOM) method to assess all of the possible configuration options. The Figure of Merit 
method is described in more detail on the following chart. 

The final result of the process is the ranked series of configuration options. Several of the top ranked options will be maintained for 
consideration because of the fact that not all of the mission parameters used in the FOM process have been fully defined at this time 
and are subject to change with evolving user and mission requirements. 






IM/^A 



SSF Evolution Configuration Assesstnent 

Approach & Methodology 



FREEDOM ^/■^^/~ 










Growth 
power 








Growth 
structure 








Module 
pattern 






LTV ASF 


— 





SSF Advanced 
Studies 



Config D 


Config C 


Config B 


Config A 





Study 
Results 


Cost 

Mission 
Accomm. 

Facility 
Ops 

Program 
Risk 


• 


























— 


— 











Configuration Figures of Merit 
Options 




Configuration 




Config D 


Config C 


Config B 


— 


Config A 



Configuration 
Evaluations 

~ — " LaRCSSFO 



7 



TIERED FIGURES OF MERIT 

In order to handle the large trade space that results from the SSF evolution configuration process described earlier a method based 
on utility theory, which transforms both quantitative and qualitative criteria into non-dimensional utility scale for comparison of 
dissimilar figures of merit, is chosen. This benefits of this method are that the process is systematic, retraceable in nature, and allows 
for interaction among the key decisions makers that are involved. The utilization method used in this study consists of he 
following major steps, (1) identification of the Figures of Merit (criteria); (2) ranking of the criteria in order of importance; (3) 
weighting of the criteria based on rankings; (4) measuring each SSF evolution concept with respect to the selection criteria and then 
normalizing; (5) multiplying a set of derived utility values by the criteria weight and summing; (6) ranking the SSF evolution 
concepts based on the weighted utilities. 

A further detailed description of this entire process is provided in a paper by J.E. Hendershot, McDonnell Douglas Space Systems 
Company, R.R. Corban and S.M. Stevenson, NASA Lewis Research Center, entitled, "Fuel Systems Architecture Evaluation Criteria 
and Concept Evaluation Methodology", AIAA 91-3479, as part of the AIAA/NASA/OAI Conference on Advanced SEI Technologies, 
September 4-6, 1991, Cleveland, Ohio. 






/" 



NASA 



FREEDOM m/-^^/ 



SSF Evolution Configuration Assessment 

Tiered Figures of Merit 



Tiered Figures of Merit 



Level I Requirements 



Tier 1 Criteria 



T 



Level li/lll Support 



t 



Tier 2 Criteria 



I 



NASA/Contractor 
Study Results 

A 



Tier 3 & 4 Criteria 
as Required 



SSF R&D Utilization 



SEI Utilization 




I 



Ottier HQ Advanced 
Projects Requirements 



SSF Evolution 
Growth Path 




SSF Advanced Studies 



Distributed Systems 



Dperations&Maintenanc e 



User Requirements 



LVC Hangar 



Structural Growth 



Module Growth 
Pattern 



RC SSFO 



EVALUATION CRITERIA 

The Tier 1 and Tier 2 Figures of Merit (Evaluation Criteria) are shown. A detailed discussion of each of the criteria is currently being 
developed under separate cover. 






IVI/\SA 



FREEDOM m/Wz 



SSF Evolution Configuration Assessment 

Evaluation Criteria 



^ 



TIER1 




TIER 2 



LaRC SSFO 



CONFIGURATION DEVELOPMENT 

The development of potential SSF evolution configuration candidates involves the inputs of a multitude of on-going SSF trade 
studies as shown in the accompanying illustration. Four of the trades will be discussed in more detail in the following charts. They 
are the module pattern study, the life sciences centrifuge facility location study, the growth structure study, and the Lunar Transfer 
Vehicle (LTV) Assembly Servicing Facility (ASF) study. 

At present, most of these studies are on-going, so a final ranking of all of the possible SSF evolution configurations has not been 
completed. A set of rapid prototype evolution configurations has been developed based on the trades that have been completed to 
date and are shown at the end of the presentation. These rapid prototype configurations were developed in order to provide a 
preliminary set of SSF evolution phase concepts to those advanced systems studies that need configurations against which to 
perform their respective trade studies. 



4i 



rUASA 



FREEDOM J^^^ 



SSF Ewolution Configuration Assessment 

Configyration Dewelopment 




^ 
u 



Module Pattern/ 
Centrifuge 



Power Generation 




Candidate Evolution 
Configurations 





• Operations 

« Distributed Systems 

« Logistics 

« NLS/CTV Interfaces 

« Distributed Systems 




Growth Structure/ 
Utility Distribution 




LTV Vehicle 
Accommodation 



.LaRCSSFO. 



KCS 5/13.91 IO:nn 



MODULE PATTERN STUDY OBTECTIVES 

Based on the number of changes to the baseline SSF configuration that have resulted from the resent SSF Restructuring activity 
(segmented modules vs. 44 ft., lower total pressurized volume, etc.) it was determined to re-evaluate the SSF evolution module 
pattern assessment that was performed two years earlier in order to determine the most favorable SSF evolution module pattern. 
As previously discussed, this trade focuses primarily on module pattern specific issues such as external operations and utility 
interfaces between module pattern elements. Areas such as flight attitude and viewing will need to take into account other trade 
study results which involve the use of an integrated SSF evolution configuration concepts. 






W/^3^ -—-————— -----^---^— —--—----— —-^^ FREEDOM /^y/ --x 

Module Pattern Growth Concepts 

Study Objectives ar.d Restructur-ing Issues 

«* In light of recent SSFP changes, options for module pattern 
growth are being revisited. Differences from previous trade 
study include: 

- Growth from PMC vs. AC 

- Segmented modules vs. 44 ft modules 

- Module addition along transverse boom not possible due to TCS radiator 
location 

- Lower total pressurized volume requirements 
» Analysis is inititally focusing on module pattem-specificlssues 

- External operations including growth pressurized element assembly and 
Shuttle payload exchange 

- Utility interface and baseline scar requirements 

• After other utilization/configuration issues are resolved; 
additional analyses will be performed 

- TEA, momentum management, microgravity environment 

- Viewing 
-Etc. 

-__^ .. -~ — — ^ _ — ___________________ LaRCSSFO 



EVOLUTION MODULE PATTERN 

The SSF evolution module pattern shown has been designed to accommodate the SSF utilization resource requirements determined 
earlier. The evolution module pattern begins with adding one additional habitat and one additional laboratory module, along with 
two resource nodes, to the PMC module pattern, in the direction of flight. Additionally, a second four man Assured Crew Return 
Vehicle (ACRV) is added on the zenith side of the starboard growth node. 

The next phase of module pattern growth adds two habitat module and two resource nodes in the nadir direction from the baseline 
resource nodes as illustrated. The two additional nodes allow for attachment locations for the two pressurized logistics carriers 
which are now required, along with the third and fourth ACRVs. 

The benefits of this module pattern over previously studied module patterns is that it provides better viewing of SSF operations 
from the cupolas, provides additional resource node attach points for future pressurized elements, and requires shorter utility runs 
for growth elements. This configuration still does solve all of the problems associated with evolution module pattern assembly and 
operations, but does represent the best configuration to date. 









FREEDOM ^j;-f/~^^ 






Airlock 1 



ACRV1 



Cupola 1 



Centrifuge 
Facility 




Growth Nodes 3 and 4 



PLM1and2 



Growtli A/L 



Possible Location of PLM, Pocket Lab or Lunar Command Module 



Growth Nodes 5 and 6 



ACRV 3 and 4 i 



LaRC SSFO 



CENTRIFUGE STUDY SCOPE 

The purpose of the life sciences centrifuge study is to access the post-PMC accommodation options for a pressurized 2.5 meter 
centrifuge facihty and recommend an implementation with minimum impacts to the baseline program. The study includes an 
assessment of node accommodation of the centrifuge verse alternative options, attachment location options, and a utility 
requirements and resource impacts assessment. In addition, the study will identify centrifuge facility drivers and options for the 
evolution phase module pattern. 



■"J 



^^^^ 



SSF Evolution Configuration Assessment 

Centrifuge Study Scope 



FREEDOM I^/^J 



Purpose of study is to assess post-PMC accommodation 
options and recommend an implementation with minimum 
impact to the baseline design 

- Node accommodation vs. alternatives 

- Attach location options 

- Utility requirements and resource impacts 

An additional objective is to identify centrifuge facility 
location drivers/options for the Evolution Phase module 
pattern 



^ 



Space Station Engineering .LaRC SSFO- 






LIFE SCIENCE CENTRIFUGE ACCOMMODATION OPTIONS 

In addition to using a common resource node as is currently being proposed, this study investigates using four alternate pressurized 
facilities as shown. Each of the facilities provides differing amounts of rack space to the user, which is a primary importance to the 
life science community. A minimum of two double racks is currently required in order to meet the basic life science user 
requirements. In addition, a number of SSF system racks, based on pressurized volume amount, must be accommodated in each 
element. 

This study is currently undergoing final review. A more complete report detailing the pros and cons of the various options will be 
available from the LaRC SSFO in the near future. 






FREEDOM ^/^/^. 



"^ 






(- 

V 


2.4 ft. 

r - 
1 

I • 


/ 



Mini-PLM 





-15.8 ft. - 


f.^ 


-T - ' , 


—.---.--- 


\ 


\ 


r=rr.r-...- 



Italian Mini-lab 



1 7.5 ft. 






,;.«v.»,-X. 






Resource Node 





/ 


^2.8 ft. - 

: 






"**■. 




k 


/ . 






1 


1 t 

1 * H 

. .r - - -^ 










— i 




V 



■\ 


- 28.0 ft. 


- -- -i 


(w 








\ 




1 / 

1* 

1 

<- -. 

1 1 








1 








\^ 










/ 



20 Rack PLM 



Laboratory Module 



LaRC SSFO 



LOCATION ISSUES AND OPTIONS OVERVIEW 
Several of the issues associated with the various location options are shown. 






f 






FREEDOM M/-^-fM' 



Location Issues & Options 



IS S3t V3, KB m I M W M Ea M m K JTB i7 

%^Mt5l MltJifM 



Node 1 Outboard •«-¥ Port (available) 



Issuss 

Limited Volume due to Radiator Clearance 
Envelope 

Reduced Radiator Performance 




Node 2 Outboard -Y Port (Cupola) 



Issues 

Limited Options for Cupola Relocation 

Limited Volume due to Radiator Clearance 
Envelope 

Reduced Radiator Performance 




Node 1 -Z Port (Airlock) 



No Alternative for Displaced Element 



Node 1 +Z Port (PLM) 



Issues 

Impact to PLM Excfiange Operations 

Violation of PLh/1 Exchange Requirement 



Lab/Hab +X Port 
(Press Docking Adapters) 



Crew Egress/Passage Requirement 
Violation 

Limited Bio-Isolation 

Eliminates Backup Shuttle Docking 
Location 



Node 2 -Z Port (ACRV) 



Issues 
No Alternative for Displaced Element 



Node 2 +Z Port (PLM) 



Issues 

Impact to PLM Exchange Operations 

Violation of PLU Exchange Requirement 

LaRC SSFO 



18 



STRUCTURAL GROWTH STUDY OVERVIEW 

The primary purposes of the structural growth study are (1) to develop a number of transition structure concepts which will permit 
the addition of various growth structure orthogonal to the pre-integrated truss (PIT) transverse boom structure; (2) develop physical 
concepts for the attachment of a transition structure to the PIT and identify any necessary scars; (3) determine what structural scars, if 
any, are necessary to allow the addition of growth power modules outboard of the solar array rotary joint (SARJ). In addition to 
these primary objectives this study will develop concepts for routing and installation of additional utility lines associated with 
additional power modules and growth in baseline SSF systems. 

Also, this task will develop finite element models of several growth configuration concepts to be used in performing dynamic loads 
analysis to assess the structural response and integrity of the growth concepts for various SSF operations. These operations will 
include SSF reboost. Shuttle docking/berthing, and plume impingement effects. 









fittuUM s^A^^ 



Strurtijfal Growth Studw 



Define and analyze structural growth options for restructured Space 
Station Freedom Pre-lntegrated Truss (PIT). 



Develop transition structure concepts which will permit the 
addition of growth structure orthogonal to the PIT. 

Develop concepts for the physical attachment of a transition 
structure to the PIT and Identify necessary scars. 

Determine what structural scars are necessary to allow the 
addition of growth power modules outboard of the SARJ. 

Develop concepts for routing and Installation of additional utility 
lines associated with the addition of growth power modules and 
orthogonal growth structure. 

Develop finite element models of growth configuration concepts. 

Perform dynamic loads analysis of configuration models. 



.LaRC SSFO^.^-^ 

KCS 6'l?,31 10;00 






GROWTH STRUCTURE 



Illustrated are the primary drivers and their potential locations which will impact the attachment of growth structure to the baseline 
SSF configuration. As mentioned earlier, additional power generation capability must be accommodated outboard of the SARJ. 
Additionally, growth structure will need to be added orthogonally to the transverse boom to accommodate growth of SSF systems, 
such as thermal control radiators and cryogenic pallet storage, accommodation of earth observing and technology payloads, and 
eventually the accommodation of an orbital spacecraft processing facility. 



fVIASA 



Orthogonal Growth Structure 



FREEDOM ifff^i 



"■•v^ 




Additional 
Power 



Earth observing payloads 



Technology payloads 



Spacecraft servicing region 



.LaRCSSFO. 



KCS 6/l?,91 10:14 



THERMAL CONTROL SYSTEM GROWTH LOCATION 

The location of growth radiators and their associated distribution lines is shown to illustrate the potential for their accommodation 
on a set of lower keels and boom. 



4^ 



-MCDONNELL DOUGLAS- 



PIT Growth Utility Requirements 

Thermal Control System 



■■■■ X :. :. ■> 
..t--*:.::r:.:;v:v;-:,.. 

i'-Y'rtr-r-i 
M 






...A., 

■■ : ■:■ , ■:■■ ,:-•• 




.■r^:-:;--|P:X'.V 



mm 



M 



Y 



-McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company - Engineering Services, Washington SE&I- 



■IS. 



LUNAR TRANSFER VEHICLE ASSEMBLY SERVICING FACILITY TASK 

The final study task to be discussed is the development of an assembly servicing facility (ASF) to process lunar transfer vehicles 
(LTV). This task is responsible for the engineering and configuration definition of a facility that process LTVs, including 
determining orbital debris/micrometeoroid protection schemes, thermal control systems, and propellant management systems. In 
addition, the task will assess and define operations and processing systems that are required to service the LTV including, IV A, EVA, 
and robotics systems. 

This task is currently scheduled for completion in late September 1991, with a final report due out in October. 



^ SSF Ewolptlon Configuration Assessment "^^ ^ 

LT¥ Assembly Serwicing Facility Task 

« Determine LTV Assembly Servicing Facility Requirements 

® Engineering and Configuration Definition of LTV ASF 
" Orbital debris/Micrometeoroid Protection 

- Thermal Control System 

- Propellant Management (Handling, Storage, Transfer) 

- Other systems as required [Lighting; Logistics (spares 
stowage; robotics; checkout)] 

• Operations and Processing Systems Definition 

- Level of A&R required 

- EVA and IVA systems 

- Orbital Support Equipment (OSE) design and capabilities 

« On-orbit aerobrake assembly requirements 

• Interfaces with existing SSF systems 



I 



Space Station Engineering ~ — . — ___ — ___ .. — — — ■ — LaflC SSFO. 



EIGHT CREW CAPABILITY CONFIGURATION 

As was discussed earlier, a preliminary set of SSF evolution phase configurations was developed to facilitate the completion of 
several systems trade studies. These four SSF evolution concepts are provided here. It should be noted that these are not necessarily 
the final set of configurations since the complete Figure of Merit process has not been applied at this time. 

The first SSF growth configuration is more appropriately referred to as the SSF Follow-On phase as it is currently accounted for in 
the existing program requirements documents. This Eight Crew Capability (ECC) as the name implies, will accommodate a crew of 
eight. In addition, the fourth photo voltaic wing is added for a total power level of 75 kW. Also, the second habitat and laboratory 
modules are added, along with a second ACRV. 



00 



Evolution Summary 

Eight Crew Capability (ECC) 



s» 




LabB K-ACRVs 
HabB / \i 1 


Cupola 2 "^ \ 


Growth Nodes (2) -^ 



INTERIM RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CAPABILITY 

The second evolution phase adds two solar dynamic power elements (each at 18.75 kw), one on either end of the transverse boom, 
along with another habitat module to accommodate growth in the crew requirements. In addition, growth structure in the form of 
lower keels and boom have been added to accommodate the growth radiators required to handle the increase in thermal rejection 
requirements. The keels and boom also allow for addition external mounting location for various science and technology payloads. 



CO 



Ewoiution Configuration and Concepts 

Interim Research & Dewelopment Capability 



SD Power 
Modules 




Growth TCS 
Radiators (2) 



Growth Node 
& Airlock 




ACRV 3 Z 



ENHANCED OPERATIONS CAPABILITY 



The Enhanced Operations Capability (EOC) configuration represents an implementation concept that fully accommodates projected 
multidisciplinary research and development user needs as they are currently understood. The EOC could accommodate a crew of up 
to sixteen with the addition of a fourth habitat module, along with a fourth ACRV. Two additional solar dynamic power modules 
are added, bringing the SSF total power level to 150 kW. At this time an advanced propulsion system with a higher efficiency is 
added on order to reduce SSF relx)OSt propulsion requirements. 



4:> 
CO 



Ewolution Configuration and Concepts 

Enhanced Operations Capability (EOC) 





PLM3(2).^--'iri@CK 



LUNAR VEHICLE CAPABILITY 



The final evolution phase is the Lunar Vehicle Capability (LVC), which has a lunar transfer vehicle (LTV) assembly servicing facility 
(ASF) added to the bottom of the lower boom structure. The ASF is designed to accommodate one fully fueled (approximately 200 
metric tons) LTV at a time. In addition, a dedicated closed life support system (CLSS) test facility is shown attached to the module 
pattern. This facility is dedicated to supporting the development of CLSS equipment and processes that would be necessary for the 
long transit times involved in a manned mission to Mars that are currently being developed within the Space Exploration Initiative. 



4i 
00 



Evolution Configurations and Concepts 

Lunar Vehicle Capability (LVC) 



SD Power 
Modules (2) 




Hg- ^ Propulsion (2) 



