
March»April 2010 


’rofessional 


for U.S. Field 
and Air Defense 
Artillerymen 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ 


Approvedtfor public release; distribution is unlimited. • Headquarters, Department of the 


B644-10-2 


















Report Documentation Page 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 


1. REPORT DATE 

MAR 2010 


2. REPORT TYPE 


3. DATES COVERED 

00-03-2010 to 00-04-2010 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Fires. A Joint Publication for U.S. Artillery Professionals. March - April 
2010 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 


5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 


6. AUTHOR(S) 


5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Fires,Building 652, Room 203, McNair Road,Fort Sill,OK,73503 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS (ES) 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 


11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


14. ABSTRACT 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 

unclassified 


b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 


c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER 

ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Same as 

72 

Report (SAR) 



19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





March-April 201 □ 



Aj'a fvdnisti^niJhe first six months 


The 2nd Battalion, 77th 
Field Artillery, deployed to 
Afghanistan and was tasked 
in the first six months with 
a dual mission of providing 
timely and accurate Fires 
for maneuver units in 4th 
Infantry Brigade Combat 
Team, 4th Infantry Division, 
and securing an area of 
operations encompassing 
1,200 square miles. From 
the beginning, they learned 
valuable lessons other units 
deploying to Afghanistan 
might find useful. 


Photo courtesy of 2nd Battalion, 77th Field Artillery Regiment 


Mud to Space 

Page 1 Adaptable Fires: Making a flexible Fires force for the future 

By MG David D. Halverson 


Uersat-ile and agile. 

Page 5 82-mm Mortars: Working with Afghan National Army 
Mortar Teams 

By MAJ Michael J. Wood 



Page 21 Finishing with Courage: I Corps’ joint Fires and effects 
cell role in MNC-lraq 

By COL David J. McCauley and 1LT Sean Bilichka 

Page 27 Leadership 101 

By LTC Timothy J. Daugherty 


Headquarters, Department of the Army • PB644-10-2 



























Sustainable 

Page 33 The Parallels to Iraq in Afghanistan 

By Doug Grindle 

Page 37 Employing special munitions 


DISCLAIMER: Fires, a professional bulletin, is published 
bimonthly by Headquarters, Department of the Army under 
the auspices of the Fires Center of Excellence (Building 
758, McNair Road), Fort Sill, Okla. The views expressed are 
those of the authors and not the Department of Defense 
or its elements. Fires' content doesn’t necessarily reflect 
the U.S. Army’s position or supersede information in other 
official Army publications. Use of news items constitutes 
neither affirmation of their accuracy nor product endorse¬ 
ments. Fires is printed by Monarch Litho Inc., a private 
firm in no way connected with the Department of the 
Army. Fires assumes no responsibility for any unsolicited 
material. By Order of the Secretary of the Army: 

George W. Casey Jr. 

General, United States Army 
Chief of Staff 

Official: y-- , Aj. 

c. Fl-4-\A^r~ 

J Joyce E. Morrow 

Administrative Assistant to the 
Secretary of the Army, 0932005 


in the contemporary operating 
environment 


David D. Halverson 

Major General, United States Army 
Commanding General 
Fort Sill, Okla. 


By CPT Brady B. Johnson 



Page 42 Preparing the ADAM Cell: Are we 
doing enough? 

By CPT Petrus J. Engelbrecht 

Page 46 Hellraisers work integration and 
joint operations 

By CPT Kristopher S. Perrin 

Page 48 3 x 2 distributed rocket artillery 
operations 

By LTC Joseph J. Russo 

Page 53 LCMR: Not just an additional duty 

By MAJ Benjamin R. Luper and 
CW4 Dallas C. Whitney 

Page 55 The Giraffe: The multi-mission 
radar gets it all done 

By CPT John M. Williams II 

Lethal and nonlethal fires 

Page 57 Going Tribal: Enlisting 
Afghanistan’s tribes 

By Dan Green 


Editor-in-Chief: Sharon McBride 
Managing Editor: Jennifer M. Blais 
Art Director: Jason Kelly 
Assistant Editor: Vacant 


PURPOSE: Founded in 2007, Fires serves as a forum 
for the professional discussions of U.S. Army and Marine 
Field Artillery (FA) and Army Air Defense Artillery (ADA) 
professionals, both active and Reserve Component 
(RC); disseminates professional knowledge about the 
FA’s and ADA’s progress, developments and best use in 
campaigns; cultivates a common understanding of the 
power, [imitations and application of joint fires, both lethal 
and nonlethal; fosters joint fires interdependency among 
the armed services; and promotes the understanding of 
and interoperability between the FA’s and ADA’s active and 
RC units—all of which contribute to the good of the FA and 
ADA, Army, joint and combined forces, and our nation. 


OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION: Free copies are sent to USA 
and USMC FA units: 7 per corps artillery, FA/fires brigade, 
brigade combat team (BCT), Stryker cavalry regiment 
(SCR), FA Marine regiment and battlefield coordination 
detachment (BCD) headquarters; 13 per FA/fires/battalion/ 
squadron-3 per fire support element (FSE) fires and ef¬ 
fects cell (FEC), effects coordination cell (ECC) fire support 
cell (FSC), fire support coordination center (FSCC). force 
fires coordination center (FFCC) and separate battery or 
detachment; 3 per fire support team (FIST) and combat 
observation lasing team (COLT); and 1 per Master Gun¬ 
ner and Fire Support Officer (FSO). Free copies to Army 
ADA units: 7 per Army air and missile defense command 
(AAMDC) and ADA brigade headquarters; 13 per ADA 
battalion; and 3 per air defense airspace management 
(ADAM) cell and separate battery or detachment.The FA 
and ADA Schools’ departments, directorates and divisions 
each get 2 copies. Other U.S. Army and armed services 
units/organizations and U.S. government agencies that 
work with FA or ADA personnel, equipment, doctrine, 
tactics, training organization or leadership issues may 
request a free copy—including, but not limited to, ROTCs, 
recruiting commands, libraries, attaches, liaison officers, 
state adjutants general, pubfic affairs offices, military 
academies, laboratories, arsenals, major commands, etc. 
Contact Fires at http://sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/. 

SUBSCRIPTIONS: Those not eligible for official distribu¬ 
tion may subscribe to Fires via theTJ.S. Superintendent of 
Documents, P.O. Box37154, Pittsburgh. PA 15250-7954 
(1 -866-512-1800) or via membership in ihe U.S. Army FA 
Association (www.fieldartillery.org). 


SUBMISSIONS: Email to the Editor, Fires, at firesbul- 
letin@conus.army.mil; mail to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, 
OK 73503-0311; overnight to Building 758, Room 7, 
McNair Road, Fort Sill, OK 73503-5600- or call at DShl 
639-5121/6806 or commercial (580) 442-5121/6806. 


REPRINTS: Fires is pleased to grant permission to reprint; 
please credit Fires, the authorfs) and photographers. 


POSTMASTER: F/res(USPS309-010)(ISSN 1935-4096) 
is published bimonthly; periodical postage paid by Depart¬ 
ment of the Army at Lawton OK 73501 and an additional 
mailing post office. Send address chanqes to Fires, P.O. 
Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311. 


Page 63 Hamilton, Knox and Gruber Awards 
Page 67 Operation Unified Response 


ADA 24/7 Hotline & Email 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 

DSN 978-5312 or 
(915)568-5312 
ada_fires@bliss.army. mil 


FA 24/7 Hotline & Email 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 

DSN 639-2204 or 
(580) 442-2204 
redleg@conus.army.mil 




DHttBEB mud to space 



Adaptable Fires: 

Mekong m fte^dbD© Froi 
fere© for tdh© fyi^uir© 

By MG David D. Halverson, 

Commanding General of the Fires Center of Excellence 


“We must be prepared to decentralize operations to adapt to 
complex and rapidly changing situations. Yet, organizational or 
physical decentralization alone may be insufficient to meet the 
challenges of the future. Leaders throughout our future force must 
have both the authority as well as the judgment to make decisions 
and develop the situation through action. Critical thinking by 
Soldiers and their leaders will be essential to achieve the trust 
and wisdom implicit in such authority. The training and education 
of our entire force must aim to develop the mindset and requisite 
knowledge, skills and abilities required to operate effectively under 
conditions of uncertainty and complexity. ” 

GEN Martin E. Dempsey 
U.S. Army Training and 
Doctrine Command Commanding General 

M o one can predict the future, but it is prudent to have a 
strategy to stimulate thought and to serve as a guide for the 
way ahead. In December 2009, the Training and Doctrine 
Command released DA Pam 525-3-0, The Army Capstone 
Concept Operational Adaptability - Operation under Conditions 
of Uncertainty and Complexity in an Era of Persistent Conflict. 
This document describes capabilities and characteristics needed to 
operate in complex environments across the spectrum of conflicts 
and missions. More importantly, it provides a foundation on which 
to build the Army’s Leadership Development Strategy and Army 
Modernization Strategy. Combined these documents outline a 
method to achieve success in the otherwise unpredictable future. 

In doing our part to meet this challenge, the Fires Center of 
Excellence realized that in order to create leaders, Soldiers and 
units that represent the force described in the Army Capstone 
Concept we must adopt an enterprise approach to Fires. We have 
to look at systems - we have to look not only at “what” we teach, 
but “how” we teach based on how our Soldiers and leaders learn 
and is our unit structure right for the mission set. Recent and 



current conflict has shown 
us that we must integrate 
joint and interagency assets 
to be able to develop a 
situation through action 
and adjust rapidly to changing situations to achieve what the ACC 
describes as “operational adaptability.” However, we must have a 
Fires force that provides the timely fires when we need them. As 
we begin defining the fires functional concepts, we are asking the 
subject matter experts to give us a rundown on how they see this 
working in concert and if we are “on target” with our way ahead. 
This year’s annual Fires Seminar will address “Adaptable Fires for 
Full Spectrum Operations” and how to continue our professional 
dialogue on the development of the fires functional concept. 

The Army Capstone Concept discusses “operational adaptability” 
which is made up of several tenets as mentioned above, but how 
are we going to apply those to our institutions and formations? 

V ersatile and agile. The ACC describes an uncertain future with 
an enemy or enemies with any number of aims. Every operation 
and mission will be different. At daylight, a unit may start a mission 
that falls on the stability side of the scale, but by noon the mission 
may have turned into a high-intensity conflict. It may also include 
Joint Interagency Intergovernmental Multinational capabilities 
that need to be integrated. Versatility and agility is what wins the 
day along with the ability to frame those complex problems and 
create a vision from chaos. To build these characteristics, we must 
focus on our training strategies and learning models and build force 
structures to support the fires force. 

E xpeditionary. Soldiers and units are an inherently expeditionary 
force, but must also be experienced with their equipment, 
procedures and TTPs - they must have the proper equipment 
and structure to be expeditionary and the time to train with that 
equipment. History has told us that our military will be fighting 
an “away” game and as the enemies’ skills change at a faster and 
faster pace, we too must retain flexibility and agility like never 



“Recent and current conflict has shown us that 
we must integrate joint and interagency assets to 
be able to develop a situation through action and 
adjust rapidly to changing situations to achieve what 
the ACC describes as ‘operational adaptability. 9 ” 

1 March-April 2010 • Fires 



















“As the Fires Center of Excellence begins work on the fires 
functional concept, we will continue to engage the Fires force 
for relevant and professional dialogue on its construct and 
stay glued to the hip of the Army as these concepts evolve.” 


before. Remaining focused on an expeditionary mindset is key to 
fostering a climate where the warrior ethos reigns and our forces 
remain steadfast in the face of adversity. 

S ustainable. Our challenge is to go to school while at war. 
Balance is an often used term in the Army these days. The 
need to teach Soldiers and leaders how to think rather than 
what to think has never been clearer. To defeat adaptive 
enemies, we must out-think them in order to out-fight 
them. Technology can enhance human capabilities, but 
at the end of the day, war remains more art than 
science, and its successful execution will 
require battle command 
more than battl 
management. 

We have 
learned that fires 
force training 
and education 
should produce 
imaginative staffs 
and commanders 
who understand how 
to interact with other 
service’s leaders and 
how to get the most out 
of the full set of joint and 
interagency capabilities 
In the end, we seek a 
bench of leaders able 
to think creatively 
at every level of 
war and are able to 
operate with equal 
comfort in Army, 
joint, interagency 
and multinational 
environments. 

I nteroperable. Because our future 
operational environment will exhibit uncertainty 
complexity, our Fires force will have to be 



idaptable 

Fires 


y 




A 



' 0| 

l ac 

peration 

Japtabilii 

al 

ty , 



/ 



and 


i 


undeniably interoperable. Both FA and ADA systems 
and units must be able to operate effectively together as 
well as with joint and combined forces. The Fires force 
must be interoperable at several echelons and be able to “plug 
and play” into any JIIM environment and immediately be effective. 
"] ethal and nonlethal. We will continue to expand our fires 
i functions and capabilities. Encompassing lethal and nonlethal 
effects is just the beginning. We must capitalize on interagency 
support as well as inter-branch support to include air and missile 
defense and electronic attack capabilities. 

The fires function will continue to identify how to exploit these 
capabilities to create specific effects on tactical, operational and 
strategic targets to interdict, degrade, defeat and destroy threat 
capabilities; and to protect friendly forces, populations and critical 
infrastructure. These types of offensive and defensive fires are the 





I 

1 ln 

teroperab 

1 



w 


fires force contributions to joint concepts and doctrine such as Joint 
Fire Support, Global Missile Defense, Integrated Air and Missile 
Defense, and Offensive and Defensive Counter Air Operations. 
Ninety percent of ADA classes are now being held at Fort Sill. 
It can’t get any better than this because this sets us up for 
unprecedented offensive and defensive capabilities and 
synergies never seen before. 

A daptable Fires. Hence, the 2010 March-April 
edition of the Fires Bulletin is dedicated to 
“adaptable fires” and is setting the stage for the 
2010 Fires Seminar, May 17-20, held at Fort 
Sill. During the seminar, 
we will discuss the 
way forward with 
senior TRADOC 
leaders from both 
an enterprise 
approach and 
specifically the 
Army Capstone 
Concept. We will tie 
those pieces in with 
current joint commanders 
and how they see the 
current fight evolving and 
what they need and expect 
from future fires force 
leaders and then finish 
the week with a day 
of branch specific 
seminars driving 
home the key points 
of our strategies and 
concepts. 

As the Fires Center 
of Excellence begins work 
on the fires functional concept, we will 
continue to engage the Fires force for relevant 
and professional dialogue on its construct and stay 
glued to the hip of the Army as these concepts evolve. 
This is the start point for the Fires force and only a 
collaborative effort from across the Fires force will truly 
achieve the level of intellect needed to meet the challenges 
that lay ahead. 

The 2010 May-June edition will be dedicated to what we learned 
during our annual seminar and what each branch discovered during 
that week. Join us May 17-20 as we will discuss “Adaptable Fires for 
Full Spectrum Operations.” I hope to see you there or ifyou are unable 
to make it in person - tune in via Adobe Connect or Defense Connect 
Online (DCO) to each of the briefings and submit questions for the 
presenters to answer in real time. Your input and experience is key to 
successfully building a strong Fires force for our future and ensuring 
the fires functional concepts meet the need today and for tomorrow. 
Fit to Fight - Fires Strong! 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 2 




DHEea Fires Seminar 



May 1 "7-lMay 20 at the 
Fines Center of Excellence, 
Fort Sill, Oklahoma 


Topics of discussion: 

• Army Capstone Concept 

• Joint and combined Fines 

• ADA theme: “Providing a flexible and 
adaptive air and missile defense CAMDD force 
capable of defeating AMD threats across the 
full spectrum” 

• FA theme: “Institutional adaptability 
and leader development in full spectrum 
operations” 

Visit www.fortsillfires.com after 
April 1 for registration and 
lodging information 

Email brenda.j.spencer@us.army.mil 
and michele.flanagan@us.army.mil for 
trade exposition details 










2010 fires Jemlncir 

Virtual attendance guide 

To enable maximum participation 
and user satisfaction using 
Defense Connect Online, refer to 
the following guidelines for 
virtual participation in the 
Fires Seminar in both unclassifie 
and classified mediums. 

» All virtual attendees must establish an account with Defense Connect 
Online CDCOD in order to view seminar briefings in real-time. A short 
tutorial for users without existing DCO accounts can be found at 
https://www. us. army, mi I/suite/doc/2'1 404059. [Note: Classified 
briefings require additional registration with both AKO-S and DCO-S.D 



> Users must logon with DCO account credentials. Guest logins wil 
be accepted by the room administrator. 


not 


» Video and microphone functions inside the DCO room will be disabled 
by the room administrator. All user interface will be limited to the 
chat function. Chat comments must be limited to questions regarding 
seminar subject material or to report technical difficulty. The sheer 
number of virtual attendees does not allow for personal chat between 
users while monitoring the seminar presentations. 

» Questions regarding seminar topics of discussion submitted through 
the chat function must include the user’s name, rank, unit, location 
and email address to ensure effective answers are provided. 

» Unclassified briefings will be hosted using the following NIPR DCO 
link - Room Name - 2010 Fires Seminar, https://connect.dco.dod. 
mil/r561 441 OO. Simply click on the link, and logon using your DCO 
credentials. 

» Classified briefs will be hosted using the following SIRR DCO link - 
2010 Fires Seminar, https://connect.dco.dod.smil.mil/r31SS2540. 
Simply click on the link, and logon using your DCO-S credentials. 

» For additional information, contact John Dorsey, Fires Center of 
Excellence Certified Knowledge Management Advisor, at dorseyj@ 
conus.army.mil or 580-442-3889. 


— 









D^tB& versatile and agile 




S2-mm 

Mortars; 

Working with 
Afghan National 
Army Mortar 

Teams 

E5MebO A WssS 





D uring the past two years, many Afghan National Army 
formations began taking the lead on executing missions 
with International Security Assistance Forces in Afghanistan. 
Even though the ANA is still dependent on coalition support for 
Fires, air support and medical evacuation, the ANA is capable of 
putting far more soldiers into an area during an operation than any 
International Security Assistance Force formation in Afghanistan. 
ANA soldiers are beginning to occupy combat outposts in platoon- 
and company-sized formations without International Security 
Assistance Force or other coalition forces. 

Inevitably, these formations will bring some or all of their 
organic 82-mm mortars. Unfortunately, not all ANA elements 
are proficient in the use of their mortars. In addition, many 
International Security Assistance Force forces, being Western 
armies, do not fully understand the capabilities and limitations or 
the gunnery aspects of these very important Soviet-designed ANA 
company-level fire support weapons. The importance of mortars to 
a company commander cannot be underestimated — and the ANA 
is no exception. However, with training and preparation, the ANA 
can increase the effective use of its mortars and can rely more on 
their own fire support and, hopefully, less on International Security 
Assistance Force fire support assets. 

This article lays out some of the specific issues the ANA faces 
in the use of its mortar systems, focusing specifically on its 82-mm 
mortar. This article, in particular, addresses various equipment 
and ammunition issues, gunnery issues and important safety 
considerations that must be taken into account when working 
with the 82-mm mortar. Next, specific examples of how the ANA 
overcame some of these problems at the Spera Combat Outpost 
in eastern Afghanistan. Finally, some training techniques and 
recommendations are laid out to aid personnel to help the ANA 
improve its mortar gunnery. This article isn’t a comprehensive 
guide to ANA 82-mm mortar gunnery. My intent is only to give 
future ANA advisors and International Security Assistance Force fire 
support personnel insight into helping the ANA use its company- 
level 82-mm mortars. 

escription. The ANA uses Soviet-designed 82-mm mortars. 
Though the mortar is similar in capabilities to the U.S. 81 -mm 
mortar, the actual weapon system has some significant differences. 
The A-frame supporting the mortar is not as stable as the U.S. 81- 
mm mortar. The base plate also is different. Unlike the U.S. 81- 
mm mortar, the 82-mm mortar base plate does not lay flat on the 
ground and set itself after one round. Rather, it is angled slightly 
and weighted with sandbags. This seemingly minor difference can 
cause significant delays in firing when the mortar has to make a 
large azimuth shift during fire missions. 

Another difference is the high-explosive range data plate on 
the mortar itself. This plate actually contains the elevation settings 
required for a given charge and range (in 100 meter increments). 
Essentially, it is a very limited high-explosive range tabular firing 
table data. If this plate is not present, unless the gun crew has the 
data written down and with them, then the crew has no way to 
determine proper elevation and charge data for high-explosive 
based on the target range. 

Finally, the 82-mm gun sight is azimuth based and uses the 6,000 
mil system. Because it does not use any type of common deflection 
and it cannot be “floated,” the gun must be laid at a known azimuth. 
The lack of a “floating” sight or common deflection causes certain 
azimuths to be blocked because the tube will be in the way of the 
sight. Because the ANA has no firing computers or comprehensive 


tabular firing tables, it is strongly recommended that the gun be laid 
at zero mils. To lay the gun on any other azimuth adds additional 
calculations into the firing data computations that are completely 
unnecessary and could slow down fire mission processing. 

A final complication to the ANA use of the gun sight involves 
the nature of the Dari or Pashtun written languages. The ANA read 
from right to left while the mortar azimuth and elevation setting 
numbers are supposed to be read left to right. When working with 
the ANA mortar team, it is absolutely critical to verify its gun 
sight data until it is clear the team knows how to read the gun sight 
correctly. 

ire direction and gunnery. The ANA fire direction is quite 
primitive. Most ANA mortar chiefs simply lay the gun on 
azimuth with the target they want to engage (therefore, the mortar 
team must be able to see the target), estimate the range, consult 
the range plate on their tubes, set the range data, cut the charge on 
the ammunition and fire. Often a platoon leader or the company 
commander is there to verify the data and make corrections. Aiming 
poles are not used and range corrections, particularly in mountainous 
terrain, are either too timid or too bold. ANA fire direction does not 
address vertical interval corrections. The simple data plate assumes 
the target and gun are both at sea level — a difficult assumption 
to make in Afghanistan. 

There are many reasons for the primitive fire direction and 
gunnery techniques. First of all, many ANA mortar men have not 
been trained in or do not understand the principles of indirect lay 
using an aim point (like aiming poles). Further, even fewer of their 
officers understand these principles. Given the old Soviet model that 
many of their officers know and practice, even if the mortar team 
understands and is willing to aim the tube off of aiming stakes, if 
the officer does not understand the technique, he will not allow the 
mortar team to do it. 

Secondly, many of the ANA mortars have either missing or 
broken sights. The ANA also has no way to purge its sights (no 
nitrogen purging kits). Without an operational sight, direct lay 
on the target is the only technique the ANA mortar team can use. 
Finally, there is no tabular firing table or firing computers for the 
ANA to use with their mortars. This lack of tabular firing table 
or firing computer is the principle reason why the ANA mortar 
team cannot adjust for vertical interval. Another important side 
effect of no tabular firing table is the ANA has no way of giving 
a maximum ordinate of its mortar rounds. Given the high angle 
nature of mortars, simply assuming that the maximum ordinate is 
the same as an 81-mm mortar is not a good assumption. 

mmunition. Ammunition generally comes in three types: 
Russian/Soviet high-explosive, Chinese high-explosive, and 
U.S. 82-mm illumination. The first two types of ammunition do 
not have the same ballistic performance. As a general rule, the 
Chinese manufactured ammunition does not perform as well as the 
Russian ammunition and can fall short by as much as 50 to 100 
meters when fired with the same data as the Russian ammunition. 
The Chinese ammunition also is more prone to hang fires. However, 
both rounds share a common, dangerous aspect — neither round 
has a minimum range “spin safety” (that is, a minimum number of 
times the round must spin when leaving the tube before the fuse 
is armed). Once the safety pin is removed from the fused mortar 
round, the round is armed. Other than that, the rounds are like U.S. 
ammunition. They may have “donut” or “cheese” charges, and 
these charges are “cut” just like U.S. mortar ammunition. The U.S. 
designed illumination does have a minimum range “spin safety” 




1SG Terry Branham (right) and SPC Seth A. Hungiville (left) inspect an 82-mm mortar set-up with an Afghan National Army weapons instructor at 
Kabul Military Training Center, Sept. 5, 2007. (Photo by SSgt Luis P. Valdespino Jr., U.S. Marine Corps) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 6 







An Afghan National Army mortar team takes a break from training, but still maintains their position next to their mortar. (Photo by maj Michael j. Wood, 
U.s. Army) 


and is much safer to handle. 

When working with ANA mortar ammunition, the mortar team 
must take care with fused rounds. The ANA is generally aware of 
the dangers associated with their high-explosive rounds and does 
not pull the safety pin until just before they drop the round in the 
tube. The mortar teams are quite frugal and save their “cut” charges 
(U.S. mortar teams do the same). They do this because it is not 
uncommon for the ANA to use mortar rounds recovered from enemy 
caches. Often times, the rounds recovered from enemy caches do 
not have all (or any) of the charges with the round. To fire these 
rounds, the ANA will use its “saved” charges. Sometimes, these 
charges have been exposed to the elements or are quite old. 

bserved fire. Without tabular firing tables, plotting boards or 
firing computers, the ANAreally does not possess the capability 
to call for and adjust mortar fire — unless the observer is on the 
gun target line. Compounding this is a lack of skilled observers 
within the ANA. While teaching the ANA how to call for and adjust 
fire was not impossible, it was very difficult. But it can be done, 
and the fact that the 82-mm mortar is azimuth laid (as opposed to 
common deflection) actually makes it easier for the ANA to gain 
this capability. If the observer can give the ANA mortar team a 
target grid, the ANA can (theoretically) compute the azimuth and 
the range off of a map and fire on the target. Using the observer 
to target line factor and the mil range relationship, the guns could 
adjust (and this is the key reason why it is best if the mortar tubes 
are laid at zero mils). But the U.S. Soldier must be careful and never 
forget that the ANA utilizes a 6000 mil compass and gun sight. 

7 March-April 2010 • Fires 


S afety considerations. Several significant safety considerations 
already have been discussed — the lack of a minimum 
range “spin safety” on the Soviet and Chinese rounds; the fact 
that Chinese rounds usually fall shorter than the Russian rounds; 
the ANA propensity to use found or captured cache ammunition; 
and the lack of good fire direction tabular firing tables or firing 
computers to compute observer corrections, gun and target altitude 
data, gun and target vertical interval, or ammunition maximum 
ordinate. One last significant safety consideration is ANA hang 
fire/misfire procedures. The high-explosive rounds the ANA uses 
are often quite old, and the round may not fire. Compounding this 
issue is the fact the high-explosive rounds are fully armed when 
dropped in the tube. If the tube must be cleared manually, then it is 
critically important that it is tipped slowly and gently to allow the 
round to slide slowly out of the tube. The ANA soldiers I worked 
with understood this, but it is important the U.S. Soldiers working 
with the ANA understand this as well. 

hallenges. The challenges the ANAmortar teams and their U.S. 
advisers face are difficult. Some of them can be overcome, 
and some cannot. The ANA, itself, has to overcome some issues, 
such as old ammunition, missing or damaged mortar gun sights 
and the lack of tabular firing tables and firing computers. But, with 
training, other issues can be addressed. It is possible to teach the 
ANA how to fire from aiming posts. It also is possible to improve 
the fire direction center capabilities and teach ANA mortarmen 
how to adjust for vertical interval errors, create known points and 
adjust fire for an observer. 










I was part of a team of 10 U. S. embedded training teams assigned 
to support the approximately 100 AN A soldiers from 3/1/203rd ANA 
at Spera Combat Outpost in eastern Afghanistan. What follows 
are the techniques I used with an ANA company from 3/1/203rd 
ANA. The ANA company had a good mortar team, but the team 
was only familiar with direct lay. The ANA company commander 
knew that I was an artillery officer and gave his consent for me to 
work with his mortar section. The two ANA 82-mm mortars were 
the only indirect fire assets on the combat outpost. 

The first challenge was convincing the leadership and the mortar 
team that mortars could be fired accurately using aiming stakes. 
Because the ANA was assuming the combat outpost from a U.S. 
unit that had a mortar team equipped with a 60-mm and 81 -mm 
mortar, this task was a little easier than we expected. The U.S. mortar 
team demonstrated (using its own mortar systems) how the concept 
of laying the tube worked. It then demonstrated emplacement of 
aiming stakes. After working through this, the ANA mortar team 
chief and company commander were allowed to aim and fire the 
U.S. mortar using U.S. calculated fire direction center data. After 
the ANA understood the U.S. method, we moved to the ANA mortar 
and began training the mortar team. 

We helped the ANAestablish a mortar firing positionwith Global 
Positioning System grid coordinates. We then used a decimated M2 
compass and determined a zero mil azimuth. After determining this 
azimuth, the ANA team was trained to emplace the aiming stakes. 
Over a couple days, we did this several times until the ANA was 
comfortable with emplacing the aiming stakes on its own. 

After teaching the ANA mortar team how to establish position 
with the Global Positioning System and directional control with a 
compass, we worked on establishing known points. With our help, 
the ANA adjusted on known points to the north, south and east of 
its firing position. The ANA company commander and mortar team 


chief recorded all of the firing data. The company commander then 
conducted drills with his mortar team whereby he would call off a 
specific target and have the team practice using the gun sight and 
aiming poles for laying the tube. After several of these dry fire drills, 
he would transition to firing live ammunition on the targets. 

Despite the lack of meteorological data (though a U.S. field 
artillery unit confirmed that the weather remained “generally 
consistent” during this training) and the age of the ammunition, 
all of the fires would impact within about 50 meters of the known 
target grid (as verified with a calibrated set of Viper range finders). 
This training continued for about four days until the U.S. mortar 
team departed. After the mortar team left, the ANA became 
completely responsible for the defense of Spera Combat Outpost. 
As such, its mortars and the mortar team training took on increased 
importance. 

At this point, it is hard to underestimate the effect of the training 
with the U.S. mortar team. In the case of this particular ANA 
mortar team, they had never fired using aiming poles nor had they 
ever established known points using anything other than direct 
lay. The U.S. mortar team also treated them as soldiers — a key 
point to observe when working with the ANA. The ANA respects 
U.S. Army capabilities and often ANA soldiers will try to emulate 
U.S. Soldiers. Of equal importance was the leadership of the ANA 
company commander. The commander was concerned about the 
training of his mortar team and was willing to get the ammunition 
necessary for the team training. 

After the International Security Assistance Force left Spera 
Combat Outpost, the ANA commander wanted to adjust illumination 
on two areas that insurgent forces historically had used to engage 
soldiers on the Spera Combat Outpost Observation Post as well as 
a point on a trail they most likely had used to get to the two areas. 
The issue we had to overcome was there were no skilled observers 










in the ANA on the observation post. Working with the commander 
and a map of the area, we began adjusting illumination. Due to the 
proximity of the international border, we deliberately fired the first 
round short of the target. The ANANCO on the observation post 
then indicated which direction (left, right, closer or further) relative 
to his position he needed the round to go. 

The commander and I worked the corrections (through an 
interpreter) on the map. As each correction was plotted, we calculated 
a new azimuth and range. The mortar chief then adjusted his tube 
to the new data and another adjustment round was fired. Because 
the ANA has no tabular firing tables, the real problem we had with 
this method was adjusting the time fuse setting correctly. Because 
the vertical interval was in excess of 300 meters, we had to slowly 
adjust “upward” and then “outward” on the gun target line until 
the illumination was optimal. 

After adjusting the illumination, it became apparent we needed a 
method for calculating corrections due to vertical interval. Realizing 
the ANA was not trained in ballistics, I tried to resolve the issue 
and come up with an acceptable approximation. Since mortars 
are high angle, the last several hundred meters of the descending 
trajectory can be closely approximated as a straight line. Making 
this assumption, I then began to analyze the “should hit” and “did 
hit” range data from the three known high-explosive points. I 
compared that range data with the Viper measured data and map 
spotted altitudes. 

Because I was assuming the last few hundred meters of 
descending trajectory was a 
line, I took data from the north 
and south known point and 
used the algebraic equation for 
a linear slope (y=mx + b) to 
try to compute an approximate 
vertical interval correction 
factor - (y is the vertical 
interval, x is the horizontal 
interval, m is the slope, and b 
is the vertical offset). I ended up with a correction factor that was 
equal to the “did hit” range correction dividedby the vertical interval. 
After computing the correction factor, I took the “should hit” data 
from the east known point and after multiplying the correction factor 
(obtained with the north and south target data) by the vertical interval 
and then adding it to the “should hit” data, I compared the results to 
the “did hit” range data. In mathematical form, the approximation 
is expressed as: (Target Range) + [(Correction Factor) X (Vertical 
Interval)] = Adjusted Range. 

The calculated data agreed within 30 meters of the “did hit” 
data of the east known point despite there being a vertical interval 
of more than 300 meters and a range of about 2,000 meters. (It also 
assumes the vertical interval is positive — if the vertical interval 
is negative, then correction is subtracted.) A point of caution is in 
order — this correction was calculated for a very specific point in 
Afghanistan with known firing data and at a gun altitude of more 
than 7,000 feet. Do not assume all firing data will yield the same 
results. The linear approximation used is a good one, but only 
for high angle fire on mortars. It is significantly less accurate for 
low-angle cannons. This point was made very clearly to the ANA 
commander. To re-emphasize, this was done in a remote combat 
outpost under combat conditions and gave the ANA a capability to 
engage threats with its only indirect fire asset. And it was used only 
after several verification fire missions demonstrated its validity as 
an approximation. 

After working through this, the ANA commander and the mortar 
team decided to try to verify my approximation calculations. After 

9 March-April 2010 


firing more than five different targets in different directions with 
high explosive and two more with illumination, we found the 
correction factor was always range accurate to within 60 meters 
(as measured by a Viper). This was a marked contrast to the 200, 
300 and 400 meter range corrections we sometimes had to make 
due to the ruggedness of the terrain and huge differences in vertical 
interval. 

Where it really paid dividends was in illumination missions by 
quickly giving the ANA an adjusted range for time fuse settings. 
Having a fairly high degree of confidence in the vertical interval 
adjustment calculation, the ANA began to apply the correction 
consistently in their firing during the next two to three weeks. An 
added benefit to this validation was the ANA mortar chief began 
to express a real interest in understanding the concepts of ballistic 
trajectories. In the process, he began to understand his weapons 
system’s capabilities and limitations. 

The final challenge in dealing with ANA mortar teams is not 
with the team itself, but with observers. The ANA simply does not 
have many observers with even rudimentary skills. Often, only the 
commander has any skills in adjusting fire. This is because many 
ANA soldiers cannot read anything, much less a map. Therefore, 
target location is sketchy at best and any corrections are “eye- 
balled” by ANA soldiers. There are some soldiers who can read 
a map, but often they read using the Russian method, hence the 
easting and northing are “reversed” from the NATO method. U.S. 
Soldiers must always verify a target grid given by the ANA if the 

ANA are calling in targets to 
any U.S. system. 

Due to the operational 
circumstances at the Spera 
Combat Outpost, it was not 
possible to work one-on-one 
with the AN A observers on the 
observation post. In addition, 
the ANA mortar team has to 
gain the ability to use a mortar 
plotting board or, at the minimum, the ability to plot corrections 
on a map to re-compute data due to the new map spot. We did 
just that at the Spera Combat Outpost. I worked directly with the 
commander to show him how to take adjustments and re-compute 
range and azimuths for the mortars based off of corrections, and 
even though it was a slow process, the commander learned the 
process and quickly got better at it. 

ecommendations. Working with and training the ANA is an 
important part to the counterinsurgency fight in Afghanistan. 
The ANA has several capabilities, but also has several limitations. 
Understanding the limitations and capabilities of company-level 
mortars is important in any military that uses mortars. As more and 
more U.S. Soldiers come in contact with the ANA, it is important 
they become aware of what the ANA can and cannot do. As fire 
supporters, we must understand ANA infantry mortars just like we 
understand friendly mortars. I offer several recommendations to 
personnel who might find themselves working with ANA mortar 
teams. 

Get to know the mortar team members, the condition of their 
equipment and their company commander. The ANA mortar team 
is willing to work with U.S. Soldiers, but only if the commander 
approves. 

If possible, try to get a U.S. mortar sergeant to work with the 
ANA team. The ANA mortar teams that I worked with greatly 
respected U.S. mortar sergeants. A joint ANA and U.S. mortar live 
fire with mixed crews can pay huge dividends by motivating the 
ANA to want to learn more. Make sure that if this is done, the ANA 


a Wfon : M¥ig ) 

odd ftioqpziJGgraS [jmFG 

0® SGo© 

fflgjCoe 0m Z^JgjGoamBssamc:® 



Fires 


company commander is invited. Earn his respect, and he practically 
will beg U.S. Soldiers to train his mortar teams. 

Understand the ANA mortar team members. Some of them 
will be very good , and some of them will not understand much 
of anything. Let them demonstrate their capabilities before you 
attempt to train with them. 

Understand manual fire direction and mortar ballistics. There 
are no computers or tabular firing tables with the ANA mortar 
teams (at least I never saw one). Many times, ANA mortars will 
engage targets they can see or, if they are very good, targets they 
can compute data from off of a map. 

Realize that an 82-mm mortar is not an 81-mm mortar. They 
may be used in the same type of role, but they are no more similar 
than an M4 carbine and an AK-74 assault rifle. Both mortars have 
a tube, a base plate, “legs,” a gun sight and ammunition — and 
that is about the extent of their similarities. 

Finding ANA soldiers who have the capability and willingness 
to learn how to call for and adjust fire will be extremely difficult. 
If you do find a willing soldier (or, more likely, officer) who has 


the capability to learn, than do everything you can to develop that 
capability. 

When training with the ANA mortar teams, always try to use 
the same interpreter. Gunnery of any kind is full of jargon, and it is 
critical you ensure your interpreter understands the various gunnery 
terms like deflection, azimuth and lay before you try to work with 
the ANA. Your interpreter must understand the gunnery if he is 
going to interpret for you. Remember, many of these ANA mortar 
sergeants really do want to understand their weapons system. 

Drink tea with the ANA mortar team if they invite you. You will 
be glad that you did. You will never get to know the ANA mortar 
teams until you are willing to drink tea with them. 

Of course, these are only recommendations based upon my 
experience as an embedded training team Soldier with the ANA. As 
many commercials say, your individual experiences may vary, but 
I will say that some of my best moments in Afghanistan occurred 
during my work with the ANA mortars at the Spera Combat Outpost. 
Just like us, nothing gets them more excited than a first round hit 
— and with assistance, training and understanding, ANA mortar 
teams can do this more often than they can now. 



Major Michael J. Wood, field artillery, is currently assigned as the G5 
fires plannerfor 10th Mountain Division at Fort Drum, N.Y. Previously, he 
was team chief and Kandak (battalion) commander advisorfor 
the 4/1/203rd Corps (Afghan National Army). His previous 
assignments include commander, Lexington U.S. Army 
Recruiting Company (USAREC), Ky., and commander, 

D Battery, 1st Battalion, 94th Field Artillery (TA), 1st 
Armored Division Artillery, Baumholder, Germany. 


r 4 




SPC Seth A. Hungiville (center right) inspects an 82-mm 
mortar set-up with an Afghan National Army weapons 
instructor at Kabul Military Training Center, Sept. 5, 
2007. (Photo by SSgt Luis P. Valdespino Jr., U.S. Marine Corps) 











1 > 




■J'i, • 










s' / 


*' 










- > 


V 


- * | , p E 


(Left to right) 1LT Great, CPT Carpenter and SSG McChntock, all of 2nd Battalion, 
77th Field Artillery Regiment, identify potential enemy fighting positions during a 
maneuver patrol in Afghanistan. (Photo courtesy of 2nd Battalion, 77th Field Artillery Regiment) 


" 7 
















By LTC Michael J. Forsyth, 
MAJ George L. Hammar and 
MAJ Billy D. Siekman 


T he 2nd Battalion, 77 th Field Artillery, deployed to Afghanistan 
and was tasked in the first six months with a dual mission of 
providing timely and accurate fires for maneuver units in 4th 
Infantry Brigade Combat Team, 4th Infantry Division, and securing 
an area of operations encompassing 1,200 square miles. From the 
beginning, we learned valuable lessons other units deploying to 
Afghanistan might find useful. Such lessons include application 
of fires in mountainous terrain, the indirect approach to maneuver 
operations, the criticality of field artillery operations and balancing 
maneuver missions with the fire support role, and we’ve learned 
the fact that fire support in Afghanistan requires skills beyond basic 
forward observer tasks. This article discusses lessons learned and 
offers solutions to issues we discovered. We organized the article 
into two sections, discussing the dual mission — owning an area 
of operations in Afghanistan and fires in counter-insurgency 
operations. 

wning an area of operations in Afghanistan. Because our 
brigade combat team was spread across an area of eastern 
Afghanistan covering more than 10,000 square miles, it was 
incumbent upon the brigade combat team to assign the battalion’s 
headquarters an area of operations. Area of Operations Steel 
encompassed more than 1,200 square miles and four districts of 
two separate provinces in Afghanistan. This challenge was even 
more daunting when considering the assets available to secure 
such a large area with imposing mountainous terrain. With a 
maneuver platoon raised in house and other attached enablers, 
2-77 Field Artillery implemented operations designed to secure 
the area enabling governance and developing building capacity 
successfully. In securing the area, we applied an indirect approach 
to facilitate success. 

For 2-77 Field Artillery, it is the process of using many different 
assets, most of which were nonlethal, to produce effective security in 
our area. Upon arrival in Afghanistan, our unit came under attack on 
several occasions within the first 10 days of transition of authority. 
We had a decision to make at that point — whether or not to go 
out the gate hard with lethal operations or to take a softer approach 
using information operations, civil-military operations, engagement 
and relationship building with locals to enable security. The paucity 
of resources helped drive the decision toward the latter because a 
significant loss in manpower effectively nullified lethal operations. 
As it turns out, our focus on nonlethal operations, complemented 
by patrolling and presence in the area of operations, drove down 
the number of attacks several fold in the weeks following the first 
10 days. 

Lessons in maneuver operations. Before our deployment, the 


maneuver mission pressed the battalion to develop a cohesive 
platoon capable of dominating terrain to prevent insurgents from 
controlling the population in partnership with Afghan forces. This 
maneuver platoon consists of about 36 Soldiers from across the 
battalion from multiple military occupational specialties. 

During the training for Afghanistan, the maneuver platoon 
rehearsed battle drills as a complete platoon. During the deployment 
however, mission requirements forced the battery commander to 
maintain an observation post at all times as well as maintain a 
maneuver element. This effectively reduced the platoon’s ability 
to maintain a dismounted element larger than a fire team because 
it could never roll with more than two-thirds of the platoon. The 
lack of manpower reduced the platoon’s ability to close with and 
destroy the enemy. This forced the platoon to adapt their battle 
drills to coordinate all systems bringing maximum fire power to 
the fight. Furthermore this allowed the platoon to remain mounted 
and dominate the enemy from the vehicles until additional brigade 
assets, such as close combat attack or close air support, are available 
to enhance the capabilities of the small element. 

The early activities in our area of operations and limited 
manpower forced the battalion into an indirect approach of 
conducting operations. The battalion plans for the maneuver-platoon 
Soldiers to execute operations that combine nonlethal elements, 
while remaining prepared for lethal situations. This enabled us to 
maintain combat power for the long haul while also winning over 
the population so that we can implement programs to develop 
infrastructure, governance, and the Afghan National Security 
Force. These new tactics also allowed the battalion to achieve the 
objectives of securing the population and gaining support for the 
local government. 

Implementing the maneuver platoon and key leader engagements 
by the battalion leadership was instrumental in exerting pressure on 
the enemy by leveraging the people’s will. These methods forced 
the population to choose between the security and development 
we provided or the violence and poverty the Taliban provided. Our 
end state is to change the enemy’s standing operating procedures, 
forcing him to take action that is detrimental to his objectives, thus 
informing the populace of the Taliban’s true intentions. 

Obviously, our training prepared the platoon for lethal combat 
operations. However, our staff and Soldiers realized victory does not 
come through destruction of the enemy or by dominating the terrain 
in counter-insurgency operations. Rather, success is quantified in 
the way you dominate the human terrain. This realization allowed 
the staff to develop courses of action for the maneuver element that 
focused on support of the local population and government. This 



13 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 








(Left to right) SFC Kyle Riley and 1LT Anthony Great 
of Headquarters and Headquarters Battery Manuever 
Platoon, 2-77 Field Artillery Regiment, conduct a 
patrol in northern Laghman province, Afghanistan. 

(Photo courtesy of 2nd Battalion, 77th Field Artillery Regiment) 








approach was instrumental for us to achieve our objective without 
continuous lethal engagements with the Taliban during an extended 
deployment. 

Partnership. The Afghanistan National Army artillery battery 
had many similarities to coalition artillery units in the current 
operational environment. It was the only ANA unit assigned to 
western Nuristan with a dual mission of direct support artillery and 
security operations. Therefore, it had to develop a dual systematic 
approach to establishing a security presence in western Nuristan 
while honing artillery skills to provide timely and accurate artillery 
fires in support of Afghanistan National Security Force. 

The assessment of the U.S. Marine Corps embedded training 
team and our leadership, upon arrival at Forward Operating Base 
Kalagush, was the artillery battery was incapable of providing 
artillery fires or comprehending its role as the Afghanistan National 
Security Force element responsible for security in western Nuristan. 
Its artillery skills were rudimentary with only an ability to conduct 
direct fire missions and basic crew drills. Specifically, the fire 
direction center could not process a fire mission in a timely manner; 
the forward observers had no understanding of map reading, spotting 
elevation or conducting target refinement; and only a handful of 
cannon crewmen could lay the howitzer. Furthermore, only the first 
sergeant understood tactics well enough to close with and defeat 
the enemy. 

As artillerymen, it was a sobering realization that our focus in 
western Nuristan must include partnering with the ANA artillery 
battery to increase its competency in the five requirements for 
accurate predicted fire. First and foremost, we had to develop a D30 
certification program to ensure the unit was capable of providing 
acurate and timely artillery fires in support of Afghanistan National 
Security Force and, ultimately, fires in support of any coalition 
forces as required. This certification program used Field Manual 
3-09.8 Field Artillery Gunnery as a guideline. 

The ultimate objective of the certification program was to train 
the ANA artillery sections at Forward Operating Base Kalagush 
in a deliberate, thorough process, culminating in a section live fire 
in a six-to-eight week period. During the training period, our fire 


direction center trained and certified the ANA fire 
direction center in the manual computation of firing 
data and the digital computation of firing data using 
the AN A artillery computer system. Our firing platoon 
similarly trained and certified the platoon leadership 
in all tasks from occupation to effective crew drill 
procedures. This was a daunting task and was only 
achievable through the sheer determination of our 
trainers and the eagerness to learn by the ANA 
leaders and soldiers as they modified years of 
traditional practices to improve their efficiency. 

The ANA’s practices and doctrine tended 
to over-centralize tasks with the leaders 
personally, doing jobs subordinates perform in 
our Army. Therefore, the battery commander, f 
the lieutenants and the first sergeant acted as , [ 
the observers, the fire direction center and the 
section chief for the howitzer. This practice, J 
naturally, did not facilitate training the entire 
battery on proper crew drill procedures or 
individual soldier responsibility. The ANA 
leadership’s lack of trust in subordinates 
derailed the training program and extended 
the section certification from eight weeks 
to 14 weeks. 

However, after a change in leadership 
and a refinement of duties and 
responsibilities, the ANA artillery 
battery in Western Nuristan was 
now capable of providing 
timely and accurate artillery 
fires in support of the 
Afghanistan N ational 
Security Force. The 


1 




j 


A Ml 98 firing point in Area of Operations Mountain Warrior, Afghanistan. 

(Photo courtesy of A Battery, 2nd Battalion, 77 Field Artillery Regiment) 







“However, the true measure of success for our Fires in counter¬ 
insurgency is not how much indirect fire was used, but how much 
the use of Fires was reduced over time. c uftiaR3i53[P3 D DuODOeCq @3 GHHP 
©fffctfS to (Bra 

(JSQDOSQo] ODD (Ms® GOd 0DQ@]© QD Fa°ba@3 


leaders understood accurate artillery fires would defeat the enemy 
and reduce collateral damage and injury to civilians, and ultimately 
increase support from the local population for its security force. 
This is an important realization as coalition forces and Afghanistan 
National Security Force attempted to build credibility with the local 
government and the population. 

Once the sections were certified, they maintained operational 
capability 24 hours a day. We had to rely on our brothers in arms 
on 13 to 14 November 2009. On these days, our mortar and gun 
sections were supporting our observation post during a fire fight with 
the Taliban. The ANA artillery section was prepared and ready to 
provide timely and accurate fires in support of a fire fight to retain 
control of Forward Operating Base Kalagush and the Observation 
Post Loyalty. On this occasion, the embedded training team observed 
a mortar team emplacing and guided the AN A observer on the target. 
The observer conducted a map spot of the grid location and relayed 
the call for fire to the fire direction center. The fire direction center 
computed the data manually, requested airspace clearance and sent 
the information to the howitzers. The howitzers were laid on target 
and received clearance to fire and achieved effects on target with 
the first round. This achievement represented the best validation of 
the training model we implemented with the ANA artillery battery 
in Area of Operations Steel. 

ires in counter-insurgency. The nature of the insurgency in 
Afghanistan proved more conducive to the use of indirect 
fires than in Iraq because the insurgency tended to base itself in 
rural areas in the mountains rather than in urban areas. That said, 
much metal is thrown around in Afghanistan. However, the true 
measure of success for our fires in counter-insurgency is not how 

much indirect fire was used, but how much the _ 

use of fires was reduced over time. Therefore, 
much of our effort in coordinating fire support 
across the brigade area of operations focused 
on doing things to reduce expenditures. Among 
the initiatives we implemented were fielding 
the Meteorological Measuring Set-Profiler 
AN/TMQ-52 meteorological station, which 
conducted fire support team certification to 
reduce target location error, developing an 
escalation of force matrix for artillery fires and 
using an attack guidance matrix. 

Fire support in restrictive terrain. During 
predeployment training at home station and the 
Joint Readiness Training Center, Fort Polk, La., 
we placed emphasis on the ability to achieve 
first round effects on the target. The forward 


observer’s ability to locate the target accurately was the critical 
requirement in the restrictive and dominating terrain of Afghanistan. 
The majority of the main supply routes were dominated by higher 
elevation terrain, and the enemy typically initiated attacks from 
above our patrols on this terrain. Therefore, the forward observer 
had to mitigate target location and elevation errors to achieve first 
round effects on target. 

We were fortunate to initiate our training at our home station, 
Fort Carson, Colo. The terrain in the training areas has similarities 
to Afghanistan’s terrain. However, home station training practices 
tend to rely on fixed observer locations or known target locations 
on which observers have refined their skills during many observer 
training events. To negate the familiarity of terrain for the observers, 
it is imperative to force the observers to conduct moving shoots 
to acclimate the observers to conducting call for fires while on 
dismounted or mounted patrols. The majority of fire missions 
executed in Afghanistan came from either dismounted or mounted 
patrols. 

Executing this deliberate training plan at home station forced 
the observer to update his observer location constantly, forcing 
the fire direction center to battle track constantly and remove the 
bad habits of garrison operations. Polar missions are the preferred 
method to call for fire by our observers. To ensure accuracy, battle 
tracking is vital, but we required a modification to the pertinent 
information in the call for fire. The observer had to include target 
elevation with the standard requirements for the polar fire mission. 
This allowed the fire direction center an independent check of target 
elevation and helped account for vertical interval. 

Fire support in Afghanistan and the counter-insurgency 



An explosion from two 500 pound bombs dropped on 
insurgents attacking Observation Post Loyalty, Nov. 
14, 2009. (Photo by 2nd Lt. Natassia Cherne, U.S. Air Force) 









environment required graduate-level expertise. Direct and indirect 
fires, used in combination, were essential to providing maximum fire 
power to the maneuver forces on the ground. Fire support could not be 
an afterthought of the maneuver commander or the forward observer. 
When direct and indirect fires were employed together in Afghanistan, 
it proved, time and again, the decisive element for defeating the enemy. 
The key to success was sound planning of fires before every patrol 
and rapid employment of those fires when engaged. 

ield artillery operations. In our role as the direct support field 
artillery battalion for the brigade, we were tasked to oversee the 
standards of discipline and precision of the gunnery solution. This 
meant maintaining 24-hours-a-day, seven-days-a-week support to our 
maneuver elements across the brigade area of operations. Management 
of ammunition resupply and the five elements of accurate predicted 
fire required the staff’s daily oversight. As the fight ebbed and flowed, 
the logistic staff had to monitor ammunition expenditures accurately 
to ensure we maintained adequate stock at all locations. Further, fires 
in the counter-insurgency fight required accuracy to reduce civilian 
casualties and help manage ammunition expenditures while also 
ensuring fires had the element of surprise. This casted the battalion fire 
direction officer back in his traditional role of monitoring expenditure 
rates while also overseeing the maintenance of the five elements of 
accurate predicted fire. 

Ammunition resupply in Afghanistan required close management. 
The remote locations of our firebases and forward operating bases 
made ammunition resupply problematic and the battery commanders 
had to manage expenditures and resupply requests down to the minute 
detail. 

During the deployment to Operation Enduring Freedom, Task 
Force Steel had to resupply nine different firebases comprised of three 
different howitzers (M777A1, Ml 19A2 and M198) and one 120-mm 
mortar. These firebases were located throughout the brigade’s footprint. 
Resupply was difficult due to the nature of the terrain and the ebb and 
flow of combat, requiring flexibility throughout the formation 

Our administrative logistic operation center was collocated with 
the brigade support battalion and brigade ammunition transfer point, 
facilitating several things. First, it was the central hub for all supplies and 
facilitates receipt and onward movement to the firebases. Second, our 
administrative logistic operation center had two Military Occupational 
Specialty 13B Cannon Crewmember staff sergeants attached, and 
they ensured that artillery ammunition was configured correctly for 
proper shell-fuze combinations and propellant lots before pushing 
out to the firebases. Field artillery battalions no longer had a service 
battery and, thus, did not have artillerymen in the logistic companies 
(forward support companies). 

The decision to attach two 13B NCOs proved critical, because it 
ensured ammo configurations and saved the firing batteries time by not 
calibrating different lots delivered by every combat logistics patrol. 
Due to the large number of propellant lots on-hand, we determined 
that a key task was lot management at the ammunition transfer point. 
Our 13Bs at the ammunition transfer point facilitate the shipment of 
single lots of ammo to reduce the need for constant calibration or the 


stockpiling of “trash” lots at firebases that tend to go unused. 
This eased a great burden from the batteries in ammunition 
management. 

There were several times during the deployment that the 
ammunition transfer point went critically short during our combat 
operations. One instance was during the fighting at Combat 
Outpost Keating on 3 October 2009. During that fight, one 
firebase nearly ran out of M232 propellant and rocket assisted 
projectile rounds within two hours of the initial call for fire. 
The ammunition transfer point had a small number of M232 
on hand and a small number of RAP rounds. Our immediate 
action drill was to cross-level ammunition from our firebases 
experiencing little to no action, and push it up to the fire bases 
heavily engaged. This enabled the firebase supporting the close 
fight at Combat Outpost Keating to maintain a constant stock 
level for seamless support. Initially, we pulled ammo from 
the closest firebase and coordinated with the brigade support 
operations to push additional propellants, RAP rounds and fuzes 
by air from outlying firebases. The threat from ground attacks 
along the main supply route forced us to move the ammo by air 
versus ground; plus it rapidly built the stocks. 

The firing platoon supporting Combat Outpost Keating 
continued a steady rate of fire for several more days taxing our 
logistics system. However, the flexibility demonstrated by the 
brigade SPO, combined with our attaching the 13B staff sergeants 
to the administrative logistic operation center collocated with 
the brigade ammunition transfer point, ensured the Soldiers 
engaged in the desperate fight at Combat Outpost Keating had 
continuous fire support. 

As artillerymen, we understood the requirement to compensate 
for nonstandard conditions through the five requirements of 
accurate predicted fire to ensure the artillery unit was capable 
of providing first round effects on the target for the maneuver 
commander. The firing platoons ’ ability to execute fires to standard 
in accordance with the five requirements for accurate predicted 
fire was what would produce the greatest effects on the enemy 
and further providing indirect fires to our maneuver elements. 

Management of ammunition was also aided by ruthless 
adherence to standards of precision through the five elements 
of accurate predicted fire. The battalion fire direction officer 
oversaw the adherence to these standards within the battalion. Our 
emphasis on this enabled the battalion to reduce the expenditure 
of ammunition during our deployment. This aided the logistic 
system by reducing haul requirements for artillery ammunition; 
and expending less ammo by hitting the target helped enhance 
fighting in the counter-insurgency environment. 

arget location. With available technology and a conventional 
environment, a trained forward observer can achieve effects 
with the first round on target. However, after years of conducting 
a counter-insurgency fight, we have seen a degradation of 
knowledge in the use of forward observer equipment combined 
with a lack of synchronization of fires with the scheme of 


“From our experience thus far, the indirect approach we have 
taken to maneuver operations has produced the best results within 
our area of operations. 1 

gin3 cmmjfiagj GCo@©© ©gqep@©(°] to 


17 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 


maneuver among our field artillery junior leaders and forward 
observers. These deficiencies significantly contribute to target 
inaccuracies. Every patrol that leaves the forward operating base 
must conduct a fires rehearsal to ensure the maneuver element and 
observers understand the fire plan and what assets are available, 
iring unit location. Across our brigade area of operations, the 
artillery and mortars provided indirect fires to their supported 
maneuver task force. However, there was no requirement for the 
artillery to mass fires in Afghanistan. 

That stated, the artillery and the mortars still had to have accurate 
weapon location in the fire direction center to ensure accurate 
range and deflection. The battalion did not operate the Improved 
Position and Azimuth Determining System for survey and did not 
operate on common survey for the reasons stated before. However, 
the howitzers and mortars required accurate survey. In our brigade 
area of operations, the batteries provided fifth order of survey to the 
indirect systems within their associated task force area of operation 
using Global Positioning System and Global Locating Positioning 
System. 

eapon and ammunition information. Ammunition 
management was the hardest task the platoon leader and 
platoon sergeant had to manage. Each howitzer in our brigade area 
of operations had its own ammunition basic load and, therefore, the 
crews had to manage the projectile family and propellants effectively. 
On average, each fire direction center maintained proper muzzle 
velocity and calibration data on 30 different lots of ammunition 
and propellants. 

At the battalion level, the fire direction officer, in coordination 
with the battalion S4, ensured he properly distributed the ammunition 
and propellants to alleviate the unit maintaining ‘trash’ lots that 
were not in sufficient quantity to calibrate properly. When the 
battalion staff and the platoon leaders managed the weapon and 
ammunition information properly, the fire direction center could 
compute accurate firing data. 

eteorological information. The common practice to provide 
meteorological information in Afghanistan was to use 
the Interactive Grid Analysis and Display System to fulfill this 
requirement. However, the Interactive Grid Analysis and Display 
System was a predicted meteorological that was not interpolated. 
Therefore, we had not used the best available technology to provide 
meteorological data to meet the five requirements. Each artillery 
battalion had a Profiler system organic to the unit to provide more 
accurate meteorological information to the fire direction center. 
The Profiler system, in coordination with the Navy Operational 
Global Atmospheric Prediction System, was capable of interpolating 
atmospheric conditions across a 60 kilometer radius to provide real¬ 
time information, ensuring the artillery unit met the requirement 
of the five requirements of accurate predicted fire. We employed 
our Profiler system to provide meteorological data for our firing 
batteries. This provided better accuracy and contributed to a reduction 
in ammo expenditure as fewer rounds were used in adjustment. 
Our battalion fire direction officer took the lead in establishing the 
meteorological station in a location that would support the firebases 
that are spread over a wide area in the brigade area of operations 
and ensuring the data was transmitted in a timely manner for use 
by the fire direction centers. 

omputational procedures. Fire direction centers were very 
efficient in the battalion at executing proper computation 
procedures and conducting independent checks before processing 
the fire mission. These checks included processing the mission on 
multiple systems, validating proper meteorological data, ammunition 
data and observe locations. It is imperative the fire direction center 
was the secondary independent check for target elevation. For this 


independent check, the fire direction center used Falcon View or 
Tactical Ground Reporting system Net. The fire direction centers 
in theater did not compute data manually as a secondary check 
because there was often little room inside the command post to 
set it up. However, they did use a second Advanced Field Artillery 
Tactical Data System and Centaur hand-held fire direction computer 
to conduct the independent checks. 

Our first six months in Afghanistan were challenging and 
demonstrated that, while our training plan was sound for preparing 
for deployment, there were a number of areas that predeployment 
training could not adequately cover. The tyranny of the terrain tested 
our gunnery skills and maneuver elements as we began operating 
in our area. However, adhering to basic principles of field artillery 
employment and fire support planning can enable any unit to meet 
the daunting challenges of delivering fires in Afghanistan. Further, 
maneuver operations must incorporate elements of an indirect 
approach to leverage all available resources and remain true to the 
spirit of counter-insurgency operations. From our experience, the 
indirect approach we had taken to maneuver operations produced 
the best results within our area of operations. The key to this was 
setting the team early and ensuring those engaged in the maneuver 
fight understood this methodology so they can implement according 
to the intent. 


Lieutenant Colonel Michael Forsyth, field artillery, is the commander 
of the 2nd Battalion, 77th Field Artillery, 4th Infantry Brigade Combat 
Team, 4th Infantry Division, deployed in support of Operation Enduring 
Freedom. Previously, he served as the executive officer and effects 
coordinator for 3rd Infantry Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain 
Division; operations and executive officer for 4th Battalion, 25th Field 
Artillery, 3rd Infantry Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain Division, at 
Fort Drum, N.Y. and commanded a battery in the 101 st Airborne Division, 
Fort Campbell, Ky. He has served in combat in the Persian Gulf War 
and twice in Afghanistan. He has authored two books about Civil War 
campaigns titled The Red River Campaign of 1864 and the Loss of the Civil 
War by the Confederacy and The Camden Expedition of 1864. He holds 
a masters of arts in military history from Louisiana State University, 
Baton Rouge, La., and a Master of Military Art and Science from the 
U.S. Army School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, Kan. 

Major George L Hammar, IV, field artillery, is the battalion executive 
officer for 2nd Battalion, 77th Field Artillery, deployed in support of 
Operation Enduring Freedom. Previously, he served as the battalion 
S3. He also has served as the brigade military transition team S3 
for the 33rd Brigade, 8th Iraqi Army Division, in Karbala, Iraq; fire 
support observer/controller and senior fire support analyst at the Joint 
Multi-National Readiness Center, Hohenfels, Germany; public affairs 
officer, 66th Military Intelligence Brigade, in Darmstadt, Germany; 
and the assistant S3 and commander of B Battery, 3rd Battalion, 
321st Field Artillery, 18th Field Artillery Brigade (Airborne) at Fort 
Bragg, N.C. He has served in combat during the Persian Gulf War 
and Operation Iraq Freedom. He holds a Master of Military Studies, 
Land Warfare from American Military University, Charlestown, W.Va. 

Major Billy D. Siekman, field artillery, is the battalion operations 
officer for 2nd Battalion, 77th Field Artillery, deployed in support of 
Operation Enduring Freedom. Previously, he served as the battalion 
military transition team chief for 2nd Battalion, 2nd Brigade, and 2nd 
Battalion, 3rd Brigade, 10th Iraqi Army Division, in Baghdad, Iraq; joint 
fires officer in the Joint and Combined Integration Directorate, Fort Sill, 
Okla., aide-de-camp for the commanding general, United States Fires 
Center of Excellence, Fort Sill, and the battalion S2 and commander 
of A Battery, 6th Battalion, 32nd Field Artillery, Fort Sill. He has served 
in combat during Operation Iraqi Freedom. He holds a Master’s of 
Military Operational Art and Science, Air University, Maxwell AFB, Ala. 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 18 













A combined patrol with the Afghan National Army in 
Western Nuristan, Afghanistan. (Photo courtesy of Headquarters 
and Headquarters Battery, 2nd Battalion, 77nd Field Artillery Regiment) 











Hiiga expeditionary 





A delay in payments to the Sons of Iraq threatens to unravel the entire program. The senior leadership of Multi-National 
Corps-lraq knows this is a critical and time sensitive issue. A decision was made to engage the highest levels of the 
Government of Iraq and emphasize the Sons of Iraq program is a serious piece to the national security of Iraq. 

MNC-I turned to Redlegs of the joint fires and effects cell to accomplish several goals. 


21 March-April 2010 • Fires 

















a s I-Corps began to plan the transition to Multi-National 
Corps-Iraq, we put considerable effort and planning into 
the organizational structure of the joint Fires and effects cell. 
Throughout the preparation for deployment, the general consensus 
that emerged was the joint Fires and effects cell’s structure needed 
to adapt to Iraq’s dynamic operational environment. Lethal strikes 
were decreasing, and security in the operational environment had 
improved considerably during XVIIIth Airborne Corps’ tenure as 
MNC-I. To capitalize on this situation, I-Corps adopted a robust, 
multi-faceted joint Fires and effects cell with a variety of roles and 
uses. Today, as MNC-I does, the I-Corps’joint Fires and effects cell 
uses a nonstandard structure to leverage a myriad of capabilities 
in Iraq’s operational environment as the nature of the war transi¬ 
tions from predominantly combat operations to a political struggle 
within a sovereign nation. 

As the last MNC-I joint Fires and effects cell did, the I-Corps’ 
joint Fires and effects cell 
embraced the idea of “finish¬ 
ing with courage.” Courage 
is the I-Corps’ motto and 
a necessary component in 
looking for a way to deal with 
the various challenges that it 
would face. As we looked to 
the course ahead, various key 
dates and times stood out. 

The national and provincial 
elections, moving out of cit¬ 
ies and transitioning from a 
Multi-National Corps to a 
U.S. Forces headquarters all 
would occur under our watch. 

Going in to our deployment, 
we were dealing with some¬ 
thing our predecessors did 
not have — a timeline for the 
completion of combat opera¬ 
tions in the Iraqi Theater of 
Operations. 

A glance at the I-Corps 
joint Fires and effects cell 
structure shows many fa¬ 
miliar components as well as 
some that traditionally are not rr\ fi iTb Rpi 
a part of a joint Fires and ef- IbUUvZ? 

fects cell structure. Functions 

such as the joint operation center, force field artillery headquarters 
and plans and targeting are some of the more traditional elements 
and incorporate core artillery roles on the modern battlefield. How¬ 
ever, organizations such as the electronics warfare coordination 
cell, corps assessments cell, air and missile defense, key leader 
engagements, the security agreement secretariat, reconciliation and 
counter-rockets, artillery and missiles augment the joint Fires and 
effects cell, allowing for a comprehensive and holistic approach 
to full-spectrum operations. To enhance the capabilities of these 
organizations, civilian contractor-staffed research organizations, 
such as the human terrain team and the Iraqi/American task force, 
provide invaluable resources to the joint Fires and effects cell. 

These capabilities are maximized in theater through a variety 
of synergistic efforts. By collocating and putting these varied 
resources under one umbrella, the opportunity to create fusion 
and unity of effort was increased exponentially. By creating a 
synchronized rhythm and facilitating interaction between these 


“Odd ©rap taKSaO (^nrq°i1ap a 
\°my (£Bg[pQaa3 apse© RS@giR»SiQg 
®Cd© ©®oo© off Opag SGoaS 
psqpflRKi] a mxscssajDgi feoSsseem 
pi[3RSS3oa3a3te®© ftraouQ 
amS Gfio3 ©oiimHiDDDimios off 
I uTjQ©fl®QxiS Hfro© amS ©GfeoasosOO 

DtBKi] ffC03 ©DfffogP g©se©e(iini0a[fe 

@@0D aoal] oanibaos©^ am Etef 
("JapsCo amaDjpfe off GGoo taoqj] 
gj®w©pmom©me D © ppoqjp©©© 
eoMapti]© poBmeoqjpasBom 
©ooo© off Opaq] 


groups, the joint Fires and effects cell was able to leverage 
and focus organizations as needed. 

In our initial example, a pay dispute arose regarding the Sons of 
Iraq that required a meeting between representatives from MNC-I 
and the Government of Iraq. The joint Fires and effects cell used 
the Corps’ assessments cell and conducted an in-depth analysis of 
the Iraqi government’s progress towards reintegration of the Sons 
of Iraq. The Sons of Iraq program was viewed as a “game changer” 
throughout the theater. At first, small groups throughout Anbar began 
to resist, then openly challenge, al Qaeda forces. The decision to 
cut ties with al Qaeda forces was dubbed the “Anbar Awakening” 
by Iraqi organizers, and has been hailed as a turning point in the 
U.S.-led war effort, because soon, this program began to spread 
throughout the country. U.S. forces originally paid these men to 
serve as a form of police. As violence decreased, the new goal was 
for the Government of Iraq to honor its deal with these brave Iraqi 

patriots and transition them to 
jobs throughout the govern¬ 
ment and ministries of Iraq. 

This spurred the reconcili¬ 
ation cell into action to gather 
atmospherics as to current 
public opinion on the Sons of 
Iraq program in order to gauge 
sentiment toward transition 
into the Iraqi security forces 
and ministries. The findings of 
these reports were transmitted 
to the key leader engagements 
cell, and a synchronized en¬ 
gagement plan was developed 
that refined our movement 
toward the desired end state. 

Key leader engagements 
are the premier tool in the 
Corps-level leader’s toolbox. 
By coordinating and priori¬ 
tizing efforts to reach out to 
government and military lead¬ 
ers throughout Iraq, MNC-I 
leaders can ensure that our 
messaging is clear and well 
planned. Key leader engage¬ 
ments can occur at various 
levels, but when dealing with 
the highest levels of the Iraqi 
government, we must be sure that our senior leaders stay well 
informed and succinctly and accurately describe U.S. positions 
and goals. 

The reconciliation cell then can put the MNC-I command 
team’s guidance into action through connections with local and 
provincial Iraqi leaders. The reconciliation cell and the security 
agreement secretariat coordinate resulting adjustments and brief 
the results during the next Joint Subcommittee for Military Op¬ 
erations, Training and Logistics, where the joint Fires and effects 
cell, as the security agreement secretariat, develops and prepares 
the commanding general for his co-chair role in partnership with 
the Iraqi ground force and national police commanders. 

The Joint Subcommittee for Military Operations, Training and 
Logistics provides an opportunity within the construct of the Se¬ 
curity Agreement for us to advise and assist our Iraqi counterparts 
with issues relating to their continued development of their military 
forces. At the general officer to general officer level, these events 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 22 


ED 




LTG Charles H. Jacoby, commander of Multi-National Corps-1 raq, speaks 
with an Iraqi leaderduring battlefield circulation in Samarra, Iraq. Important 
atmospherics gained during meetings like this are analyzed and interpreted 
by the corps assessments cell. (Photo by MSG Mark Woelzein, U.s. Army) 



TSi Ihm 

gW o iV / 


f wBSf 

W m jwbwt 1 

■r 1 ~ T 

11 1, 

raucj . m v —i 


23 March-April 2010 


Fires 




















function as a chance to engage and inform our Iraqi partners on 
various issues we see on the horizon as well as engage them in a 
social setting and build strong relationships. Any issues related to 
the security agreement are discussed as well, and this provides a 
forum for U.S. forces to describe how we are conducting operations 
inside of the sovereign country of Iraq. 

Throughout all the stages of development, from planning to op¬ 
erations, the joint Fires and effects cell synchronizes and any issues 
that might occur across all planning horizons in a comprehensive 
manner toward one end state. The United States is a reliable and 
enduring strategic partner to the country of Iraq. 

As MNC-I conducted a seamless transfer of authority with 
XVIIIth Airborne Corps, we also assumed control of the XVIIIth 
Airborne Corps Operations Order 09-01 which emphasized three 
lines of effort — security of the forces and the people of Iraq, 
training and equipping the Iraqi security forces, and construction 
and facilitation of civil capacity. The joint Fires and effects cell 
functions to support the commander’s scheme of maneuver across 
all three of these lines of effort. As the new MNC-I, we transitioned 
to Campaign Plan 09-02 and developed the MNC-I operational 
targeting design. This design is focused and framed by the three 
major decisive points in the near future (All combat forces out 
of major Iraqi cities, setting the conditions for safe and secure 
parliamentary and national elections and executing a responsible 
drawdown of forces). The operational targeting design allows us to 
transition from our current lines of effort to ones that fully embrace 
the drawdown of forces with the Iraqi security forces in the lead 
and set the stage for stability operations beyond August 2010. 

The fight increasingly is shifting to apolitical struggle throughout 
Iraq with violence trending downward. Although lethal operations 
are diminishing in frequency it is still an important weapon in the 
commander’s tool kit, however, our preferred course of action is to 
leverage the nonlethal aspects of our organization. The focus of our 
operations is to maintain pressure on the networks by leveraging 
all capabilities. This allows us to disrupt the movement of lethal 
aid and the flow of foreign fighters as well as weaken the financial 
capabilities of our enemies. These objectives are increasingly being 
achieved through nonlethal means. We are the first corps element to 
be operating with a clear change of mission timeline and a defined 
end state. 

As we begin a responsible drawdown and after moving units out 
of major Iraqi cities, we face the potential for a renewed conflict 
as groups vie to fill the power void left by U.S. forces moving out 
of these regions. To stem this potential for renewed violence, we 
began to work even more collaboratively with both the Government 
of Iraq and the Iraqi security forces. As this partnership expands, 
it has become most evident in the transparent targeting process, 
ansparent targeting. In a major shift from previous combat 
operations, the transparent targeting process ensures all 
operations conducted both notify and include our Iraqi partners. 
This effort ensures the Iraqis take an increasing stake in their own 
security and safeguards American forces from potential backlash 
against unilateral operations. The process shows Iraq’s government 
and security forces that we have an interest in being completely 


open with our actions in their country and what we view as potential 
threats to their sovereignty. 

The transparent targeting process begins with a collaborative 
target development that identifies a potential threat. In collaboration 
with U.S. forces, Iraqi governmental and military agencies begin the 
process to collect evidence on the targeted individual or network. 
This information is then presented to a court, much like traditional 
police operations in the U. S. If there is sufficient evidence, a warrant 
is issued. When a warrant is acted upon, U.S. and Iraqi forces act 
together to conduct the apprehension of the individual or network. 
This process is entirely open, following both the letter and the spirit 
of the current security agreement, which states, “The U.S. is here 
at the request of the Government of Iraq, and all operations will 
be conducted by, with and through the Government of Iraq.” 
rnrotecting the force. Our focus is shifting from counter- 
Li insurgency operations to protecting U.S. and Iraqi forces to 
shore up the Iraqi government as it takes the lead. The joint Fires 
and effects cell provides force protection through varied means, 
but perhaps the most visible one to Soldiers in the Iraq theater of 
operations is the Counter-Rockets, Artillery and Mortars system. 
The Counter-Rockets, Artillery and Mortars system is at several 
operating bases and has the capability to intercept indirect fire 
near critical assets and/or provide localized emergency warning 
near the indirect fire point of impact. The sensor data provides 
intelligence and targeting information to support responders and 
field commanders in countering enemy tactics. The joint Fires and 
effects cell and the Counter-Rockets, Artillery and Mortars cell 
also provide a liaison between units executing the mission and the 
Counter-Rockets, Artillery and Mortars Program Manager team to 
improve the system. The cell coordinates the efforts of civilians at 
Counter-Rockets, Artillery and Mortars Program Manager, Soldiers 
and sailors of Task Force 3-3 Air Defense Artillery and various 
radar units, to provide increased force protection to U.S. forces. 

Another way the joint Fires and effects cell is influencing the 
battle is by reducing the number of enemies by supporting Iraq’s 
reconciliation efforts. A crucial element of reconciliation is the Sons 
of Iraq program facilitating the reduction of insurgent attacks and 
the increase in cooperation of local and provincial governments, 
tribal leaders and U.S. forces. As of May 2009, the Government of 
Iraq has control over all 90,000 Sons of Iraq in nine provinces and 
is responsible for paying all Sons of Iraq salaries. While completing 
the transfer of control of the Sons of Iraq and ensuring Sons of Iraq 
payments, U.S. forces continued to work with Implementation and 
Follow-up Committee for National Reconciliation to transition Sons 
of Iraq members to other viable employment. The Government of 
Iraq has transitioned more than 13,000 Sons of Iraq into the Iraqi 
security forces and more than 5,000 Sons of Iraq into Government 
of Iraq ministries. We will continue to partner with the Implemen¬ 
tation and Follow-up Committee for National Reconciliation in 
transitioning all the Sons of Iraq through the end of 2009 and early 
part of 2010. 

S trength in diversity. Traditional roles of the artillery also 
make up the efforts by the MNC-I joint Fires and effects cell. 
Using the benefits offered by precision-guided munitions, such as 



omfla© aooB off Eogflap Qpsisfl ms teas aOoa psaanafeO 

top a p@0Q3BHa»] ©ajOufflaB as gjpaoqp© as fflB paism? 
0@3a \sjy QDndk tonas© DuQOTfljQg ®aoB off adoos© (Rag/Jama.® 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 24 



Excalibur and Guided Multiple-Launch Rocket System rockets, the 
joint Fires and effects cell can shape the battlefield in methodical 
and surgical means that is unparalleled in modem warfare. 

The joint operation center Fires cell is responsible for the tradi¬ 
tional integration of conventional and precision surface-to-surface 
and air-to-surface delivered Fires. Based on increased security 
conditions in the operational environment, the number of lethal 
surface-to-surface and air-to-surface delivered munitions dropped 
off significantly in the last six months. The largest number of mis¬ 
sions in the last six months were 155-mm illumination projectiles in 
support of terrain-denial missions. As with a high-intensity conflict, 
the interaction with the corps air liaison officer is critical. Although 
not employing lethal strikes on a frequent basis, the shows of force/ 
shows of presence and rapid response to troops in contact from the 
available air assets are critical to the warfighter on the ground. 

The force field artillery cell also conducts traditional field 
artillery missions in support of force protection operations. The 
sensors section coordinates the distribution of the 200-plus radar 
assets across the Iraqi Theater of Operations to counter the indirect 
fire threat. The Q-48 Light-weight Countermortar Radar, the most 
predominant counter-indirect fire sensor, is an indispensible asset 
against counter-indirect fire due to its mobility, low cost and up¬ 
grades to improve an already combat-tested system. As the enemy 
and his tactics, techniques and procedures continue to transform, 
the primary purpose for the counter-indirect fire radars is to provide 
input into the Counter-Rockets, Artillery and Mortars sense and 
warn systems to warn troops and determine the points of origin, 
rather than traditional sensor-to-shooter counterfire assets. 

These operations occur entirely in the sovereign country of Iraq, 
presenting numerous challenges when dealing with governmental, 
religious and tribal officials. A constant dialogue must be maintained 
to ensure operations and actions happen with the approval of the 
Government of Iraq. The joint Fires and effects cell facilitates these 
discussions with the key leader engagement cell. 

The key leader engagement cell, comprised of four officers 
and one civilian, is responsible for preparing the corps’ flag of¬ 


ficers for upcoming engagements with senior Government of Iraq 
and Iraqi security force leadership. The cell accomplishes this by 
synchronizing operational and tactical level key leader engage¬ 
ments in support of the corps’ communication strategy. One field 
grade staff officer from the key leader engagement cell resides in 
the communications strategy fusion cell — a cell rounded out by 
public affairs and information operations officers. This cell produces 
consistent themes and messages that support U.S. government, 
force and corps guidance. The key leader engagement cell also 
has one field grade intelligence officer that resides in the corps 
assessment control element who is responsible for providing all 
of the background and analysis the Government of Iraq and Iraqi 
security force leadership. 

As the nature of the war in Iraq continues to move toward 
providing support to and partnering with the Government of Iraq, 
traditional artillery roles and core competencies, augmented with 
new capabilities, have rejuvenated the branch and continue to prove 
the versatility of the artilleryman. As the conflict has evolved, so 
too has our function as a joint Fires and effects cell. By embracing 
this change and providing a clear focus on the challenges and op¬ 
portunities that lay ahead, we are preparing ourselves for success 
and look forward to finishing with courage. 


Colonel David J. McCauley, field artillery, is the Multi-National Corps- 
Iraq effects coordinator at Camp Victory, Iraq. He most recently 
commanded 17th Fires Brigade at Fort Lewis, Wash., and commanded 
2nd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery as part of V Corps during major 
combat operations as Operation Iraqi Freedom began in 2003. 

1LT Sean Bilichka, field artillery, is the Multi-National Corps-lraq 
joint Fires and effects cell administrative officer at Camp Victory, 
Iraq. Previously, he served as executive officer of Headquarters and 
Headquarters Battery and platoon leader for C Battery, both part of 
5th Battalion, 3rd Field Artillery, in Fort Lewis. 



MG John D. Johnson, deputy commanding general of operations of 
Multi-National Corps-lraq, discusses issues with Sons of Iraq leaders at 
a conference. By having an open dialogue with the leaders, Multi-National 
Corps-lraq has been able to quickly respond to any concerns that may 

arise. (Photo courtesy of Multi-National Corps-lraq Reconciliation Cell) 









A rticle subjects. Fires strives to be 
“forward-looking.” We’re at the 
dawn of a new Army transformation. 
Many exciting things are taking place in 
the field and air defense artillery fields of 
expertise. Article subjects should therefore 
be current and relevant. Writers may share 
good ideas and lessons learned with their 
fellow Soldiers, as exploring better ways 
of doing things remains a high emphasis 
with Fires. 

If an article subject is significant and 
pertains to field artillery or air defense 
artillery and its diverse activities, as a rule 
of thumb we’ll consider it appropriate for 
publication. Article subjects include (but 
aren’t limited to) technical developments, 
tactics, techniques and procedures; how¬ 
to pieces, practical exercises, training 
methods and historical perspectives (Army 
Regulation 25-30, Paragraph 2-3, b). 

We are actively seeking lessons-learned 
articles which will enhance understanding 
of current field and air defense artillery 
operations. The magazine’s heart is 
material dealing with doctrinal, technical 
or operational concepts. We especially 
solicit progressive, forward-thinking and 
challenging subject matter for publication. 
In addition to conceptual and doctrinal 
materials, we encourage manuscripts 
dealing with maintenance, training or 
operational techniques. 

Good ideas or lessons-learned articles 
should have two closely related themes: 
one, what did you learn from what you 
did? The second theme is: what is most 
important for others to know, or what will 
you do differently in the future? Include 
only the pertinent information on how you 
did it so someone else can repeat what you 
did. Don’t include a blow-by-blow of your 
whole deployment. The article’s emphasis 
should be that your unit has a good idea or 
some lessons-learned to share. 

Steps involved in submitting an article 
to Fires are outlined following. 

All articles should have the bottom line 
up front; however, to better ensure your 
chances of publication, we recommend 
that you read all the criteria contained in 
this article as well as apply the guidance 
contained in the Fires style manual at 
sill-www. army.mil/firesbulletin/style. 
asp for more details. We do not pay for 
articles or illustrations other than providing 


contributors with complimentary copies of 
the magazine. 

Fires is not copyrighted. All material 
published is considered in the public domain 
unless otherwise indicated. (Occasionally 
we use copyrighted material by permission; 
this material is clearly marked with the 
appropriate legal notification.) 

If you get permission to use someone 
else’s graphic or photo, especially from 
the private sector, we need proof of that in 
writing. 

etting started. Select a relevant topic of 
interest to the U.S. Army field and air 
defense artillery community. The topic must 
professionally develop members of these 
fields. Write an outline to organize your 
work. Put the bottom line up front and write 
clear, concise introduction and conclusion 
paragraphs. Follow the writing standard 
established in Army Regulation 25-50, 
Preparing and Managing Correspondence, 
Section IV (the Army writing style), and 
Department of the Army Pamphlet 600- 
67, Effective Writing for Army Leaders, 
especially Paragraphs 3-1 and 3-2. 

The Army standard is writing you can 
understand in a single rapid reading and 
is generally free of errors in grammar, 
mechanics and usage. Also see Fires' 
style manual. Maintain the active voice as 
much as possible. Write “Congress cut the 
budget” rather than “the budget was cut 
by Congress.” (Department of the Army 
Pamphlet 600-67, Paragraph 3-2, b[l]). 
Write as if you were telling someone face-to- 
face about your subject: use conversational 
tone; ‘I,’ ‘you’ and ‘we’personal pronouns; 
short sentences and short paragraphs. 
Articles should be double-spaced, typed, 
unpublished manuscript, between 3,000 
and 3,500 (or less), but no more than 
5,000 words, including inline citations as 
appropriate. 

Authors should check their articles’ 
contents with unit commanders or 
organization directors or S2s/G2s to 
ensure the articles have no classified or 
operations security information in them. 
Clearance requirements are outlined 
in Army Regulation 360-1, Chapter 5, 
Paragraph 5-3. Headquarters Department of 
the Army/Office of the Secretary of Defense 
clearance is required if your article meets any 
of the criteria listed there. Article clearance 
is further covered in Paragraph 6-6, with 


procedures on how to do so outlined in 
Paragraph 6-9. The bottom line on most 
article clearance is discussed in Paragraph 
6-6. While you certainly may ask your 
local Public Affairs Office’s advice, it is the 
“author’s responsibility to ensure security 
is not compromised. Information that 
appears in open sources does not constitute 
declassification. The combination of several 
open-source documents may result in a 
classified document.” 

So while the Fires staff may question 
the sensitivity of an article we receive, it 
is not our responsibility to officially clear 
articles, however if we do see something 
within an article that might cause concern, 
we reserve the right to withhold publication 
of such an article until it is thoroughly 
vetted with the proper subj ect matter expert 
or Army authority. But it still remains the 
author’s responsibility, as outlined in Army 
Regulation 360-1, not to compromise 
national security or U.S. Army operational 
security matters. 

We reserve the right to edit an article, so 
the Fires staff will edit all manuscripts and 
put them in the magazine’s style and format. 
The author of an article or interviewee will 
receive a courtesy copy of the edited version 
for review before publication, however, if 
the author does not get back to the Fires 
staff with any questions or concerns within 
a specified suspense date (typically five to 
seven working days) it will be assumed the 
author concurs with all edits and the article 
will run as is. 

Except in the case of Armywide 
news items, authors should not submit 
a manuscript to Fires while it is being 
considered elsewhere. A comprehensive 
biography, highlighting experience, 
education and training relevant to the 
article’s subject and credentialing the author 
as the writer of the article also is required. 
Include e-mail and mailing addresses and 
telephone, cell and fax numbers. Please 
keep this information current with Fires 
for as long as we’re considering the 
manuscript. 

hotographs and graphics. See the 

“Fires Bulletin Photographer’s Guide” 
on page 36. 

end the article. E-mail the editor at 
firesbulletin@conus.army.mil; or mail 
them to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 
73503-0311. 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 26 








B 0KB® expeditionary 


By LTC Timothy J. Daugherty 


Leaders 




LTC Timothy J. Daugherty (center) stands with leadership from his battalion, 5th Battalion, 82nd Field 
Artillery Regiment, and his partner Iraqi brigade. (Photo courtesy of ltc Timothy j. Daugherty, u.s. Army) 


A s an Army, we are trained to conduct 
an after-action review on every 
event and share information. After 
recently returning from my fifth deploy¬ 
ment to Iraq as a battalion commander, it 
seems as if something is missing unless I 
share some successful tactics, techniques 
and procedures in leadership I used during 
these two years of command with the last 
year being while deployed to Iraq. This is 
in no way an insinuation I have it all figured 
out and my battalion was flawless due to 
these lessons learned; it is simply to share 
some thoughts and ideas with other units 
and commanders. 

This article outlines a list of methodolo¬ 
gies that worked for me and allowed my unit 
to perform admirably as Iraqi trainers, all 
while firing artillery rounds in our brigade 
area of operations. To highlight just a couple 
of quantifiable results, we had only four 
non-deployable Soldiers left back on rear 
detachment, no disciplinary issues above a 
field grade level and statistically the fewest 
serious incident report events in the brigade. 
Additionally we had no suicides or serious 
injuries, no Soldiers lost in combat due to 
friendly or enemy action, more than 3,800 
field artillery rounds fired in train-up and 
Iraq without incident and no serious disci¬ 
pline issues upon return from Iraq. 

raq overview. My unit was the 5th 
Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery Regi¬ 
ment which is the organic Field Artillery 
Battalion of the 4th Brigade, 1st Cavalry 
Division (1CD). My brigade deployed to 
southern Iraq in the vicinity of the Dhi Qar 
province after a year of preparation that 
included two training center rotations. The 
first at the Joint Readiness Training Center 
at Fort Polk, La., and the other at the Na¬ 
tional Training Center at Fort Irwin, Calif. 
One could make the assessment that 4th 
Brigade, 1 CD was a prototype “advise and 
assist brigade.” My battalion initially was 
not aligned with my brigade headquarters. 
We had one battery task organized under 
a cavalry squadron from the brigade and 
various hot gun sections and radar systems 
throughout the brigade’s area of operations. 
The battalion headquarters and remainder 
of my battalion, as well as some other units 
task organized to us, had a security mission 
in central Iraq in the vicinity of Logistics 
Support Area Anaconda. 

After about four months, the battalion 


received a change of mission; to focus on 
standing up and training the new 41 st Iraqi 
Army Brigade in southern Iraq near the 
brigade’s headquarters in Dhi Qar prov¬ 
ince. After about three months of training 
the 41st, we then moved with the 41st into 
our area of operations in south eastern Iraq 
near the Maysan province for our final five 
months. 

oldier caring plan. Early in my 
command, we developed the Black 
Dragon Soldier Caring Program to provide 
some synergy and detailed mandatory guid¬ 
ance for what is expected from leaders as 
well as provide some methodology units 
should look at when establishing and main¬ 
taining the relationship with our Soldiers. 
The topics discussed below were outlined 
in the program. The program document 
was disseminated widely in the battalion 
and talked about in numerous forums and 
meetings as the backbone of how we wanted 
to treat Soldiers. In my opinion, this was 
the most important document we had in 
the battalion. Implementing this program 
allowed us to maintain a very small num¬ 
ber of Soldier discipline issues over a very 
stressful two-year period. The program al¬ 
lowed us to have a constant Soldier caring 
theme and provide a baseline of not only 
how we would deal with our Soldiers, but 
also what is expected of our leaders. 

ctive leaders. Leaders must be engaged 
and get ahead of issues. The question 
I enjoy asking leaders the most is, “Tell me 
one thing you have done recently or you 
are doing in the near future that lets your 


Soldiers know you care about them?” I actu¬ 
ally ended every meeting with that question 
to my subordinate commanders. It does not 
need to be some huge or extensive event 
each time, but what is really important is that 
our leaders ask that question of themselves. 
There are numerous good answers but only 
one bad answer to the question; that is no 
answer at all. 

In the Soldier Caring Program, we 
outlined some opportunities units could 
put into action and it gave ideas on how to 
answer the question above. Soldiers knew 
one part of being a leader in the 5-82 Field 
Artillery Battalion was an expectation, a set 
of standards and guidelines focused on the 
Soldiers ’ well being. Leaders were required 
and encouraged to adhere to those standards 
and guidelines. 

eekly sensing sessions. Weekly, we 
had the chaplain go and ask Soldiers 
10 specific questions on quality of life is¬ 
sues. Topics such as pay issues, work areas, 
leader attitude and living conditions were 
discussed. This gave the chaplain a specific 
mission to interact with Soldiers beyond 
traditional religious duties. The results of 
those informal yet quantifiable sensing ses¬ 
sions were briefed at the weekly command 
and staff meetings in a very nonthreatening 
way. Unit commanders then openly and 
briefly discussed those concerns. More 
often than not, it was an issue that the 
unit needed help with from the battalion. 
Often, a Soldier would identify an issue or 
problem no one in the room was tracking. 
These weekly sessions seemed to put us in 





27 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 












hip tot 


front of issues we were not tracking, and 
it was a good sounding board for Soldiers 
to vent without any consequence in a very 
non-attribution type environment. 

ounseling. We know the center of 
gravity for taking care of our Soldiers 
is for our first-line leaders to know our Sol¬ 
diers. The key is how we make that happen. 
In my experience, I see leaders are good at 
directive counseling where we give them 
a form letter of rules with which they must 
comply. What we are not good at is interac¬ 
tive counseling, where we get to know the 
Soldiers and develop an individual plan for 
those under our care. We found putting out 
clear minimum standards on what is required 
for initial, monthly and special counselings 
helped clear up any confusion. We put 
those minimum standards in our battalion 
Soldier Caring Program. Additionally, any 
disciplinary incident required the Soldier’s 
complete counseling packet to be brought 
to the battalion commander and command 
sergeant maj or for review. As a result, we had 
few Soldier discipline issues. This initiative 
fed on itself and enhanced the concept of 
proper counseling. 

addle. I really think metaphors work. 
The one we used for team building in 
our Iraq deployment was of a paddle; we 
were in the same boat moving to the same 


location. The comparisons are many. If one 
person does not paddle and accomplish his 
fair share of the work, it makes it much 
harder for everyone else. The theme con¬ 
tinued, if someone refused to paddle, we 
might have to discard him from the boat 
(or for literal purposes chapter them out of 
the Army). The Soldiers found some more 
humorous meanings within the metaphor, 
such as Soldiers who were absent without 
leave were those who chose to jump out of 
the boat. Why jump out when the island (or 
in this case home) was literally thousands 
of miles away? 

To further solidify my team building 
metaphor, I actually had a paddle that I took 
to all my battalion formations. Any time I 
administered a Uniform Code of Military 
Justice action, I would use a marker to put 
the Soldier’s name on the paddle. I would 
ask them if they were going to remain in 
the boat. The reference caught on and so it 
was used often to motivate Soldiers and get 
them back home safely. 

itness theme. It is imperative at the 
battalion level and below that the 
commander finds ways to reach as many 
Soldiers as possible on a personal basis 
and on a physical fitness level. One way 
we can do that as leaders is to have a fit¬ 
ness challenge of some kind in our units. 


Studies show sound physical conditioning 
is absolutely paramount to Soldiers being 
able to handle a tough year-long deploy¬ 
ment. All leaders should bring something 
to the plate physically. They must be able 
to run, lift, perform chin-ups, road march, 
etc. at a higher level than the majority of 
Soldiers in their formations. 

So in keeping with this thought process, 
I used a personal bench press challenge. I 
issued to all the Soldiers in my battalion to 
meet or surpass a specific goal. In order to 
become a member of the “Big Dog” club 
they had to be able to bench press 300 
pounds. This was coupled with a challenge 
to beat my best lift. Use whatever your skill 
set is to offer a challenge to your Soldiers. 
Those who beat you can get some kind of 
recognition and perhaps, a free lunch with 
you, rights to park in your space for a week 
or even a four-day pass. We had a battalion 
t-shirt with a strength patch that was given 
to Soldiers who successfully completed 
the challenge. This type of challenge helps 
establish your unit as a physical formation 
and broadens your contact with your Sol¬ 
diers. It also gives them a way to relate to 
their commander on a personal level. We 
came back from Iraq at a much higher level 
of performance from the strength aspect 
of fitness than we would have without the 


















challenge. As a reference point, in a bat¬ 
talion of about 550 Soldiers, we had 58 
Soldiers bench press our internal standard 
of 300 pounds and numerous others got 
very close. 

I n processing/contract. Prior to deploy¬ 
ing to Iraq, as part of our quarterly battle 
rhythm, we held an in-processing week at 
the battalion level for new Soldiers that 
we called Black Dragon University. We 
consolidated the new Soldiers and gave 
them some classes on standards, programs 
in the battalion, policies and procedures and 
we discussed the upcoming calendar. We 
also had them go through Soldier readiness 
processing. It culminated on the last day 
when the command sergeant major and I 
did physical training with them as well as 
discussed and signed a contract with each 
Soldier. The one page contract referenced 
the top issues that typically get Soldiers in 
trouble and lets them clearly know what 
the possible consequences were to their 
actions. 

We also explained we would not be a unit 
that allowed harassment of our Soldiers and 
we cared for them greatly. We sent NCOs 
who seemed to forget standards frequently 
through the week as well. Before our return 
from Iraq, the command sergeant maj or and 
I did a second contract with them outlining 
some key concerns we wanted to ensure we 
personally addressed with each Soldier. The 
command sergeant maj or and I knew that we 
personally gave our vision to every Soldier 
on what we expected of them and we clearly 
outlined for them what some consequences 
were for some common misconduct, such 
as driving under the influence. 

L etter writing campaign. In garrison 
and in Iraq, I wrote two to three letters 
to family members of our Soldiers each 
week. I would pick a Soldier who seemed 
to need a pat on the back or I thought might 
have issues in the future. Knowing I was in 
contact with their family members seemed to 
build a bond with them. In general, the let¬ 
ters were very positive, and I would simply 
let the family member know their Soldier 
was in my unit and I was proud of them. 
It is a tactic, technique and procedure that 
provided a high probability of connecting 
with a Soldier and gaining his confidence. 

My personal effort in writing these let¬ 
ters also was a good example for company 
and battery commanders, which I think, 
caused them to be even more aggressive at 
their levels to establish their own methods 
of relationship building. There was a strong 
bond between me and some of the family 
members of Soldiers I was concerned about. 
I got numerous letters and phone calls from 
family members that I would usually defer 

29 March-April 2010 • 



CSM Melvin Carr of 5th Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery Regiment, talks to the battalion in Iraq 
following an awards ceremony. (Photo courtesy of LTC Timothy J. Daugherty, U.S. Army) 


to the battery-level chain of command to 
work and resolve. I think those family 
members then helped keep their Soldiers on 
track because they knew me on a personal 
basis. 

P rivate Gleep. Our second metaphor 
we used to highlight training at the 
first-line leader level and the consequence 
of leaders not training Soldiers was called 
PVT Gleep. We obtained an urn-looking 
item that weighed about 25 pounds. On 
it, we wrote the story of a fictitious PVT 
Gleep who died due to his first-line leader 
conducting improper precombat checks/ 
precombat inspections. When we identi¬ 
fied units or leaders who failed in those 
principles, they would have to carry PVT 
Gleep around. 

The overarching theme of the burden of 
carrying PVT Gleep’s urn around was much 
less than the burden we could carry the rest 
of our lives as leaders if we fail to train our 
Soldiers properly and a Soldier dies due to 
our training deficiencies. Our leaders who 
had to carry the urn didn’t perceive it as 
harassment because we also awarded it to 
units in a positive manner. Either way, lead¬ 
ers (including myself) would carry it around 
to events like battalion runs and meetings. 
It gave leaders a constant reference of the 
grave consequences that faced us if we 
didn’t prepare our Soldiers properly. 

U nit and Soldier awards. All units 
need an awards program for their 
subordinates. There are lots of opportunities 
for awards across the Army. The unit needs 
to identify a few and work to get their sub¬ 
ordinate units’ hard work recognized. For 
example, after my deployment, my battalion 
ended up winning a few corps safety awards 


and a Forces Command logistics award. 

To take it one step further, we also 
wanted to develop a method of awarding 
our Soldiers who go above and beyond their 
peers, as well as our batteries that upped 
the ante. The awards we ended up using 
to identify our top performers were called 
the “Man Up” and the “PVT Gleep header” 
awards. We gave the “Man Up” award twice 
a year to the Soldiers (one per battery) who 
embodied the concept of being a Soldier 
who took care of tasks he was given in 
professional and unassuming manner. The 
“PVT Gleep header” was awarded at the 
rank of staff sergeant or above. It was given 
to the NCOs who demonstrated the concept 
of taking caring of our Soldiers. All of our 
winners received a nice gift, in addition to 
an article written about them in the local 
paper and one of their ID tags placed on a 
plaque. 

The other method we used to motivate 
and instill pride in our units was awarding 
guidon streamers at the company/battery 
level. These streamers were awarded for 
specific areas and were given to the company 
with the best performance. We often made 
this competition a part of another program 
such as a battalion fitness test or part of a 
battalion inspection. The units seemed to 
appreciate adding the “Top Supply” type 
streamers to their guidon. We made sure we 
did these competitions in a positive manner 
so that it did not become a negative factor 
leading the units to stop sharing and helping 
each other. 

L eader development. In the last several 
years the Army has accelerated it 
promotions from the junior ranks, and this 
acceleration has come with a price. The cost 


Fires 








is we have some very talented junior leaders 
who simply lack a lot of experience that is 
gained with time in service. There is also 
a huge disparity of experience between the 
company and battery level of leadership. 
On average, a company commander has 
six years of experience while a battalion 
commander has about 18 years of experi¬ 
ence. This gap has expanded more in the last 
several years as the Army has accelerated 
promotions to captain. 

A remedy to fix this inequality is to have 
a functional and diverse leader development 
program in place. An example of this in ac¬ 
tion was when we held an overnight officer 
training exercise in the field which involved 
physical training, road marches, weapon 
ranges, leader reaction course, simulation 
training, land navigation and leadership 
classes. This exercise culminated in a sur¬ 
prise, team-building, late-night barbecue 
out in the training area. 

Another example is we 
had an officer andNCO 
staff ride to the National 
World War II Museum 
in New Orleans, La.; 
it also was a terrific 
event. 

Baring special 
events, a good baseline 
to always have are old- 
fashioned leader devel¬ 
opment presentations 
to cover key topics. 

No matter what type 
of event you decide to 
have, putting these on 
the training schedule 
and resourcing them is the key. These types 
of discussions and training at the leader level 
enabled us to stay on top of the professional 
development of our junior leaders. 

latoon-level safety. One of the things 
we started early is to empower the 
platoon-level leadership to understand 
composite risk management and be able to 
make good decisions on tough situations. In 
order to do this we made the risk assessments 
center of gravity at the platoon level, rather 
than at the battalion level. The focus at the 
platoon level drives home the point that our 
junior leaders were the ones who would be 
able to stop a poor decision from being made 
at the point a task is executed. We started 
this concept in garrison long before the 
deployment and continued a platoon-level 
focus throughout our time in Iraq. 

The platoons were required to conduct a 
risk assessment (functional and not fancy) 
on any event that involved vehicles moving 
or Soldiers conducting a mission. In Iraq, 
the reality of a fast-paced mission dictates 


that platoons are “where the rubber meets 
the road.” 

A vehicle did not move without a 
platoon-level risk assessment and approval 
from the platoon leadership. I attribute this 
tactic, technique and procedure to enabling 
us to have a very small number of safety is¬ 
sues or incidents, including our two training 
center rotations and then the year in Iraq, 
how initiative to your unit. Our 
Soldiers want leaders who think out 
of the box, and we tried numerous things to 
keep the enemy off balance. One example 
we employed was getting several local video 
repair shops around Fort Hood, Texas, to 
donate dozens of old and worthless video 
cameras before our deployment. We took 
these to Iraq and put them in simplistic black 
wooden boxes we had one of our NCOs 
make for us. We then attached these boxes 
to our meteorological helium balloons and 


flew them about 100 feet off the ground in 
areas we thought had the most insurgent 
activity. We would also periodically set one 
of these floating cameras in a part of our 
area of operations we had concerns with 
and tell the locals we were conducting a 
test flight. Sometimes at night we would 
untie one and let it go. From 100 feet, these 
boxes with their balloons looked like a real 
surveillance devices and the locals were 
convinced these were legitimate systems. 

To keep the enemy guessing we also 
extensively used nonlethal ambushes. To 
achieve this, we would pick a secondary 
road with limited traffic, place some brush 
or other object on it to slow vehicles down, 
and when a vehicle would approach, a team 
would ascend to conduct a surprise vehicle 
inspection. All of this was done jointly with 
Iraqi security forces of course. This led 
up to us finding a large amount of illegal 
weapons and improvised explosive device 
building material. 

Both of these examples gave the Soldiers 


a sense their leadership was looking hard for 
alternate solutions. It also provided a high 
level of local misinformation in our area 
of operations which kept the enemy from 
having a full understanding of exactly what 
we technically could and could not do. The 
bottom line is, in each location we imple¬ 
mented a full-spectrum of TTPs, enemy 
attacks went down across the board, and 
the Soldiers were very proud of that fact. It 
was confirmed the enemy eventually started 
moving their operations to other areas due 
to these pressures on their systems. 

ositive theme, no slang allowed. One 
of the real measures a unit can take 
in preparation and training is to eliminate 
any negative opinions of their deployment. 
In addition, the chain of command must 
enforce a policy of respect for the people 
in whose country they are deployed. It is 
imperative as Soldiers and leaders that we 
cannot get involved with 
or express our personal or 
political opinions about 
current operations. Sol¬ 
diers feed negatively on 
that, and it becomes a 
cancer, resulting in our 
Soldiers dealing with the 
population in a less than 
respectful manner. 

Our j ob is to follow our 
orders and accomplish the 
missions we are given, 
and not to determine 
what that mission is. I 
understand the concept 
of providing our higher 
headquarters with honest 
assessments on issues, but once the decision 
is made, we are either part of the solution 
or part of the problem. We need to find the 
essence of the mission we agree with and 
push forward from there. To do otherwise 
is counterproductive and of no value. 

A year is a long deployment and if 
we start to let negativism creep into our 
formations, the result inevitably will be 
counterproductive. In a year of aggressive 
operations, my battalion did not have one 
complaint lodged against it nor was there 
ever an accusation of any inappropriate 
conduct with any Iraqi personnel. 

eader involvement in decisions. We 
found as a field artillery unit, we were 
very comfortable with the tactic, technique 
and procedure of reviewing our stand¬ 
ing operating procedures frequently. Our 
leadership needed, wanted and deserved a 
forum to discuss evolving TTPs and trends 
that might change our current standing 
operating procedures. The system we used 
to provide our leaders that forum was a 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 30 


“It is imperative as Soldiers and 
leaders that we cannot get involved 
with or express our personal or political 
opinions about current operations. 
Soldiers feed negatively on that, and 
it becomes a cancer, resulting in our 
Soldiers dealing with the population 
in a less than respectful manner.” 




monthly SOP update. In order to accomplish 
this, we would hold a platoon sergeant and 
above leadership development session to 
distribute information and discuss trends we 
were seeing. The key was to then have two 
people in charge of the proposed changes. 
They would then initially vet them with 
the leadership before implementation at 
the LDP session. Then, during the session, 
these NCOs would lead the discussion and 
provide a one or two-page summary which 
clearly outlined the proposed changes. They 
would vet them with the leadership before 
implementation. 

The standing operating procedures was 
kept in a 3x5 binder with a simple circle 
ring to keep the pages together. This made 
the “on the spot” replacement of pages very 
easy. I kept the standing operating proce¬ 
dures binder on my desk, and throughout 
our last year in Iraq we had made more than 
40 changes. Checking for an updated SOPs 
was probably my most frequent pre-combat 
inspection as I was spot checking convoy 
movements. This gave us a feeling we 
were staying on top of any evolving tactics, 
techniques and procedures we were seeing 
and provided a forum to share information 
at the platoon level. 

-shirts. Another relatively simple plan 
we implemented based on our ongoing 
teamwork concept was to get a battalion t- 
shirt made in lieu of company-level t-shirts. 
I got the idea for a battalion-themed t-shirt 
after a discussion with a Soldier who had 
never deployed before. He asked me if I was 
ever afraid of getting hurt on a deployment. 
That question was the base for our t-shirt 

31 March-April 2010 • 


motto, “We do not get hurt, we give hurt.” 
Although, perhaps a little overly aggressive 
in its context, it helped us to have an ag¬ 
gressive attitude. Those red Black Dragon 
t-shirts were very well known at any and all 
locations we were stationed or even visited. 

We also gave them out at our deployment 
ball, our reenlistment NCO gave them out as 
incentives, and we also gave some to junior 
leaders and Soldiers as perks. We had plenty 
to go around without Soldiers having to pay 
a lot for them, and the pride on their faces 
during battalion runs was remarkable. My 
fellow commanders did enjoy harassing 
my Soldiers who fell out of a battalion or 
brigade run since they were easy to spot in 
their red shirts. In response, I would always 
claim the fallouts were their Soldiers who 
had bought the shirts on E-bay. 

latoon certification program. A 
battalion-level leader does not earn 
their paycheck by sitting behind a desk, 
so as a consequence I was out and around 
the troops often. I found it essential to visit 
and certify each platoon every quarter to 
ensure they were not getting complacent. 
The visits also provided me with a forum 
to teach, coach and mentor each platoon, 
especially the platoon leadership. We 
would stand a platoon down for 48 hours. 
They were given the first day to get some 
rest and prepare themselves for certifica¬ 
tion. On day two of the stand down, my 
battalion master gunner, communications 
and maintenance teams would ascend on 
the selected platoon and give them about 
an eight-hour certification. The command 
sergeant major, battalion S3 operations 


Soldier and I were part of the process and 
were at all the after-action reviews. Those 
certifications were an essential ingredient 
to ensure bad trends were not finding their 
way into our formations and good trends 
were. Although I constantly looked at the 
platoons, this 48-hour formal certification 
allowed us to certify every platoon and 
make sure things were not slipping through 
the cracks. 

I do not want to leave you with the 
impression the battalion should have been 
named the “good ship lollypop,” borrow¬ 
ing from my boat metaphor one last time, 
and there were no problems. I do, however, 
think effective communications can make a 
difference in increasing a unit’s productivity 
and will reduce negative conduct. 


Lieutenant Colonel (P) Timothy J. Daugherty, 
field artillery, is the interim commander of 
the 89th Military Police Brigade at Fort Hood, 
Texas. His deployments include Operation 
Desert Storm as a battery fire direction officer 
and company fire support off icer in Iraq for 2nd 
Battalion, 3rd Field Artillery Regiment. He was 
also a battery commander in Bosnia for 5th 
Battalion, 41st Field Artillery, and a battalion 
S3 as part of a Desert Strike mission in Kuwait 
for 3rd Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery. He was 
also the aide-de-camp to the Multi-National 
Corps-lraq commander in Iraq in 2004, deputy 
commander in 41st Fires Brigade in Iraq in 
2006, and the battalion commander of 5th 
Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery Battalion in Iraq 
from 2008 to 2009. 


Fires 


Photo courtesy of LTC Timothy J. Daugherty (U.S. Army) 





















SociaTmedia websites 


Fires Center of Excellence 
^ http://www.facebook.com/FiresCenterOf 
Excellence 

U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery School 
^ http://www.facebook.com/AirDefense 
ArtillerySchool 

U.S. Army Field Artillery School 

^ http://www.facebook.com/FieldArtillery 
RedLegLive 

^ http://twitter.com/RedLegLive 
^ http://www.flickr.com/photos/RedLegLive 



Fires Bulletin 

^ http://www.facebook.com/FiresBulletin 







D [Unsustainable 


Hid PardyJj^Jd td 

jrsicj iti AJ^hemits^urt 

By Doug Grindle 




A handful of Iraqi kids sit on a 
mound of dirt on the outskirts 
of the small town of Harami 
in the southern Diyala province. 
The harsh midday sun beats down 
on their uncovered heads. Few 
people live in the empty houses, 
which are long-since abandoned. 
Many of the doorways sag with 
neglect. The flimsy wire livestock 
pens are dusty and empty. Around 
the town, fields lie dried up and 
barren of crops. The winter wheat 
and beans wilted and blew away 
years ago. 

Harami suffered badly under al Qaeda 
in Iraq during its nearly five-year reign of 
terror. Barely 25 miles from Baqqubah, 
the provincial capital, this is one of the last 
places in the province to be reclaimed from 
al Qaeda in 2008. 

Al Qaeda wrecked whole swathes of 
Diyala province. As it took over from the 
government, those rich enough to flee did so. 
The poor were trapped and stayed behind. Al 
Qaeda brought drought with them because 
the fields had been fed with water from the 
Diyala River near Baqqubah, but war closed 
the taps and the plants died. With few other 
options, people soon started working for 
al Qaeda as couriers, bomb-planters and 
guardians of hidden weapons caches. 

T urn for the worse. Life for these 
people turned sharply worse. Working 
for al Qaeda meant fighting the Americans 
and Iraqi forces, which took a heavy toll. 
Villages turned against each other. The pay 
was meager, and prices of food and fuel were 
high. And life under al Qaeda was tense, as 
the terrorists instituted strict Sharia law, cut 
off the hands of thieves and killed people 
who fell afoul of the new regime. Cars lay 
burned out and abandoned near the killing 
houses where al Qaeda meted out its grisly 
justice. Darkness had fallen over Diyala. 

“It was a weird life,” said Sheikh Riyath 
Tami Abas, whose tribe lives in southern 
Diyala. “The people would get killed little 


Children sit on the outskirts of Harami Village in south central Diyala province, Iraq. Villagers are 
trickling back in after al Qaeda was ousted in the winter of 2008-2009, but they still face little 


water or electricity and few jobs. (Photo courtesy of Doug Grindle) 


by little. Nobody could walk in the street a 
go to Baqqubah. They could not get married. 
No one could visit neighbor to neighbor.” 

Yet in spring 2009, the terror group is 
all but gone. Almost a dozen families have 
come back to live in Harami. LifeJi ere * s 
still tough. There is no running water>Elje 
irrigation ditches are still dry. There is no 
electricity, but Soldiers say it is secure. 

R eturn to normalcy. A joint security 
center sits on the edge of town. Inside 
is a joint detachment of the Sons of Iraq 
militia and the Iraqi army. Outside the 
center, a few workers place brick on brick, 
building a brand new extension. No one 
fears death threats or the return of al Qaeda. 
An American patrol stops in at the joint 
security center at Harami, parking its Stryker 
fighting vehicles in a ragged crescent. The 
young American lieutenant speaks with the 
local Sons of Iraq commander, who says 


JL MA I i I I 

33 [Vlarch-April J blO • Fires It 

'JTTj- J '1 

f id* 


L 


Kt 1 . 














al Qaeda is unpopular and has no presence 
here at all, though it is trying to return across 
the province. 

“I think they’re done,” reflected 1LT Jeb 
Townsend of B Company, 3rd Battalion, 
21 st Infantry Regiment. “They had a bad 
ideology. It just does not work on the 
ground.” 

Only a year earlier, al Qaeda’s hold 
over almost all of southern Diyala was iron 
tight. A narrow ribbon of road connecting 
Baqqubah and Baghdad was secure, and 
government officials and security forces 
traveled that road. But venturing even a little 
way into the countryside was unwise. 

Then over the course of six months 
almost everything changed. The story of 
the turning of south central Diyala is a 
relatively simple one, though simple does 
not necessarily mean easy. 

For years, the coalition had not 
gone down the roads in the countryside. 
Improvised explosive devices were well 
hidden and abundant, and there weren’t 
enough extra Soldiers to push far — the 
U.S. Army was occupied in its back and 
forth struggle with al Qaeda in Baqqubah. 

But then, Baqqubah started to turn. 
By spring 2008, the road from Baqqubah 
to Baghdad was secured. And by fall 
2008, it became feasible to push into the 
countryside. 

N ew people, new 
ideas. And 
new people came 
in with new ideas. 

The 2nd Battalion, 


1st Stryker Brigade Combat Team, 25th 
Infantry Division, rotated into south central 
Diyala. It added one extra company to the 
mix in the countryside south of Baqqubah, 
which was a 100 percent increase in troops. 
Most importantly, it introduced new ideas 
of how to secure the area. 

In previous years, patrols pushing 
down a road would be blown up, so there 
was never a lasting presence. But now the 
battalion called in the Iraqi army. Iraqi 
army engineer platoons, backed by U.S. 
Army explosive ordnance disposal teams, 
cleared the improvised explosive devices. 
Behind them, the Iraqi army built up a new 
system of joint security centers. They built 
eight stations quickly, added another four 
in coming months and constructed three 
police stations. An Iraqi brigade spread its 
soldiers across the ground, mostly holding 
villages and checkpoints on roads. 

The coalition forces recruited about 
3,000 men for the Sons of Iraq — locals 
who knew the area, many of whom likely 
fought against the coalition—and installed 
them in the joint security centers along 
with the Iraqi army. The U.S. sent roving 
patrols from station to station, inspecting, 
encouraging and improving. Al Qaeda was 
routed. It had no effective counter to the 
continued presence of security forces who 
knew the area and were supported by the 
population. 

Today, there are still follow-up issues. 
Thousands of displaced people are trickling 
back to their home villages with dry fields, 
no electricity and little water. Palm groves 


along the Diyala River slowly are being 
cleared of al Qaeda’s abandoned munitions 
and booby traps. An estimated 2,000 houses 
were destroyed and have to be rebuilt. 
But these are generally the problems of 
the transition to peace-building, not war- 
fighting. 

C omparison to Afghanistan. In 

many areas of Afghanistan today, the 
situation resembles that of Diyala. There 
are huge agricultural areas where people 
are too poor to flee violence and become 
drawn into it, depending on terror dollars. 
Coalition forces are often too scarce to 
maintain a lasting presence in the areas they 
patrol. The national government is too frail 
to counter a deep-seated insurgency. 

In the same way Diyala benefited from 
a new direction, Afghanistan also needs a 
new way of doing things. One possibility 
includes creating a local militia that pays 
large numbers of local fighters to keep 
terrorists out of the villages. Without the 
Sons of Iraq working for the coalition instead 
of against it, the situation in Diyala would 
have been all but hopeless. Their recruitment 
tipped combat power in Diyala toward the 
government forces. The Sons of Iraq were 
encouraged, controlled and empowered as 
they operated with the Iraqi army. A well- 
paid tribal militia would benefit Afghanistan 
similarly. 

Another opportunity exists through the 
creation of joint security centers to give 
the population confidence and prevent the 
enemy from returning. Local populations 
have no incentive to work with the security 
forces if they feel the security forces will 
disappear sooner or later. Defensible and 
credible security stations provide the visible 
proof and, more importantly, are easier to 
set up than traditional, cumbersome police 
stations. The Diyala example suggests 
police are the least important component 
of counter-insurgency work—a surprising 
development when considering the police- 
heavy solutions in campaigns such as 
Malaya. 



V 


BACKGROUND: A house destroyed in the village of Naqib in 
southern Diyala province. U.S. and Iraqi forces clearing the 
village were forced to destroy over 90 percent of the houses, 
which were rigged with numerous improvised explosive 
devices in order to clear them. (Photo courtesy of Doug Grindle) 









“SqjsMllOg) (Ulie/ii^lQgDD Kkli330Dgl]£!ffl^ 


on I n ip nio 


■ • I ■ ■ I 


GCosiS D@@@0 osflBSs© nEfJgJifi ®KsaS3 Basso cMcfciHi]© a? as® s© a 
ssnnSajpsMB ®a ®0aa DoatflaGoaO gjavanBoa^^ 


Eon® ®0aa toat°f] amDopOs amgfpa®© (Soa® Dsxs^ mflBfe]© ®@m fes Dci^sD 
Qa ®0aa DoatflaGoaO ©"Xv^HjOdddsol]^ ceetoxs^gJIljy ttaCosciD GCdc^7 seks racastE 
[pgfliL rajs(E=®[«][pHS30g]SSi] n iGtoil tSKxs^ ®cfcb ®©asoa[Sgl] {teip 


success 


ED 


In addition, the U. S. Army must backstop 
the whole effort. The addition ofU.S. forces 
in southern Diyala was tiny — an increase 
in the number ofU.S. companies from one 
to just two. But what it did is allow the U. S. 
forces to support Iraqi army operations in 
any sector where there might be a terrorist 
problem. During a six month period, 
U.S. forces made several air assaults into 
rural areas where al Qaeda was trying to 
mass or was hiding. U.S. forces could be 
used flexibly because the forces were not 
stretched, holding ground better held by 
the Iraqi army or Sons of Iraq. U.S. forces 
were able to go after al Qaeda itself. 

A rich security environment. In con¬ 
clusion, U.S. forces need to create 
a rich security environment. It must pay 
for a local militia. Expanding the Afghan 
National Army must take precedence over 
expanding the Afghan National Police. 
Political concerns that local militias 
might create local warlords or act as a 
counterpoint to the national government 
cannot be ignored. But the Iraqi example 
suggests that local militias can be loyal to 
the national government, especially when 
they are well paid, well-appreciated. And 
they are essential for success. 

The Taliban and other terrorist networks 
are following their own variant of this 
strategy. They arm and pay the villagers. 
They settle in for the long haul, building 
training bases and village strongholds. It’s 
a plan that al Qaeda used for almost five 
years in Diyala and was successful for most 
of the time. But the security forces defeated 
al Qaeda in Diyala, and it can defeat the 
extremists in Afghanistan as well. 


Doug Grindle is a freelance reporter who has 
written for more than 30 outlets about Iraq and 
Afghanistan over the past five years. He has 
contributed regularly to C-SPAN, Fox News 
Radio and over 30 local television affiliates, 
radio stations and newspapers across the 
U.S. He is a graduate of Columbia Journalism 
School. 



An Iraqi army soldier at a joint security center at Harami Village, Diyala province, Iraq, spring 
2009. The joint security center is manned by Sons of Iraq and the Iraqi army. (Photo courtesy of 
Doug Grindle) 


35 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 






















PHOTOGRAPHER’S 

GUIDE 





PFC Alii Hargis, assigned to Joint Combat Camera-lraq, shows Iraqi 
children photos on her camera's display screen during her visit to 
document a humanitarian-aid mission in the village of Dexeboth, north 
Of Mosul, Iraq, Oct. 25, 2009. (Photo by POI Carmichael Yepez, U.S. Navy) 

W e are always looking for photographs that tell the stories 
of today’s Soldiers. Here are some guidelines you can 
follow to give us high enough resolution photographs in 
formats we can use. 

hoot the picture at the highest resolution possible. Set 

your digital camera on the largest image size and the highest 
quality resolution the camera will allow. The highest resolution 
settings usually are called ‘high,’ ‘super fine’ or ‘ultra-high.’ 

Cameras set at ‘ standard’ or ‘basic quality’ can sometimes produce 
images only good enough for websites or Microsoft PowerPoint 
presentations, not publication in a magazine. Just because a 
photograph looks good on your computer screen does not mean 
it is printable in Fires. 

At Fires , we need high-resolution digital photographs. The 
photographs should be no smaller than 2 megapixels, which is 
approximately 4-by-6 inches at 300 pixels per inch or 16-by-24 


inches at 75 pixels per inch. For magazine covers and larger feature 
photographs, we prefer 6 megapixels or more, which is approximately 
6.5-by-10 inches at 300 pixels per inch or 26-by-40 inches at 75 
pixels per inch. 

We can use tif, but we prefer photographs saved as a jpg. When 
saving a file as a jpg, choose a ‘quality’ setting of ‘maximum’ or 
‘10’ and the ‘format option’ of ‘baseline (standard).’ 

Depending on the compression ratio when the photograph is saved 
in jpg, the closed file size of the photograph will be 150 kilobytes 
(KB) or more. 

To find out the closed file size, right click on the 
photograph file thumbnail, scroll to the bottom of the menu 
and select ‘properties.’ 

o not manipulate the photograph. Images cannot be 
manipulated other than the industry standard for darkroom 
processing, such as dodge, burn, crop, etc., as per Department 
of Defense Directive 5040.5, “Alteration of DoD Imagery.” Do 
not crop, resize or try to edit the image in any way. This includes 
adjusting the brightness and contrast. We know what settings work 
best according to the specifications of our printer. We also have 
the latest professional digital image manipulation software. Let us 
take care of that. 

And, please, don’t try to increase the resolution of the small, 
low-resolution photograph you’ve shot. Shooting a one megapixel 
image and increasing the pixels per inch after you’ve shot it will 
not make the image clearer or more usable — it only will make the 
image larger. You are limited by the resolution setting at the time 
the photograph is taken. 

Do not place the photographs in Microsoft PowerPoint or Word 
and send them to us. They are unusable in those formats. 

end us the digital photograph. Following the first two steps 
may result in a large file for each photograph. 

Do not send more than 20 megabytes per email. You can send 
several photographs in multiple emails. Include caption information 
(when, where and who’s doing what—including each person’s rank, 
full name and unit) for each photograph attached and the title/name 
of the associated article/author. Also include the photographer’s 
full name, rank and unit for credit in the magazine. 

This information can be embedded in the photograph properties 
or sent as a separate text document. To embed information in the 
photograph properties, right click on the photograph’s icon; scroll 
down and select ‘properties;’ click on the ‘summary’ tab; type the 
information in the ‘summary’ window; click ‘apply’ and close the 
‘properties’ window. Caution: unless you are using Adobe Photoshop 
software to embed information, only the information typed in the 
‘ summary ’ window that is visible when you first open the ‘ summary’ 
screen (without scrolling down) will be saved. 

You also can mail your photographs. We accept photographs saved 
on either a CD or DVD. All submissions become the property of 
the magazine and cannot be returned. 

agazine information. If you have questions about shooting 
digital photographs, contact the Fires staff at DSN 639- 
5121/6806 or commercial 580-442-5121/6806. Our email is 
firesbulletin@conus.army.mil. 






sill-www.ariTiy.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 36 



















^[Unsustainable 


Employing special 
munitions in the 
contemporary operating 

environment 




By CPT Brady B. Johnson 


P ast conflicts have seen the use of 
multiple types of munitions to 
facilitate the ground commanders’ 
missions. As a force multiplier, indirect fires 
evolve to exploit weaknesses in the enemy’s 
ability to counter friendly operations. 
Russian tactics during World War II saw 
the use of massed fires to decimate entire 
city blocks with follow on infantry and 
armor forces. “From antitank battles in the 
summer of 1943 it clearly appears that the 
main reasons for Soviet success were: (1) 
mass fire of artillery pieces echeloned in 
depth, (2) employment of mobile antitank 
reserves, and (3) secure protection from the 
air. It must not be forgotten, however, that 
without the skill and courage of the gun 
crews victory would have been impossible. 
This employment of massed fires, supported 
by infantry and armor were used to great 
effect to crush German resistance and ensure 
the success of the Russian army” (See COL 
R Afanayev’s “Antitank Action of Soviet 
Artillery” in the Nov. 1943 issue of Field 
Artillery). The consequence of mass fires 
as the primary tactic of the Red Army was 
total destruction of the local infrastructure 
resulting in a loss of critical support and 
services needed to sustain the soldiers and 
civilians after the cessation of hostilities. 

C hanging tactics and lessons learned. 
The conflict in Iraq, like Russian 
doctrine during World War II, has resulted in 
continually changing tactical developments 
and lessons learned that influence current 
and future employment of indirect fire. The 
use of dual-purpose improved conventional 
munitions was extremely effective when 
employed by U.S. forces during Operation 
Desert Storm and the 3rd Infantry Division 

Soldiers from B Battery, 1st Battalion, 109th 
Field Artillery Regiment, 56th Stryker Brigade 
Combat Team, fire 155-mm illumination rounds 
from a M777A2 howitzer at Joint Security Station 
Istaqlal, Iraq, Apr. 11, 2009. (Photo by ssg Mark 

Burrell, U.S. Army) 


37 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 









during Operation Iraqi Freedom. Dual- 
purpose improved conventional munitions 
were the munitions of choice for killing tanks 
and mechanized enemy forces in the open. 
A large drawback to dual-purpose improved 
conventional munitions in the current 
tactical environment is possibilities of duds. 
“Once we determined a target would be 
engaged best by 15 5-mm fires, we employed 
Paladin, principally with (high-explosive) 
rounds. We stayed away from (dual-purpose 
improved conventional munitions) in urban 
areas for obvious reasons (potential for 
unexploded bomblets)” (See BG Lloyd J. 
Austin Ill’s “3rd ID in OIF: Fires for the 
Distributed Battlefield” in the October 2003 
issue of Field Artillery). 

The duds produced by dual-purpose 
improved conventional munitions became a 
point of concern during combat operations 
and in post-combat stability and support 
operations. Armored vehicles destroyed by 
the 3rd Infantry Division Fires Battalion’s 
use of dual-purpose improved conventional 
munitions during Operation Iraqi Freedom 
were found scattered along the route north. 
While the effectiveness of these munitions 
has been proven, dual-purpose improved 


conventional munitions have been found 
less valuable in a combat environment due 
to the negative impacts derived from the 
possibility of duds in the path of follow-on 
forces and hazards to the civilian population. 
As a result, both large-scaled massed 
fires the Russians employed and their use 
has been re-evaluated in tactics, use and 
employment, resulting in the limitation 
of massed fires in urban environments 
and dual-purpose improved conventional 
munitions on the battlefield. 

pedal munitions. Like conventional 
munitions and dual-purpose improved 
conventional munitions, the effects of 
special munitions on the battlefield must 
and have undergone changes. Employment 
of illumination, smoke and rocket-assisted 
projectiles are a crucial aspect of the 
contemporary operational environment of 
the counter-insurgency and full-spectrum 
environment. The ongoing conflicts within 
Iraq and Afghanistan have proven the 
need for continual use of all fire support 
assets and have illustrated more directly 
the continual validity of indirect fires. 
Cannon and rocket artillery are the ground 
commander’s premier 24-hour weapon 


systems, and the Global Positioning System 
precision munitions now being used by both 
systems have made artillery more viable, 
crucial and responsive for today’s ground 
forces in urban and counter-insurgency 
environments. 

Special munitions, illumination and 
rocket-assisted projectiles play vital roles 
in the commander’s decisions affecting 
ongoing operations. Alternate operational 
procedures developed by units in country 
and adaptation of these techniques by all 
indirect fire assets and maneuver forces will 
give the ground forces, as a whole, the ability 
to operate more freely and reduce collateral 
damage while increasing the effectiveness 
of the total force package and indirect fire 
assets supporting them. 

During Operation Iraqi Freedom III, 
units supporting the 116th Cavalry Brigade 
faced increased demands for special 
munitions from their command structures 
on the ground. The artillery platoons 
supporting the maneuver forces in northern 
Iraq had to adapt to new criteria and ways of 
implementing fires to meet the commander’s 
intent. Built up urban environments were 
the greatest challenges to employing indirect 




Force Protection Operation Center blasts illumination rounds over the city of Mosul, Iraq, to heighten security, Dec. 18, 2005. (Photo courtesy of 1 38th 

Mobile Public Affairs Detachment) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 38 



fires. The suburban environment and the 
countryside also required creative new 
ways to reduce collateral damage while 
supporting ground units engaging the 
enemy. 

During the 116th Cavalry Brigade’s 
relief in place/transfer of authority with on 
scene forces, numerous emergency missions 
fired in support of Iraqi and coalition forces, 
with both illumination and rocket-assisted 
munitions, were fired. Illumination was 
fired in support of U.S. and Iraqi troops 
in contact and for the Iraqi police being 
engaged within city limits. Often during 
the relief in place/transfer of authority, 
rocket and artillery fires from the enemy 
using historical points of origin required 
the use of rocket-assisted projectiles from 
the M119A1 howitzer due to the enemy’s 
firing from ranges exceeding 12,000 meters. 
With the arrival of the M109A6 Paladin 
in the area, the increased capabilities and 
ranges of 15 5-mm munitions were brought 
to bear on these points of origin using regular 
munitions and special munitions from the 
Paladin in addition to the Ml 19A1. 

n illuminating concept. Leading up to 
and during the handover in Feb. 2005, 
the 116th Cavalry Brigade fire support 
element began to ask for illumination 
canister data before approving planned 
missions. At first, determining data seemed 
difficult as Field Manual 6-40 Tactics, 
Techniques and Procedures for Field 
Artillery Manual Cannon Gunnery did not 
give a way to determine specific canister 
data, but only the effective illumination area 
based upon illumination safety procedures 
are outlined. The Advanced Field Artillery 
Tactical Data System does not account for 
the continued ballistic trajectory of the 


canister in excess of 70 pounds, and the 
brigade wanted to know if determining 
specific data was possible. 

Until this point, ground commanders 
believed the illumination canister is 
unpredictable in flight after releasing the 
flare. Convincing the maneuver elements 
that the canister did not become unstable 
after ejecting the parachute -— rather it 
continues on a stable ballistic trajectory 
— was an obstacle in effective fires 
employment. The artillery fire direction 
center looked at the FT 155-AM-2 
Tabular Firing Table part 2 illumination 
data and developed an alternate method 
for illumination missions. This procedure 
became standing operating procedure for 
the 116th Cavalry Brigade and reduced 
collateral damage caused by illumination 
canisters early in the deployment. 

redicting data. Within the illumination 
safety procedures outlined in Field 
Manual 6-40 Tactics, Techniques and 
Procedures for Field Artillery Manual 
Cannon Gunnery , the fire direction center 
developed a better method to predict 
projected canister data accurately. Early in 
the process, a direct correlation between the 
gun target azimuth/range on the Advanced 
Field Artillery Tactical Data System and 
range to impact in the tabular firing table 
was identified. To determine canister data, 
an illumination mission was processed to 
pinpoint azimuth and range to the point of 
illumination. After the illumination target 
was processed, the yellow target icon 
appeared on the screen. The intervention 
point screen in the Advanced Field Artillery 
Tactical Data System was then opened 
and ranges/gun target azimuth on the first 
window were recorded. The gun/target 


azimuth and range are the critical pieces of 
information for the canister data. 

afety. The yellow target on the 
Advanced Field Artillery Tactical 
Data System is the graphical representation 
of the 600 meters standard height of 
burst and does not take into account the 
canister as it continues its flight. Not only 
does the canister continue in a wartime 
environment, but safety measures in the 
Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data 
System at a continental U.S. range can be 
violated, sending the canister outside an 
impact area or outside control measures. 
While illumination safety is followed to 
determine maximum illumination area 
to keep illumination canisters within the 
impact area, the safety measures in the 
Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data 
System do not prevent the possible effects 
violation the canister can create, nor does 
the max illumination area address where 
the canister actually is going. 

Once range and gun/target azimuth 
are determined, tabular firing table part 
2 illumination is used to determine the 
canister’s range to impact, correlating to 
the range to target. Column 7 of Table A 
lists the range-to-impact in relationship to 
the range-to-target. The second mission is 
fired using the gun as the observer firing 
illumination. A polar mission is fired using 
the gun target azimuth (found in the original 
mission), range to impact (taken from the 
tabular firing table) and altitude (from the 
map or digital terrain elevation data from 
the Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data 
System). Interpolation can be used to find 
exact range to impact, but often the impact 
area chosen was a field or open area with 
a couple of hundred meters on each side 




allowing for 100 meters of movement 
between ranges in the tabular firing table. 
Once computed, this polar mission gave the 
grid to the predicted canister impact area. 
High angle missions were conducted the 
same way. 

Within the city limits of urban areas, 
another unique problem with illumination 
occurred. Based on urban growth and 
sprawl, manipulating charge usage to find 
safe impact areas was not always enough. 
Changing charges did allow for enough 
range or too much range to bring the casing 
down in a safe area either overshooting 
or undershooting safe impact areas. The 
solution was to change the height of burst. 
The desired range in the tabular firing table 
was taken from the range-to-impact column. 
The corresponding quadrant elevation was 
noted and the height of burst adjusted using 
the “recalculate” function on the Advanced 
Field Artillery Tactical Data System until 
the desired quadrant elevation was reached. 
While conducting cordon and searches in 
urban areas, maneuver units used night 
vision goggles to capitalize on the adjusted 
illumination. Using night vision goggles 
made the higher illumination extremely 
effective and prevented the night vision 
goggles from being washed out or giving 
their position away while providing the 
necessary support. All procedures were 
similar to the earlier technique with the 
quadrant elevation adjustment the only 
addition. 

^echniques confirmed. Validation 


i 


canisters that did not burrow into the ground. 
Many times, the canisters continue into the 
ground to an undetermined depth leaving 
behind only a perfect circle with obturated 
band marks clearly continuing to rotate as 
the round entered the earth. 

| imiting danger and collateral damage. 
The Air Force explosive ordnance 
disposal unit would either drop off the 
retrieved canisters to units or destroy them. 
In most cases, the canisters were found 
within 70 meters of the predicted grid. As the 
deployment continued, using this procedure 
limited the danger to the civilian populace 
to falling canisters. Additionally, it reduced 
collateral damage to houses, vehicles and 
other buildings. 

T he rocket failure grid. A similar 
procedure was used to employ rocket- 
assisted projectiles. Preparation for fire 
training, registration and show of force 
missions included the need to compute 
the rocket failure grid. The current safety 
procedure requires 6,000 meters from the 
point of impact back along the gun target 
line to have enough room in case of rocket 
failure. Using rocket and non-rocket tables 
in the FT 155-AO-l, a similar procedure 
can be used to determine failure data. The 
original target is fired and the quadrant 
elevation and gun target azimuth are 
recorded. 

Under the non-rocket table, the quadrant 
elevation is looked up and recorded. Apolar 
mission, using the gun as the observer, is 
fired with the direction from the first mission 


of these techniques came numerous used and the distance corresponding to the 
times during Operation Iraqi Freedom III QE non-rocket tables entered. The computed 
in northern Iraq. U.S. Air Force explosive grid is the rocket failure location or non¬ 
ordnance disposal teams often visited the rocket flight path 


fields plotted as impact areas and picked up 


In Iraq, units were required to compute 


this grid for planned fires. In one instance of 
rocket failure, this technique was validated. 
After firing had ceased, the forward observer 
team went to the impact grid where it 
observed the round land. Shrapnel, burnt 
grass and disturbed earth were found within 
100 meters of the impact grid computed at 
a distance of 21 kilometers. This validated 
the procedure used to obtain the failure grid 
and eliminated collateral damage. 

As operations continue in Iraq, 
Afghanistan and other areas of the world, 
artillery will continue to find a way to 
support the ground commander no matter 
the situation. Future operations and weapons 
will change current trends and techniques. 
Artillery needs to continue to adapt and 
change with current needs just as 116th 
Heavy Brigade Combat Team did. Our 
innovation as a branch and forward thinking 
by Soldiers in the field are our future. But as 
always, the artillery will be there Whenever, 
Wherever. 


Captain Brady B. Johnson, field artillery, 
commands A Battery, 1st Battalion, 148th 
Field Artillery Regiment, at Pocatello, Idaho. 
Previously, he deployed as part of Operation 
Foal Eagle to Korea as the 34th Infantry 
Division fire support element in Feb. 2008. 
Captain Johnson served as the battalion 
fire direction officer, 148th Field Artillery and 
underwent two brigade war-fighting scenarios 
as FDO. He also served as battalion firing 
platoon fire direction officer for 1 st Battalion, 
148th Field Artillery fire direction officer for 
1st Platoon, A Battery, 1-148th Field Artillery 
a fire support team leader for A Troop, 2-116 
Armored Recon Squadron before being 
assigned as the squadron fire support officer 
for the 2-116th Armored Recon Squadron. 





CIRCLED ABOVE: An XM982 Excalibur precision-guided 
artillery round falls onto a well-known insurgent safe house 
during combat operations in the northern region of Baghdad, 
Iraq, May 5, 2007. (Photo illustration by Jason Kelly, Fires Bulletin. Original 
photo by SPC Jeff Ledesma, U.S. Army) 






Fires Bulletin 201 □ 
Photo Contest 

T his annual contest obtains high-quality photos that tell the story 
of today’s U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps field artillery and U.S. 
Army air defense artillery units and Soldiers conducting training 
or engaged in full-spectrum operations. These photos may appear as a 
cover or other shots for future editions of the magazine, as part of the 
Fires Center of Excellence poster series or in other esprit de corps or 
strategic communications projects. The competition is open to any military 
or civilian, amateur or professional photographer. 


T wo Prize Categories — Six prizes. A first place prize of $500, second place prize of $200 and third place 
prize of $75 will be awarded in each of two categories: (1) training for combat/stability operations and (2) 
actual combat/stability operations. Winning photos will be posted on the magazine’s website at sill-www.army. 
mil/firesbulletin and Facebook page at http://www.facebook.com/FiresBulletin. 


Rules. Photos not meeting the following rules will be disqualified: 

•Only photos taken between 1 July 2009 and 30 June 2010 are eligible. 

•A maximum of three photos per photographer can be submitted. 

•Photos can be entered only by the photographer who took them. 

•Each entry must meet the requirements of the specified category and be 
received by the magazine no later than 1 August 2010. 

•Each photo must be a color jpg or tif image with little or no 
compression. 

•Each photo must be taken with a camera with a resolution of five megapixels 
or better on its highest resolution setting (jpg image file size should be 
greater than two megabytes in most cases). Photos cannot be manipulated 
to increase resolution. 

•Images cannot be manipulated other than the industry standard for 
darkroom processing, such as dodge, burn, crop, etc., as per Department 
of Defense Directive 5040.5, “Alteration of DoD Imagery.” 

•Each submission must include the photographer’s name, unit/affiliation, 
email address, mailing address and phone number. Caption information 
must include who, from what unit, is doing what, where and when (date) 
in the photograph — for example: “SGT Joe B. Smith, C/2-20 Fires, 4th 
Fires Brigade, fires the M777A2 howitzer during unit qualification training 
at Fort Hood, Texas, Jan. 5,2010.” 

•Photos cannot be copyrighted or owned by an agency/publication; the image 
must be cleared for release and publishable in the magazine. 


Judging. A panel of editors, professional photographers and military 
personnel will select winners. The judges’ decisions will be final. Judging 
criteria is as follows. 

•Power and impact of the message that the image conveys 
•Composition, clarity, lighting, focus and exposure of the image 
•Creativity and originality 

Submissions. All submissions may be used at the discretion of the 
magazine staff. Photos can be sent by email or compact disk (CD). CDs will 
not be returned. 

•Email image files (one image per email) to Fires Bulletin atfiresbulletin@ 
conus.army.mil. Mark the subject line as “2010 Photo Contest/Photo #1 
(2 or 3), Entry Category-Your Last Name.” 

•Each entrant must email his or her rank, full name, mailing address 
(permanent preferred), phone number and a secondary email address 
for contact purposes. 

•Mail CDs to ATTN: Photo Contest at P.0. Box 3331 1; Fort Sill, OK 73503- 
0311. 

•FedEx or UPS submissions to Building 758, Room 7, McNair Road, Fort Sill, 
OK 73503-5600. 

Questions. Contactthe Fires staff by email atfiresbulletin@conus.army. 
mil or by phone at DSN 639-5121/6806 or 580-442-5121/6806. 


41 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 




Photo illustration by Jason Kelly, Fires Bulletin. Original photo courtesy of 25th Combat Aviation Brigade Public Affairs. 

By CPT Petrus J. Engelbrecht 


T he air defense and airspace management cell provides 
important capabilities to the brigade combat team. It serves as 
the brigade combat team’s link to air defense assets, provides 
the commander with situational awareness of the third dimension 
and enables the unit to rapidly bring all direct and indirect fires to 
bear upon the enemy. The cell also is air defense artillery’s most 
important and visible contribution to the Army’s tactical echelons. 
As a branch, air defense artillery has not prepared its Soldiers fully 
for the important and challenging assignment in the brigade combat 
team’s air defense and airspace management cell. 

The cell was conceived during a turbulent time as the Army 
transformed from a division-centric organization to one whose 
primary tactical unit was the modular brigade combat team. 
During this same period, the short-range air defense units were 
being removed from divisions and most were deactivated. The air 
defense and airspace management cell was created to provide vital 
capabilities to the brigade combat teams. 

Since air defense units no longer habitually support brigade 
combat teams, the air defense and airspace management cell serves 
as the commander’s expert on air defense matters. Doctrinally, 
the cell plans and coordinates air and missile defense operations; 
however, because there are no air defense weapon systems organic 
to the brigade combat team, air and missile defense planning is 
limited. The air defense and airspace management cell helps the 
brigade combat team staff develop aerial intelligence preparation 


of the battlefield, template enemy air defense artillery sites and 
recommend passive air defense measures. It also advises the brigade 
combat team commander to request additional air defense assets 
when analysis determines they are required. 

Due to the strategic importance of our Patriot forces and the 
limited availability of other air defense assets in the Army’s inventory, 
it is improbable that a brigade combat team would receive these 
assets. However, when collocated on the battlefield with other 
air defense units, the air defense and airspace management cell 
coordinates with them to determine which brigade combat team 
assets can be defended. A more likely asset that may support a 
brigade combat team is a Sentinel radar, which provides the local 
air picture to the brigade combat team. Furthermore, through the 
air defense and airspace management cell’s connection to the Joint 
Data Network, the cell receives and disseminates air and missile 
early warning. 

The air defense and airspace management cell provides an air 
picture, contributes to airspace deconfliction for the brigade combat 
team and serves as the expert air defense planner. The cell establishes 
connectivity with local and joint sensors to receive the air picture. 
Then, it can contribute to the commander’s situational awareness 
of the third dimension by developing and displaying the air picture. 
The cell contributes to airspace management and deconfliction, 
minimizing the potential for fratricide. More importantly, airspace 
integration, synchronization and deconfliction allow the brigade 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 42 



interoperable 








combat team to target enemy forces rapidly. 

The air defense and airspace management cell helps the brigade 
combat team staff with airspace command and control by receiving 
airspace coordination measure requests from subordinate units 
and forwarding them through proper channels for inclusion in 
the airspace control order. The cell then receives and displays the 
order to enable rapid deconfliction of the airspace. It maintains 
close ties with other airspace users (fires, intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance and aviation) in the brigade combat team and 
helps them with airspace planning. Additionally, the air defense 
and airspace management cell may plan and coordinate aviation 
operations, normally in conjunction with the brigade aviation 
element. 

As critical contributors to the brigade combat team staff, these 
air defense and airspace management cell Soldiers must be highly 
proficient. The branch must overcome the current shortfalls in 
preparing its Soldiers for the brigade combat team air defense and 
airspace management cell. I will use doctrine, organization, training, 
materiel, leadership and education, personnel and facilities as a guide 
to discuss some of the shortcomings and to make recommendations 
on how to improve on them. These recommendations are based, 
in part, on observations at Battle Command Training Program 
brigade full-spectrum 
exercises and interviews 
with air defense and 
airspace management 
cell Soldiers and trainers 
at the combined training 
centers. This article also 
was influenced by the 
ADAM/BAE Strategic 
Plan Brief 2009 created 
by the U. S. Army Aviation 
Center of Excellence, F ort 
Rucker, Ala. 

octrine. Doctrine 
establishes common 
approaches to military 
tasks, promotes mutual 
understanding and 
enhances effectiveness. 

It is a menu of practical options that allow us to learn from others’ 
experiences and helps us think about how to best accomplish the 
mission {Field Manual 3-0 Operations). Field Manual (Interim) 
3-01.50 Air Defense and Airspace Management Cell Operations 
is the primary field manual that governs the air defense and 
airspace management cell. Although it contains relevant technical 
information, it lacks pertinent information that covers the full 
spectrum of operations that the air defense and airspace management 
cell will conduct as part of a combined arms team. 

This field manual (interim) must be rewritten, taking input from 
the field and providing air defense and airspace management cells 
with common approaches and a menu of options that enhances 
their performance. It must cover airspace command and control, 
air and missile defense and aviation planning and operations, and 
not be limited to the current operating environment. The focus of 
the manual must be operations, as opposed to the technical focus 
of the current field manual (interim). 

rganization. The current organization of the air defense and 
airspace management cell must be reconsidered. Currently, 
two majors, an air defender and an aviator, are assigned to the air 
defense and airspace management cell/brigade aviation element. 
There is no clear guidance of who is in charge, which causes 

43 March-April 2010 


inefficiency and needless friction. 

The Aviation Center of Excellence conducted a recent analysis of 
the brigade combat team airspace management cell/brigade aviation 
element organization. The center recommended the creation of a 
brigade air-ground integration cell under a lieutenant colonel, who 
could direct all airspace users and serve as the bridge to the brigade 
combat team commander (ADAM/BAE Strategic Plan Brief2009). 
The brigade air-ground integration cell would include the fires cell, 
tactical air control party, air defense and airspace management 
cell/brigade aviation element and Navy liaisons (if assigned). This 
would mitigate the challenges caused by having two field grade 
officers with the same mission and greatly enhance cohesion and 
unity of effort. 

raining. Upon assignment to an air defense and airspace 
management cell, an air defender faces some immediate 
challenges. Most young air defenders lack combined arms 
training, have little or no experience in the maneuver world and are 
unfamiliar with the brigade combat team’s operations, equipment 
and organization. In addition to these challenges, the officers sent 
to air defense and airspace management cells receive only cursory 
training on the capabilities and operations of this important asset. 
Improperly trained officers have difficulty articulating to the brigade 

combat team commander 
what they bring to 
the fight and, almost 
inevitably, are tasked out 
somewhere where they 
‘can be useful’ in the 
eyes of the commander 
and staff. This situation 
is so pervasive that air 
defenders expect to be 
tasked out upon arrival 
to the brigade combat 
team. 

The only formal 
schooling for the air 
defense and airspace 
management cell is the 
small, under-resourced 
and infrequently 
conducted Air Defense and Airspace Management Cell Course 
formerly conducted at Fort Bliss, Texas and now taught at Fort Sill, 
Okla. Currently, this is the best training available for air defense 
Soldiers and officers being assigned to air defense and airspace 
management cells. The course is not resourced properly with 
dedicated cadre. It is conducted by Warrant Officer Basic Course 
instructors on Warrant Officer Basic Course equipment and in 
Warrant Officer Basic Course buildings. This limits the throughput 
of the course severely, since the Warrant Officer Basic Course 
instructors cannot teach the Air Defense and Airspace Management 
Cell Course concurrently with a Warrant Officer Basic Course. 
Nonetheless, the instructors provide excellent training bolstered 
by their numerous operational experiences in air defense and 
airspace management cells. The course culminates with a three- 
hour, simulation-driven exercise where students operate in an air 
defense and airspace management cell and respond to various 
injects such as call-for-fire, immediate airspace requests and other 
airspace command and control specific events. Nonetheless, the 
course comes up short with regard to instruction on air defense 
and aviation planning and execution, which are important aspects 
of air defense and airspace management cell operations. 

A first step in overcoming these pervasive issues is including 


“ZS© @p0eO@aO soDDGpOfooaSoiPS S® 
sCo® Mgpiite @®oatogis 0 s@eb ©egffl D 


Is® 


must 


i' ilSt 


GGdss© @0p (totoDS© mM 
DimiBagiaiDSDaS ostD ©sMisc© 

CflOgJi% [pRsiSSsBBd 'ufia® togmsOo 
®'®p®®bd© (So© siihrsoliS ©tkaffiteDD© 
to [pRspsEtog] 0 a® SettiBaps top (to® 
MpiS® (saEtogis S3 @odd sflp (totese® 
gflp©pa@© [smimigpouiiaBS @®0DJ 


ana 


ED 




Fires 







ADAM cell specialist SGT Annia Rowe of 3rd Brigade Combat Team, 25th Infantry Division, confirms 
connectivity on the Tactical Airspace Integration System Bullfrog computer system inside the Air Defense 
and Airspace Management Shelter in Tikrit, Iraq, Oct. 5, 2007. The ADAM shelter is organic equipment to 
all brigade aviation elements in infantry brigade combat teams and contains a full suite of communications 
and airspace management systems. (Photo courtesy of 25th Combat Aviation Brigade Public Affairs) 


the three week-long Air Defense 
and Airspace Management Cell 
Course as a part of Air Defense 
Artillery Captain’s Career Course. 

This enables captains to receive 
better training; however, a major 
assigned to an air defense and 
airspace management cell feasibly 
could have completed Air Defense 
Artillery Captain’s Career Course 
more than five years prior. 

The best course of action is the 
creation of a resident course that 
should grow from the existing Air 
Defense and Airspace Management 
Cell Course and the recently approved 
Air Ground Integration Course 
mobile training team program of 
instruction. This brigade air-ground 
integration cell course would teach 
the full spectrum of operations 
and not focus only on the current 
operational environment. Creating 
a brigade air-ground integration 
cell course can have an immediate, 
beneficial impact throughout the 
Army. 

In its ADAM/BAE Strategic Plan 
Brief 2009, the U.S. Army Aviation 
Center of Excellence recommended 
the following. “This effort should 
result in a full (brigade air-ground 
integration cell program of instruction) and program that includes 
hands-on exercises conducted in a simulated (brigade air-ground 
integration cell) combat environment complete with digital feeds, 
communications and role players to provide input and friction. The 
course collective capstone exercise should replicate fires, joint, 
air assault, (close air support, close combat attack) and nonlethal 
operations. Additionally, (brigade aviation element) personnel 
should receive (unmanned aerial system) oversight skills training. 
The course should include all grades in joint scenario based training. 
(U.S. Air Force, U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps) personnel 
should receive slots in the class just as they do in brigade combat 
teams.” 

“This type of crawl, walk, run training provides initial skills 
training and adequate collective friction upon culmination. Since 
the training is standardized, cell fidelity is not required and (brigade 
air-ground integration cell) designated personnel can attend when 
they become available, usually prior to assignment. Likely, a 
(brigade air-ground integration cell) operator and (brigade air-ground 
integration cell) leader differentiation will separate the initial portion 
of the training, ultimately bringing all participants together in the 
collective portion. The resident course should serve as a doctrinal 
development center and support the proponent of (air-ground 
integration and airspace command and control) publications and 
training. It also serves as the developmental hub for future concepts 
and requirements of the (brigade air-ground integration cell). By 
constantly remaining in contact with the mission and its personnel, 
the (brigade air-ground integration cell) course serves as continuity 
for current operations and analysis for future development.” 

ateriel. An air defense and airspace management cell’s 
equipment is robust and effective. There are a few minor 
improvements that can be made, such as including a secondary 


Tactical Airspace Integration System and a system that correlates 
the air picture being received from numerous sources that will 
enhance and augment air defense and airspace management cell 
capabilities. 

eadership and education. Officers assigned to the air defense 
and airspace management cell must understand how the brigade 
combat team operates and be comfortable in the brigade combat 
team tactical operations center. We must codify how we grow and 
prepare these officers and ensure they have the same opportunity to 
command as those who are assigned as S3 operations officers and 
executive officers. According to the analysis in the ADAM/BAE 
Strategic Plan Brief2009, the current perception is that they do not 
have the same opportunities. If this perception is reality, it must 
be corrected. If it is merely a perceived issue, we must overcome 
this perception if we wish to have quality officers volunteer for 
these assignments. 

If the brigade air-ground integration cell concept is accepted 
at the brigade combat team, the lieutenant colonel position would 
increase career progression opportunities further for air defense, field 
artillery and aviation officers. This would allow career progression 
for air defense and airspace management cell officers to flow from 
captain in an air defense and airspace management cell to major 
in an air defense and airspace management cell and, finally, to a 
brigade air-ground integration cell officer as a lieutenant colonel. 
The lieutenant colonel then would have extraordinary experience 
in brigade combat team operations and could be used further at 
division staff or on a battlefield coordination detachment. 

For each level of assignment, there must be concurrent level of 
training in the Professional Military Education system. Integrate 
training from familiarization to employment into all Professional 
Military Education programs. 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 44 





















P ersonnel. Soldiers are assigned to the air defense and airspace 
management cell too late in the units’ Army Force Generation 
cycle to be integrated properly into the brigade combat team staff and 
to complete necessary training with the unit. They need to be with 
the brigade combat team as it builds from individual to collective 
training which culminates with the brigade combat team’s combat 
training center rotation. According to cadre at the combat training 
centers, they commonly observe this issue of undermanned air 
defense and airspace management. Normally, there are shortages 
across all ranks. The air defense and airspace management cell 
might be fully manned immediately before the unit deploys, forcing 
Soldiers to conduct on-the-j ob training in Iraq or Afghanistan, where 
mistakes can have dire consequences. 

The air defense and airspace management cell’s success at the 
combat training centers, and by extension in theater, is related 
directly to the cell’s manning strength. As a branch, we must ensure 
that every effort is made to get the right people to the air defense 
and airspace management cell early enough to be fully integrated 
members of the team. 

acilities. Any increase in the training of air defense and airspace 
management cells will require additional facilities and resources, 
especially if the brigade air-ground integration cell course is adopted. 
The brigade air-ground integration cell course would require facilities 
with the appropriate access to joint agencies that have the capacity 
and equipment to train one-third of the Army’s air defense and 
airspace management/brigade aviation elements every year to keep 
pace with personnel turnover and operational tempo. 

The air defense and airspace management cell is a significant 
and vital part of the brigade combat team and our branch. The 
cell provides aerial situational awareness and allows airspace 
management to allow freedom of action and aid in fratricide 
prevention. It is the link to air and missile defense forces and 


provides early warning of aerial or missile attack. Furthermore, 
the cell conducts air and missile defense and aviation planning for 
current and future operations. 

In addition to being an important member of the combined 
arms team, the air defense and airspace management cell is air 
defense artillery’s exemplar to the tactical Army. We must prove 
to the tactical Army that we are professionals, true experts at our 
jobs and that we are value added to an organization by properly 
training and preparing our Soldiers for the air defense and airspace 
management cell. The brigade combat team commanders and staff 
officers of today are the leaders of tomorrow’s Army. The impression 
we convey to these officers will have a lasting effect. 

The air defense and airspace management cell deserves the 
branch’s support across the doctrinal, organizational, training, 
materiel, leadership and education, personnel and facilities spectrum. 
The cell is not flashy; it cannot shoot down a Scud missile, a mortar 
or an aircraft. The air defense and airspace management cell is 
more subtle, and it is making a difference in the current fight every 
day. Let’s make sure we’re giving our full support to preparing 
Soldiers assigned to the air defense and airspace management cell 
properly. 


Captain Petrus J. Engelbrecht, air defense artillery, is the air defense 
observer/trainer at the Battle Command Training Program, Operations 
Group Charlie at Fort Leavenworth, Kan. Previously, he served as the 
commander of C Battery, 5th Battalion, 5th Air Defense Artillery, Fort 
Lewis, Wash., which conducted Counter-Rocket, Artillery and Mortar 
sense and warn in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. He also served 
as an Avenger platoon leader and later executive officer of D Battery, 
4th Battalion, 5th Air Defense Artillery, at Fort Hood, Texas, deploying 
in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom II. 



aceboolt Hhv FrUFlh? FrMi !ii£hi,. 1 


Fires Bulletin as you con re* from ^ now uage. tne smjtean soft has been p 
Theeledronscvemmirf She Joni^iry Februiiry is svwobinbelow The mfivirfuni * 
Chose articles, hove atee been posed. We Ve also oostefl nine interesting snide5 end ph 
aummunttv.n wuii w» 

Wfll Infer rtwtos Hnissfcma Buses Phttes +■ 


Find us on 

Facebook 


idol's Dei your tftniP 


£D 3J © ^ 


Juit F iff* 4 S 

I Fire? Britetki As you con we from our nevn paoe, the Fires BuUetrr, staff 
has been pretty buw ever She past few days The electronic reckon of 
due January-February edrbon « ovBilofiie below, The indftndiHl articles 
and the photographs from there articles hove also been posted. YVeVe 
Disc posted sortie interesting artxtes ard phonographs from the Fires 


l mi; Your PiK)<e to Your i witter Acewwt 

Yevun rm expert ,-=u pj^ mrttun teTrtrte-- la Aw 


45 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 

















< 


By CPT Kristopher S. Perrin 


H eadquarters and Headquarters Battery, 5th Battalion, 5th 
Air Defense Artillery, Hellraisers , stationed at Fort Lewis, 
Wash., just completed its command post exercise and 
mission readiness exercise at Fort Sill, Okla. The Hellraisers , 
proud members of the 31 st Air Defense Artillery Brigade, Fort Sill, 
will deploy in the first quarter of 2010 and provide Multi-National 
Division-Baghdad with Counter-Rocket, Artillery and Mortar 
capabilities. Conducted at Fort Sill, this was HHB/5-5 ADA’s 
culminating collective training event before its upcoming Operation 
Iraqi Freedom deployment. Every unit undergoes a command post 
exercise and mission readiness exercise before a deployment, but 
our training was unique in two ways. The training prepared the 
Hellraisers for integration between two branches of the Army and 
also for joint operations with the U.S. Navy. 

-RAM. C-RAM is an easy concept to comprehend. It is a 
system of systems built on six pillars: sense, warn, intercept, 
shape, respond and protect. We sense incoming rounds with our 
radars. The radars provide a point of impact that enables a wireless 
audiovisual warning system to warn certain forward operating base 
sectors of incoming rockets, artillery and mortars. A Land-based 
Phalanx Weapon System can intercept these incoming rounds if 
they are projected to land in a gun defended asset. 

We shape the battlefield by knowing where the enemy indirect 
fire is originating and recommend increased patrols in the area. 
We facilitate response by providing actionable-intelligence, such 
as a point of origin, to the maneuver commander for counterattack 
purposes. Lastly, we protect by understanding our system’s 
weaknesses and continually improving our defensive posture. 
C-RAM is a young system that requires a joint effort and combined 
between air defense artillery, field artillery and the U.S. Navy, 
adars. The extraordinary efforts to integrate the air defense 
artillery and field artillery branches seem to be coming 
to fruition. This is evident by the demands of our upcoming 
deployment. The Hellraisers received training on the Q-36 
and Q-37 Firefinder radars and will depend heavily on them to 
provide effective localized warning and intercept capabilities in 


Multi-National Division-Baghdad. 

These field artillery radars will be operated and maintained by 
a field artillery unit. The air picture they produce will be fed into 
a forward area air defense computer that uses different algorithms 
to determine if the system needs to intercept the round or allow the 
round to impact. Either way, the audiovisual warning system will 
provide localized early warning of all incoming rounds. C-RAM 
seems to be the first capability that requires both air defense artillery 
and field artillery support. The Fires Center of Excellence at Fort 
Sill seems to be less of a concept and more of a reality. 

he mission. The Hellraisers ’ mission requires them to work not 
only with field artillery capabilities, but with the U.S. Navy as 
well. When the Hellraisers got off their flight at Fort Sill, they were 
greeted by their Navy counterparts who will accompany them on 
their 12-month deployment. A total of 58 Soldiers and 71 sailors 
trained together for 336 straight hours to certify as a C-RAM joint 
intercept battery. 

The sailors ’ primary mission is to operate and maintain the 20-mm 
Land-based Phalanx Weapon System. This system enables the unit to 
intercept incoming rounds. Upon completion of the command post 
exercise and mission readiness exercise, the Hellraisers, Soldiers 
and sailors traveled back to Fort Lewis to take block leave and 
continued training for the deployment. Currently, the Hellraisers 
are now deployed to Victory Base Complex in Baghdad, Iraq where 
they have just assumed their C-RAM mission. 

Hellraisers can work jointly and integrate their work. They are 
on the cutting edge of a modular force that requires a unit and its 
members to be flexible and adaptive. 


Captain Kristopher S. Perrin, air defense artillery, is the commander of 
Headquarters and Headquarters Battery, 5th Battalion, 5th Air Defense 
Artillery at Fort Lewis, Wash. Previously, he served as an S3 battle captain 
in 4-5 ADA, as an executive officer for E/4-5 ADA, and platoon leader 
for E/4-5 ADA while stationed in Fort Hood, Texas. He holds a Master 
of Art in leadership studies from the University of Texas in El Paso. He 
also holds a Bachelor of Science in Human and Regional Geography 
from the United States Military Academy in West Point, N.Y. 





sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 46 


C-RAM system in Iraq. (Photo by SrA Brittany Bateman, U.S. Air Force) 









thoughts on field artillery 
and air defense artillery 
doctrine ma 


/ 


FM 3'4H.50 


• Suggest improvements to manuals adaucciio 

• Review nriiaiii iisialfg) ekirina revision^ 

• Respond with comments of Substance 

m*mi 1 * 

• Fiscal \ imm\t 2010 2 nd /3 rd /quarter r irmaimiinta|lrsi% p 
review/comments 


"^huerters, o Vfftn7i 


'Wot the Am >y 


ADA Manuals 


FM/ATTP/TC 


Name 


Document location and 
forums for comment 


FM 3-01.50 

ADAM Cell Operations 

Fires Knowledge Network 

FM 3-01.64 

Avenger Battalion and Battery Operations 

Fires Knowledge Network, 
AKO 

FA Manuals 

FM/ATTP/TC 

Name 

Document location and 
forums for comment 

FM 3-09 

Fire Support 

(Revised Final Draft version 3 - March ) 

Fires Knowledge Network, 
AKO 

FM 3-60 

The Targeting Process 
(Final Draft - April) 

Fires Knowledge Network, 
AKO 

ATTP 3-09.30 

Observed Fire 
(Initial Draft - April) 

Fires Knowledge Network, 
AKO 

ATTP 3-09.50 

The Cannon Fires Battery 
(Initial Draft - April) 

Fires Knowledge Network, 
AKO 

ATTP 3-09.65 

NLOS-LS Operations 
(Initial Draft - April) 

Fires Knowledge Network, 
AKO 

TC 3-09.31 

Fire Support Training for the 

BCT Commander (Initial Draft - April) 

Fires Knowledge Network, 
AKO 


•Email Fires Center of Excellence Doctrine at ATFS-DDD@conus.army.mil 
•General comments can be made on the Doctrine Blog at: 
http://usacac.army.mil/blog/blogs/firesdotd/default.aspx 



























A High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System from T Battery, 5th Battalion, 11th Marines, launches a reduced range practice rocket from the unit's 
range at Al Asad Air Base in Anbar province, Iraq, June 28, 2008. (Photo by LCpi Kelly chase, u.s. Marine Corps) 


“Any use of force generates a series of reactions. There may be 
times when overwhelming effort is necessary to destroy or intimidate 
an opponent and reassure the populace. An operation that kills five 
insurgents is counterproductive if collateral damage leads to the 
recruitment of 50 more insurgents. ” 

Marine Corps Warfighting 
Publication 3-33.5 Counterinsurgency Operations 

A s U.S. and coalition forces enter their ninth year of combat 
in Afghanistan, the current operating environment reflects 
a complex mix of both kinetic operations and unique 
counter-insurgency considerations. Fires must be arrayed to 
enable the mobility and responsiveness of mortars, the massing 
effects of cannon artillery on enemy concentrations and air- and 
ground-delivered precision fires on high value targets, time 
sensitive targets and targets requiring low collateral damage. As 
the protection of the population and sensitivities toward civilian 
casualties become center-pieces to counter-insurgency operations 
in Operation Enduring Freedom, the ability to assess requirements 
appropriately and effectively, position and employ assets is critical 
to the success of this dynamic three-block fight. The Ml42 High- 
Mobility Artillery Rocket System brings a revolutionary range and 
precision fires capability to both Operation Enduring Freedom and 
Marine artillery arsenal in general. 

InMay 2008,5thBattalion, 11thMarine Regiment, successfully 
completed its new equipment transition from the Ml98 medium 
towed howitzer to Ml42 HIMARS. While physically fielded, 
trained and capable of employing the new system and its associated 


equipment, employment concepts arguably remained entrenched 
in legacy cannon tactics, techniques and procedures. 

Examining existing U.S. Army Multiple-Launch Rocket System 
doctrine, Army, Marine Corps and British HIMARS employment 
lessons learned from Operation Enduring Freedom and possible 
future contingencies across the range of military operations, 
5th Battalion, 11th Marine Regiment, adjusted its training and 
organizational structure to support the requirements of decentralized 
command, control and sustainment of its subordinate batteries. 
From June through August 2009, 5/11 Marines conducted a series 
of command post and live-fire exercises to assess and validate 
decentralized, precision rocket fires in a highly distributed operating 
environment. 

attalion-level distributed operations July 27 to July 29,2009. 

The battalion dispersed its batteries between Camp Pendleton, 
Calif., Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, Calif., and Naval Weapons 
Station Seal Beach, Calif. Initially focused on the validation of 
long range tactical satellite and high-frequency communications, 
these exercises matured to the level of live-fire execution over an 
operating area in excess of 150 miles. 

Upon completion of these exercises, firing battery commanders 
were directed to reorganize their units into three firing platoons 
of two launchers per platoon (designated 3 x 2), and a general 
assessment and validation of personnel and equipment requirements 
was undertaken across the battalion. 

latoon-level distributed operations Oct. 14, 2009 to Nov. 
1, 2009. 5/11 Marines’ platoons operated from five separate 
locations at Camp Pendleton, Marine Corps Air Ground Combat 
Center Twentynine Palms, Calif., Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 48 




D [Hme interoperable 











Marine Corps Air Station Yuma, Ariz., and the Naval Shore 
Bombardment Training Area at San Clemente Island, Calif. Rocket 
artillery liaison teams were employed with Marine Expeditionary 
Forces Fires, 1st and 5th Marine Regiments. 

During this assessment, 5/1 l’s Headquarters Battery was 
reorganized and distributed in support of independent firing battery 
operations. Administrative and logistics capabilities were task 
organized into direct support teams, providing platoon-level units 
with the necessary support functions to operate semi-independently 
throughout geographically dispersed locations. The battalion combat 
operations center was reorganized to replicate a 24-hour Marine air- 
ground task force-level fires cell. The replicated fires cell, operating 
from the I Marine Expeditionary Forces Battle Simulation Center 
at Camp Del Mar, was capable of both voice and digital long-range 
communications through a tactical satellite and other high frequency 
systems, and exercised control ofboth the command post exercise and 
live-fire operations of the battalion’s deployed platoons, distributed 
across nearly 500 miles. It further conducted a long-range command 
post exercise with 2nd Battalion, 14th Marines (Reserve HIMARS 
battalion), in Grand Prairie, Texas. This training culminated during 
the division’s Steel Knight 09 exercise with the live firing of 12 
rockets at Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center Twentynine 
Palms by a two-launcher platoon, which was controlled by the I 
Marine Expeditionary Forces fires rocket artillery liaison team within 
the fires cell at Camp Pendleton. The battalion headquarters’ role 
transitioned from command, control and sustainment of battalion- 
level operations to dispersed, task organized support of platoon 
operations and facilitation of distributed training. 

ntroduction and employment of rocket artillery liaison 
teams. Marketing the M142 HIMARS ’ capabilities to supported 
maneuver commanders was among the greatest challenges initially 
faced with its fielding. Now capable of providing deep, precision 
fires, previously only delivered by air platforms, HIMARS provides a 
dramatically increased fires capability and options to the Marine air- 
ground task force. Recognizing the need to provide rocket expertise, 


mission processing facilitation and long-range communications 
capabilities validated in the battalion’s command post exercises 
and field exercises, 5/11 Marines reorganized its liaison personnel 
into four-man rocket artillery liaison teams. Their training focused 
on the capabilities listed in figure 1. Constructed to provide flexible 
rocket mission processing expertise, application of a rocket artillery 
liaison team at the appropriate force fires coordination center or fire 
support coordination center is deemed essential to facilitate timely 
and effective rocket fires integration. 

ong-range communications. Having identified the requirement 
for sustained, long-range voice and digital communications, 
the allocation of secure tactical satellite and high frequency 
communications was assessed as operationally critical. The 
allocation of dedicated satellite time, bandwidth, frequencies and 
appropriate equipment must be viewed as a necessity to harness 
and integrate the capabilities of this weapon system fully. Simply 
put, the autonomy and complexity of the newly developed long- 
range communications infrastructure and distributed operations 
concept entail a need for augmented communications equipment, 
prioritization, supervisors and operators. A table of organization and 
equipment change request, identifying an additional 45 Marines, 
representing key supervisory and military occupational specialty 
critical billets, an additional technical representative and a suite 
of long-range communications equipment has been submitted to 
address these requirements. 

trategic lift and ground convoy raid capability. In each of 
its battalion-level exercises, 5/11 Marines conducted fly away 
training and embarkation preparation for raid employment by both 
C-130 and C-17 aircraft platforms. Establishing a strong working 
relationship with the C-130 squadron Marine Aircraft Group-11 
Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, these aircraft raids have included 
movements to the expeditionary airfields at Marine Corps Air Ground 
Combat Center Twentynine Palms and San Clemente Island, as well 
as the airfield at Marine Corps Air Station Yuma. The significant 
range capabilities of the system require minimal movement of 

the launchers to range targets 
throughout an area of operations. 
As such, numerous established 
and expeditionary airfields 
throughout an area of operations 
potentially offer adequate, 
secured position areas from 
which to provide coverage of 
all contingencies. Additionally, 
each 5/11 Marines’ platoon 
has conducted considerable 
training on ground convoy/ 
improvised explosive device 
defeat movements to support 
off forward operating base/ camp 
vehicular raids and movements. 
To conduct raids, either by air 
or ground, and while mission, 
enemy, terrain and weather, 
troops and support dependent, 
augmentation of the raid unit 
by non-organic security must 
be considered based on the 
operating environment. 

esupply operations. The 
current HIMARS battery 
table of equipment allocates 
12 resupply supply systems. 



A truck prepares for a dry-fire session to test the firing capabilities of the High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System, 
Dec. 6, 2007. (Photo by CpI Andrew Kalwitz, U.S. Marine Corps) 




49 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 















Figure 1: Rocket artillery liaison team training focuses on the following capabilities: 


High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System subject matter expertise 
Facilitation of airspace deconfliction and asset synchronization 


^- 

HP 

r -.- - - — .-... - -- 

Ability to translate technical expertise into tactical recommendations for a maneuver 

commander or Fires cell 

£ 

_^ 

r 

Capability to provide 'plug and play' capabilities to regimental combat team, division, 
Marine expeditionary brigade and Marine expeditionary force level Fires cells 

fc- 

- 4 

r - 

Expertise on platform and munitions capabilities 

d 

Expertise on Crest Clearance Too! (engagement visualization) 

it- 

4 

r ~ 

Facilitator of informal collateral damage estimation 

£ 

_ -A 

r- 

Expertise on Precision Strike Suite for Special Operations Forces precision coordinate 
generation 

L> 



Comprised of a resupply vehicle with organic hydraulic crane 
capability and a towed resupply trailer, each resupply supply system 
is capable of transporting as many as four rocket pods, each carrying 
six rockets or one Army Tactical Mission System missile per pod. 
Each launcher is supported by two resupply systems capable of 
transporting a total of eight pods. The launcher transports a ninth 
pod. In extraneous conditions, pods can be double stacked to double 
the lift capacity. The battalion also has developed medium tactical 
vehicle replacement/logistics vehicle system bed “kits”. These 
kits are intended to modify medium tactical vehicle replacement/ 
logistics vehicle system truck beds with pod “shoes” to enable the 
transportation of rocket pods. 

Training has been conducted with the Marine Logistics Group to 
enhance battery-level organic helicopter support team capability to 
load and offload heliborne, sling loaded resupply operations. Each 
battery will maintain a helicopter support team-trained capability at 
each of its three distributed platoons. Further, it has been determined 
through the spring and summer exercises and assessments that, 
as the artillery regimental logistics trains typically are focused 
forward in support of its cannon battalions, it is likely they will 
be separated by significant and arguably unsupportable distances 
from HIMARS units. The Marine Logistics Group or designated 
combat logistics battalion, therefore, would best be suited with the 
requirement to resupply rocket ammunition. Marine Logistics Group 
familiarization training regarding rocket ammunition handling and 


resupply operations is planned within the battalion’s fiscal year 
2010 training schedule. 

onduct of HIMARS 3x2 operations. Recognizing the 
range and fire power of the HIMARS battery and assessing 
requirements in support of current and future operations, the ability 
to operate HIMARS as 3 x 2 formation was found to be sound 
operationally. To adequately man a HIMARS firing battery for 
sustained 3x2 operations, the current table of organization and 
staffing goal were assessed as inadequate to provide sufficient 
supervision in several key billets. Supervisory billets such as platoon 
commander, fire direction officer and operations chief positions 
require the augmentation of additional Military Occupational 
Specialties 0802 Field Artillery Officers and 0848 Field Artillery 
Operations Chiefs. Additional communications infrastructure 
requires enhanced radio operator and technician augmentation as 
well. 

As HIMARS tactics, techniques and procedures continue to 
develop, the range and precision capabilities of rockets in the 
Marine artillery arsenal must be understood. HIMARS should 
not be viewed simply as a long range cannon. Rather, the system 
should be viewed as a long range, precision fires platform. 
While HIMARS can and should respond to close fight maneuver 
requirements, its worth on the battlefield must additionally be felt 
in its range and precision capabilities. Target types should be such 
that a low collateral damage estimate, Global Positioning System- 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 50 







guided, high-explosive unitary munitions are the effect of choice. 
The penetrating effects of its vertical angle of fall and delay fuse 
capabilities make it uniquely capable of destroying reinforced 
mud/brick positions while producing minimal collateral damage 
to surrounding structures. 

uture initiatives. There are several future initiatives to orient 
and train maneuver units on HIMARS and its employment. 

Mojave Viper integration. Mojave Viper exercises offer a superb 
venue to orient and train maneuver units throughout the Marine 
Corps. With the establishment of the rocket artillery liaison team 
concept, the entry argument for access to rocket fires is established. 
When fully trained, the rocket artillery liaison team provides both 
mission processing tactics, techniques and procedures, as well 
as professional military education on capabilities and logistical 
requirements. 

MARSOC/ANGLICO/NSW Training Integration. Having 
developed relationships with each organization, the continued 
integration of Marine Special Operations Command, Naval Special 
Warfare and air naval gunfire liaison company sensors to distributed 
operations is deemed essential. Furthermore, the integration of the 
unmanned aerial systems as a viable rocket observation platform 
requires development. 

Development of distributed operating areas. While working 
to develop viable rocket artillery firing areas further aboard Camp 
Pendleton and San Clemente Island, future exercises will include 
long-range raids and command post exercise training from Naval 
Air Station, El Centro, Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, Marine 
Corps Air Station Yuma, Naval Weapons Station Seal Beach, Naval 
Training Center at Warner Springs, the U. S. Army Reserve Center at 


Camp Roberts, Nellis Air Force Base, and the expeditionary airfield 
at Imperial Beach. To truly demonstrate the system’s capabilities, 
live-fire Guided Multiple-Launch Rocket System exercises also 
must be enabled. See figure 2 for some additional initiatives. 

Revolutionary in its capabilities, the Ml42 HIMARS brings a 
level of range and precision lethality never before seen in the Marine 
artillery arsenal. As with so many newly developed systems, interest 
in HIMARS has grown as its capabilities have been demonstrated 
in both peace-time training and in combat. With the resources, 
advocacy and training integration necessary to employ HIMARS 
effectively, innovative development will continue to maximize its 
worth across the full spectrum of conflict. 


Lieutenant Colonel Joseph J. Russo is the commander of 5th Battalion, 
11th Marine Regiment in Camp Pendleton, Calif. In January of 2003, 
he deployed with the 1st Battalion, 11th Marines, 1st Marine Division 
as part of Amphibious Task Force West, participating in combat 
operations with RCT-1 in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom I. He 
then attended the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College at 
Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, subsequently serving as the U.S. Marine 
Corps fire support exchange officer with the U.S. Army’s 25th Infantry 
Division (Light), Schofield Barracks, Hawaii. While with 25th ID, he 
deployed to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom 
V. In July 2006, he reported to the Recruit Training Regiment, MCRD 
San Diego, with subsequent assignments as the battalion executive 
officer, 3rd Recruit Training Battalion, regimental operations officer, 
and regimental executive officer, Recruit Training Regiment. 


Figure 2: Live-fire Guided Multiple-Launch Rocket System exercises must also be enabled. Additional initiatives include the following: 



51 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 


















IED trainer helps prepare 
warfighters for Afghanistan 



Afghanistan-bound Soldiers and service members can use the "Recognition of Combatants- 
Improvised Explosive Devices" computer-based interactive multimedia trainer to help prepare for 
deployment. The program helps train warfighters to anticipate and prevent lED-related incidents 
in theater. (Photo illustration by C. Todd Lopez) 


By William J. Sharp 

Headquarters Army 
Directorate of Operations 


A s of February, Afghanistan-bound 
Soldiers and service members can 
access M ROC"-solid training to 
help counter improvised explosive device 
threats. 

Recognition of Combatants-Improvised 
Explosive Devices, or ROC-IED for short, 
is a computer-based interactive multimedia 
trainer. The program helps train warfighters 
to anticipate and prevent IED-related 
incidents in theater. Officials distributed 
more than 30,000 CD copies of an Iraq- 
focused program. Based on its success and 
demand, officials determined the need for 
an Afghanistan version. 

"ROC - IED IS A HIGH QUALITY 
CONTRIBUTION TO THE SAFETY, 
SURVIVABILITY AND LETHALITY 
OF OUR DEDICATED AND SELFLESS 
WARFIGHTERS WORKING IN 
DEFENSE OF OUR NATION," said 
Brigadier General Ernest C. Audino, deputy 
director, Army operations, readiness and 
mobilization directorate (G-3/5/7). 

The program is divided into three main 
topical areas: IED understanding, thermal 
understanding, and the IED visible/thermal 
browsing library. A trainee can select Iraq 
or Afghan-centric modules. 

The IED understanding section begins 
with an IED overview followed by the 
Afghan operational environment to 
include types of emplaced devices; IED 
emplacement tactics; vehicle- and person- 
borne IED attacks; situational awareness; 
immediate responses; and preventive 
measures. 

Differences between visible and thermal 
imagery, factors that affect thermal images, 
and techniques to optimize thermal images 
are discussed in the thermal understanding 
section. 

The thermal browsing library helps 
train users on capabilities and limitations 
of sensor solutions. The library contains 


numerous images of personnel wearing 
a variety of suicide bomb devices. 
Additionally, ROC-IED’s ask-the-instructor 
feature allows students to pose questions to 
various IED subject matter experts. 

One of the program’s many benefits is 
its versatility and flexibility. 

’’The software uses actual footage from 
insurgent and coalition-produced video 
which helps demonstrate lessons learned 
from both operational theaters,’’ said Ken 
Cook, Recognition of Combatants Team 
member and one of the software’s developers 
at Fort Belvoir, Va. 

Additionally, ”ROC-IED can be used 
alone as introductory level, self-paced 
counter-IED knowledge training, as a 
supplement to classroom and lane training, 
or as long-term sustainment training,’’ Cook 
said. ’’ROC-IED is regularly evaluated and 
upgraded to address the ever-changing 
conditions in theater.’’ 

Organizations collaborating on ROC- 
IED development focused on emerging 
warfighter needs. 


"YOU ALMOST HAVE TO UNLEARN 
IRAQ_ COUNTERM ED STRATEGY 
WHEN APPROACHING THE AFGHAN 
THEATER," COOK SAID. "THAT'S 
BECAUSE TERRAIN, TACTICS, 
TYPES OF DEVICES, AND THE 

Afghanistan insurgency are 

CONSIDERABLY DIFFERENT FROM 
IRAQ^ SO, IN CREATING THE 
PROGRAM, WE WANTED TO MAKE 
SURE THE TRAINING IS GEARED 
TOWARD THE NEW AND DIFFERENT 
ENVIRONMENT." 

The training tool is available to U.S. 
government agencies and their designated 
contractors. The Army has also initiated a 
foreign disclosure process on ROC-IED 
in order to make it accessible to NATO 
and International Security Assistance 
Force partner nations. Product requests or 
questions can be sent to roc@nvl.army.mil. 
The program is web accessible at https:// 
rocv.army.mil. 

Editor’s note: This article has been edited for Fires ’ 
style and format. 


13 I uTjd© ©dfitosF© sea© — tad 1 foofy from haurgmt 
andooaltloifriirudiiMdiildMirttf}^ 

Oseeum© Qsgmma”] fitpam IfeeGDo c^pcstPsiSflsoQgl] gQdsssspSddd® 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 52 



D [Hngg interoperable 











B HU® interoperable 


LClVIR: Not jmC an 
additional duty 




CW4 Dallas Whitney (left) and MAJ Ben Luper, both of Combined Joint Task Force-82 Joint Fires 
Cell, stand next to an AN/TPQ-48v2 Lightweight Countermortar Radar at an undisclosed location 
in January. (Photo by Capt. Bernie King, U.S. Air Force) 


By MAJ Benjamin R. Luper and 
CW4 Dallas C. Whitney 


S ince fielding in 2003, the AN/TPQ- 
48 Lightweight Countermortar 
Radar has provided the joint force 
with an invaluable 6,400 mil countermortar 
acquisition capability that is essential 
in counter-insurgency operations. In 
an operating environment where units, 
sometimes as small as platoons, operate 
from remote combat outposts and forward 
operating bases, the LCMR is often the 
only counterfire target acquisition system 
available. Unlike its radar cousins, the Q-36 
or Q-37 Firefinder radars, the LCMR was 
not fielded with an LCMR operator military 
occupational skill or modified table of 
organization and equipment section. 

According to Field Manual 3-09.23 
Tactics, Techniques and Procedures for 
the Modular Fires Battalion Draft Version 
2 dated May 8, 2009, “Target acquisition 
platoons are organized with a platoon 
headquarters, a Q-36 radar section and 
Q-48 lightweight countermortar radars. In 
addition, the heavy brigade combat team and 
Stryker brigade combat team fires battalion 
have a Q-37 radar section.” Note the lack of 
an allocated section for the LCMR. This has 
led to considerable shortcomings in proper 
emplacement, operation and maintenance 
that have reduced the LCMR’s overall 
effectiveness. 

anning burden. The lack of dedicated 
personnel is exasperated further by 
the exceptional requirement for LCMR 
coverage in Afghanistan. Even if the Army 
had decided to create an LCMR operator 
military occupational specialty, the current 
demand far exceeds the brigade combat 
team modified table of organization and 
equipment allocation of four LCMRs. For 
example, Combined Joint Task Force 82 
operates more than 50 LCMRs throughout 
Regional Command-East. The decision to 
field the LCMR without a modified table 
of organization and equipment section or 
MOS has placed the manning burden onto 
the brigade combat team. While already 
stretched thin, brigade combat teams now 
must generate ad hoc LCMR sections from 
non-radar and more often non-artillery 
personnel. 

While it is unrealistic to consider 


manning the LCMR with 13R Radar 
Operators, the LCMR does require fully 
trained and certified operators and dedicated 
sections to employ, operate and maintain 
the radar effectively. An unintended 
consequence of the Army’s decision not to 
provide the LCMR with an modified table 
of organization and equipment section 
or MOS personnel is the perception that 
the LCMR requires little more than the 
operator to power-up and monitor the 
radar passively. By treating the LCMR as 
an additional duty, much like conducting 
dining facility headcount, and employing 
rotating or part-time sections, the LCMR’s 
ability to provide a counterfire acquisition 
and force protection capability is reduced 
significantly if not lost altogether. 

The LCMR requires trained, certified 
and permanently manned sections to 
achieve its full operating capability, just 
as any weapon system or command and 
control application. The lack of expertise 
and dedicated manpower has created a habit 
and, more often, a necessity for operators 
and fires staffs to forward problems and 
issues — many of which entail 10- to 20- 


level maintenance, employment and basic 
operator-level troubleshooting directly to 
civilian field service representatives. 

requent issues. The most common 
errors associated with the employing 
the LCMR stem from the lack of adequate 
planning and understanding of the LCMR’s 
capabilities and limitations. Operators 
frequently assume that because the LCMR 
has a 6,400 mil acquisition capability, 
location considerations are minimal. 
Leaders must take the LCMR’s operational 
requirements into account in their forward 
operating base/combat outpost defensive 
plans with the same emphasis provided to 
the Firefinder radars, howitzers, mortars 
and direct fire weapons systems. Placing the 
LCMR on the highest point or building on 
a forward operating base often surrounded 
by numerous radio antennae is not always 
the optimal location for the radar. 

etailed assessment. The target 
acquisition platoon leader, fire support 
officer, fire supportNCO and S2 intelligence 
officer must conduct a detailed assessment of 
enemy indirect fire capabilities and template 
or historic firing locations. By understanding 




53 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 

















the enemy’s indirect fire system’s ballistic 
and trajectory characteristics and tactics, 
techniques and procedures, planners can 
apply this data to calculate the optimal 
placement for the LCMR to acquire enemy 
indirect fire. The pivotal factor of whether 
or not the radar acquires the projectile is the 
amount of time the projectile is within the 
radar search beam. The enemy indirect fire 
time of flight must not be confused with the 
LCMR’s track time requirements. 

Applying proper employment planning 
fundamentals in conjunction with current 
intelligence assessments is only the first step 
in achieving successful LCMR acquisitions. 
By estimating the trajectory’s maximum 
ordinate and the round’s entry point into 
the radar beams, planners can calculate the 
required radar track time. This calculation 
results in an optimal “goose egg” location 
for the radar. The challenge in Afghanistan, 
as well as any environment that operates 
from company-sized forward operating 
bases, is the goose egg may fall outside the 
physical confines of the forward operating 
base. However, this does not alleviate the 
requirement or value of performing this 
calculation. 

ssential considerations. Accurate 
radar location and boresight azimuth 
of the radar are essential for accurate 
enemy indirect fire acquisitions. If the 
radar does not have an accurate location 
and orientation direction, its ability to 
calculate the acquisition grid location 
within 100 meters is limited tremendously. 
For example, during a polar fire mission, 
if a fire direction center has an inaccurate 
grid for a forward observer and the forward 
observer provides an inaccurate azimuth to 
the target, the computed target location is 
inherently inaccurate. The use of survey 
teams for positioning and emplacement is 
preferred, however at a minimum the use of 
an AN/PSN-13 A Defense Advanced Global 
Positioning System Receiver and a precision 
mapping software tool, such as Falcon View, 
is sufficient. Unlike indirect fire systems, a 
five meter error in radar location does not 
translate into a point of origin location error 
of five meters. An acquisition at a range of 
five kilometers with an LCMR with a five 


meter positioning to bore-sighting error will 
produce a 250 meter target location error. 

Once the LCMR is located and 
emplaced properly, the radar requires a 
proficient operator to initialize the LCMR 
radar software, operate Falcon View, the 
geographic translator and the advanced 
communication service applications, input 
the mission planning data and establish 
interoperability with the LCMR Remote. 
Additionally the operator must initialize the 
Personal Data Assistant, Advanced Field 
Artillery Tactical Data System and Counter- 
Rockets, Artillery and Mortar systems, as 
required. Operators must understand the 
system’s operational capabilities, have 
proficiency in uploading mission data into 
the system’s computer, maintain proper 
monitoring of the systems clutter display 
and acquisition tracks and establish 
interoperability with others systems. While 
this may seem like a lot, the LCMR radar 
software is not overly difficult to operate. 
Much like any computer application, 
training, repetition and experience are 
essential. 

Daily operator maintenance is also 
essential for optimal performance. The 
LCMR requires operators to conduct daily 
preventive maintenance checks and services 
same as any other item of equipment. Daily 
maintenance includes, but is not limited 
to, checking the cylinder for proper power 
connection, cleaning the cover and the 24 
antenna columns, checking antenna column 
connections, properly powering down the 
radar and Miltope computer system for 
a short periods of time, re-leveling the 
radar and re-orienting the radar onto its 
bore sighting point. Operational readiness 
reporting in Afghanistan shows that units 
that conduct these daily maintenance 
activities have better operational readiness 
rates and significantly more accurate 
acquisitions. 

Deploying units must identify, assign, 
train and certify personnel on the LCMR 
before deployment. Setting up the radar 
on an observation post during live-fire 
exercises is an excellent way for operators 
to gain experience and validate their 
training on the LCMR. Once deployed, 


the assigned personnel must stay on the 
systems and receive further sustainment 
training throughout the deployment. 
Understandably, the need to rotate 
personal may arise. However, leaders 
must understand the level of training 
and experience required to achieve full 
operating capability of the LCMR. 

As artilleryman, we are duty bound by 
the mission of field artillery, “To integrate 
all fire support assets into combined arms 
operations.” The Q-48 LCMR is one of those 
assets. For a system that will provide you 
with an eight-digit grid location within 100 
meters from where the enemy is engaging 
you with lethal indirect fires, it is surprising 
to see the marginal effort across all 
maneuver, fires and effects branches that is 
spent toward the LCMR’s employment and 
operation. While it is unrealistic, given the 
operating environment, that artillerymen are 
present everywhere an LCMR is employed, 
it is not outside our capacity to provide 
oversight and leadership for its employment, 
operation and maintenance. 


Major Benjamin R. Luper, field artillery, 
is the deputy chief of fires for the 203rd 
Afghanistan National Army Corps as part 
of the Combined Joint Task Force-82/203rd 
ANA Corps Combined Action Headquarters 
in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. 
His previous assignments include U.S. 
exchange officer at the Director Royal 
Artillery, United Kingdom; commander of 
Headquarters and Headquarters Company, 
4th Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division, and 
commander of B Battery, 2nd Battalion, 
319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, 82nd 
Airborne Division, both at Fort Bragg, N.C. 

Chief Warrant Officer Four Dallas C. Whitney, 
field artillery, is the Combined Joint Task Force 
-82 Force fires officer and sensor manager 
in Afghanistan. He previously commanded F 
Target Acquisition Battery, 210th Fires Brigade, 
2nd Infantry Division, Republic of Korea. He has 
20 years of service as a Military Occupational 
Specialty 0803 Target Acquisition Officer in 
the U.S. Marine Corps before an inter-service 
transfer to the U.S. Army. 


“Deploying units must identify, assign, train and certify 
personnel on the LCMR before deployment. ©@B3fagJ 

oop 0ft© [paagip god sib ®fe®aH!5030aB [oxseSB (ftntttng) 
aanpsfess fe an aaBoQDoooB way flap stpoaSsiP© 00 gsfla 
(gqpcflaiss sm°l sseEilsfis (Mp 0 c©fMjog| ®m isCd© IlJlMEi,® 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 54 





B HUB® interoperable 




SJJTSJIfS 

The multi-mission radar pets it all done 

















By CPT John M. Williams II 


T oday’s operating environment has 
created a new type of Soldier. From the 
lowest levels to the highest echelons, 
more is being asked of each individual in 
today’s fight. An infantry private has to 
know much more than just how to conduct 
his warrior tasks and battle drills; he has to 
know how to be a forward observer, a human 
intelligence source, a combat medic and 
civilian affairs agent. This concept of the 
decathlete warrior is a result of increasing 
requirements and decreasing resources 
within the military, meaning there is more 
to do and less to do it with. For the military 
to keep pace, more must be asked from the 
resources we have. This concept’s truth goes 
beyond the Soldier and encompasses all of 
our military equipment as well. There may 
be no better example of a decathlete system 
than the Giraffe agile multi-beam air defense 
search radar. 

hallenges. His¬ 
torically, radars 
were specialized and 
used for individual 
and specific mission 
sets. Multiple radars 
would be employed 
within a small area with 
limited interoperability 
and a constant con¬ 
cern of interference. 

Each system required 
its own specified operators, maintainers, 
logistical support packages and technical 
requirements, all of which represent costly 
resources. We see this paradigm being 
executed today in our current theaters. 
Because of the asymmetric, nontraditional 
area of operations, multiple units occupy 
the same space, each attempting to maintain 
360-degree radar coverage, and because of 
a lack of interoperability, the units do not 
get to leverage their neighboring unit’s 
assets fully. 

The Counter-Rocket, Artillery and 
Mortar fight may be the best example 
of this flawed system. Counter-Rocket, 
Artillery and Mortar requires a mixture 
of long-range counterfire radars, short- 
range counter-indirect fire radars and 
low-level airspace management radars 
to create a composite 360-degree bubble 
of persistent surveillance, all in a small 
and sometimes urban area. After this feat 
is accomplished, the challenge becomes 
sharing this architecture with the rest 
of the force. To move forward, we must 
consolidate these requirements, limit the 


resources dedicated to them and ensure all 
systems are interoperable to allow units to 
leverage the assets available. 

ey features. The ideal decathlete sensor 
would have to be self contained and 
highly mobile, unlike current systems that 
require separate power supplies, shelters, 
vehicles and very specific sites to emplace. 
The system’s range should extendbeyond the 
limits of the threat, and its search fan would 
have to be 360 degrees to remain relevant 
in today’s asymmetric, nontraditional area 
of operations. The system would have to be 
able to accomplish the missions of today’s 
counterfire radars, both short and long range, 
as well as airspace management radars. 
The system would have to be interoperable 
across a long distance, allowing netted 
sensor coverage throughout the area of 
operations. It should be ruggedized and 
able to operate in austere environments. 
It should be elevated to operate in urban 
environments with limited masking from 


man-made structures. 

nter the Giraffe. It appears to have been 
designed to meet these requirements 
to a tee. The system is self-contained in 
a 20-feet container mounted on a cross¬ 
country truck for high mobility and rapid 
deployment. Its emplacement is complete 
within 10 minutes and march order is 
complete in five minutes. It can track air 
breathing targets simultaneously out to 120 
kilometers in range and 20,000 meters in 
altitude, and ballistic tracks more than 20 
kilometers in range. The radar is refreshed 
once a second and can be equipped with 
a number of discriminators to include 
friendly or foe identified, automatic threat 
evaluation and recognized air picture. It 
uses C-band radar with ultra low side-lobes. 
This is critical to reduce the amount of 
interference it causes in a radio frequency 
spectrum already saturated with systems 
in the current operating environment. The 
system can be operated and maintained by 
a single Soldier, or a small team can operate 
and maintain a cluster of radars. One of 
the best features is the interoperability the 


system has with other systems. The radar 
can operate independently or in a cluster, 
creating a netted air-ground picture across 
a wide area. 

urrent employment. While the system 
seems too good to be true, we have yet 
to apply all of its uses fully. To date, only four 
systems are in use in the current operational 
environment (two by the U.S. and two by 
the United Kingdom, all in Counter-Rocket, 
Artillery and Mortar architectures). The 
United Kingdom has leveraged the system’s 
multi-mission capabilities in their operations 
already. The Counter-Rocket, Artillery and 
Mortar architecture has been where the 
Giraffe has made its greatest impact. 

Statistically, Giraffes have the fewest 
target misclassifications and the most 
accurate state vector messages, which are 
key elements to successful Counter-Rocket, 
Artillery and Mortar operations. During 
the United Kingdom’s Counter-Rocket, 
Artillery and Mortar mission readiness 
exercises at McGregor 
Range, Fort Bliss, Texas, 
the Giraffe was consistent 
in quickly acquiring 2.75- 
inch rockets while tracking 
remote control air targets. 
Because it is equipped with 
its own Global Positioning 
System and north finding 
systems, its computations 
are less susceptible to human 
errors in mission planning. 
While no radar is infallible, 
this system rarely misses a target. 

The future of radar systems in the 
operational environment is unclear, however 
if the Giraffe is any indication, that future 
is bright. This system has the potential 
to accomplish the functions of the Q-36 
Firefinder radar, the Q-48 lightweight 
counter mortar radar and the Q-64 Sentinel 
radar with considerably less support needed, 
a less cluttered radio frequency spectrum 
and, most importantly, drastically fewer 
Soldiers. With few limitations and almost 
limitless potential, the Giraffe is truly a 
decathlete sensor. 


Captain John M. Williams II currently is 
the commander of Delta Battery, 2-6 Air 
Defense Artillery Battalion. In 2006, Williams 
was selected by his chain of command to 
command, train, and deploy the first C-RAM 
Sense and Warn detachment in support of 
Operation Iraqi Freedom. From June of 2006 to 
June 2007, this 55-Soldier detachment served 
in six forward operating bases across Iraq, 
and provided sense and warns capability to 
over 30,000 personnel. 


“WMte nos [paSsp to toMffifeo ffife 
sjpSam cpgtp©027 KDfesas a SaffEpa, 
‘uft© fitonp© ®3 spearne to 

sCd© stpapgfStoaoaQ to 

omsfegifb Qe wrnsp 03 qCl© ®foa3to to 
®DD27 to^tostSsoLiD 





sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 56 









were simple; I was to 
the local inhabitants to 
up for themselves. 1 * 

Alec Kirkbrid© [1371], 

Britan officer end diplomeC 


Kuchi villagers gather in Herat province, Afghanistan, to meet with a joint U.S. and Afghan team, Feb. 17, 2009. (Photos by lcdr John Gay, u.s. Navy) 


Fires 


' 4 * Z* 

■vV 












A s United States policy-makers undertake a series of exhaustive 
reviews of U.S. policies in Afghanistan, they are taking a 
closer look at Afghan tribes as part of a new strategy for 
confronting increasing violence. 

Much of this newfound interest stems from the very successful 
turnaround of Anbar province, Iraq, where Arab tribes played a 
key part in changing the province from a hotbed of the Sunni Arab 
insurgency to a place where security has improved to the point 
that U.S. troops are beginning to be withdrawn. The tribes are 
also receiving increased attention because the U.S. does not have 
enough troops available to undertake a proper counter-insurgency 
campaign, because of existing requirements in Iraq and the dwell 
time required between deployments. 

But as tribes assume a more central role in our Afghanistan 
strategy, it is essential that we approach the challenge informed by 
our experiences in Iraq, not dominated by them, and that we craft a 
pragmatic strategy that will achieve enduring security effects for the 
Afghan population. Afghanistan’s tribes must forcefully confront 
the insurgency and not be overwhelmed by it, while maintaining 
the active support of the people and reducing the tendency of the 
tribes to fight among themselves. 

All of this must be done while building the capacity of the 
Afghan state without creating a parallel tribal system. Though 
this would seem to be an almost insurmountable challenge, it is 
not impossible, and to quote General David Petraeus’s view about 
creating security in Iraq: “Hard is not hopeless.” 

Any tribal-engagement strategy in Afghanistan that seeks to use 
the tribes against the insurgency must begin with an understanding of 
how the Afghan tribes are different from Iraqi tribes. Though Iraq’s 
tribes were, to varying degrees, suppressed, co-opted, included and 
divided during Baathist rule, their structures remained 
largely intact. Even though tribal leadership 
in Iraq was often quite fluid, as rivals 

made competing claims based HgH 

on different familial ties to a ■ y ' 

tribal atriarch, conflicts were 

generally circumscribed 

within a coherent tribal 

structure. 


Many of Afghanistan’s tribes have been systematically 
undermined by the Taliban, Pakistani intelligence and local warlords; 
perverted by the free flow of arms; and weakened by mass migrations 
of people. Leaders in power may not be the traditional tribal leaders, 
and some tribes have been so weakened that no single individual 
leads them. That situation complicates leader selection, legitimacy 
and efficacy and leads to conflict within and between tribes. 

Because many tribes lack a unifying leader, a key aspect of a 
tribal engagement strategy should be the convening of tribal security 
jirgas (a meeting of village elders) throughout a province, primarily 
orchestrated by the government of the Independent Republic of 
Afghanistan, or GIRO A. The goal of the jirga is to introduce the 
strategy of empowering the tribes and to identify not only a leader 
who can marshal the tribe or village against the insurgents but to 
also select a security committee. The chief goals of the committee 
are to advise the leader; assist in the selection, vetting and support of 
lashgars (tribal militias); and create a pool of potential replacements 
for the leader if he is ineffective, corrupt or killed. 

These leaders would form the nucleus of a province-wide tribal 
force who would, in turn, select a provincial leader who could lead 
the tribes and take decisive action (in 
some cases, this may be an existing 
security official). This individual 
would, in turn, have a small executive 
committee to advise him and to 
help with security planning and the 
administration of salaries and other 
support. 

Another key distinction between 
Iraqi and Afghan tribes is that most of 
Iraq’s tribal leaders are well-educated, 
or at least have a modern outlook with 
respect to the way they run their affairs, 
and they are used to working within 
an established state structure. Many 
of Afghanistan’s tribal leaders are 
illiterate, have limited administrative 
ability and often see very little reason 
to cede authority to the state or to other 
tribal leaders. 

Furthermore, in Afghanistan, 
powerbrokers often struggle to control 
the few resources that do exist in the 
country, such as government revenue, 
land, roads and bazaars. There are no mitigating factors, such as oil 
profits, a robust state employment sector, a large private economy 
or an extensive road system facilitating commerce, to dampen tribal 
conflicts over resources. 

For these reasons, an Afghan tribal-engagement strategy may 
have some natural limits in terms of how well indigenous forces 
are able to organize themselves. U.S. forces may encounter 
resistance from some tribes who either oppose an expansion of the 
state’s authority or see an inclusive approach of empowering all 
tribes as unacceptable. Additionally, many tribes will be reluctant 
to diminish or eliminate their revenue streams (e.g., increasing 
transparency in government revenue as a way of reducing corruption 
or ceding control of a checkpoint to another force) and will have 
to be approached in a careful and deliberate manner that seeks to 
deconflict tribal friction points. Furthermore, because of the limited 
education of many tribal leaders, the U.S. will likely have to devote 
some resources to helping with the administrative tasks of tribal 
security, such as registering tribal members, administering salaries 
and facilitating other logistical support. 

59 March-April 2010 


As effective as a tribal lashgar would be in confronting the 
insurgency, it must be nested within the institutions of the Afghan 
state. To ensure that local warlords are accountable to the people 
and the government, the tribal security leaders should be answerable 
to a provincial government committee comprised of the governor, 
the provincial council and the province’s members of parliament. 
Each district chief would ostensibly lead his local committee of 
tribal elders, and the security committee would be led by the district 
police chief. 

A provincial security committee, which would answer to the 
government committee, should be led by the Afghan National 
Police, or ANP, and have members from the National Directorate 
for Security, the Afghan National Army, or ANA, coalition forces 
and the heads of the tribal lashgars. To increase political legitimacy, 
access to the resources of the GIRO A and support of the international 
community, the political leaders would set the tone for the lashgar, 
moderate disputes, build popular support, ensure government 
transparency and investigate abuses of authority (in conjunction 
with the judiciary and local mullahs) 

While the security committee would have overall command of the 
tribal forces, it would work with other 
state security representatives to create 
the security plan for the province. The 
provincial security committee would 
be tasked with identifying the locations 
for checkpoints, facilitating the 
fortification of villages by allocating 
HESCO barriers, concertina wire and 
lumber; disbursing pay, ammunition 
and weapons; registering tribal 
members and issuing identification 
cards; and training lashgars while 
providing overall security direction. 

Both the government 
and security committees would 
require staff that process payments, 
investigate problems, provide reports 
and facilitate the business of the 
committees. Following the Iraq 
model, each tribal member of the 
lashgar should be promised the 
opportunity to work for the ANP or the 
ANA if they perform their tasks well. 
The promise of future employment 
works as a check on bad behavior and will eventually serve as 
an employment magnet for military-age males who support the 
insurgency out of a need for income. Employment also provides 
a path for tribes to become legitimate members of the security 
force. 

The role of coalition forces in the raising of tribal lashgars must 
be targeted, supportive and active. Throughout the process—tribal 
consultation, selecting leaders, standing up a security committee, 
creating a provincial government committee, adjudicating disputes 
and investigating abuses — the coalition must be present. We are 
often viewed as an honest broker and have the institutional capacity 
to make the ideas a reality. For example, in a tribe that does not 
have an identifiable leader, a CF member could facilitate a tribal 
meeting and work behind the scenes to achieve an understanding 
among rival candidates. Ideally, the GIRO A would undertake this 
effort, but unfortunately, the GIROA is not viewed as an honest 
broker by many tribes, and in those instances, a CF member might 
have to intervene. 

Additionally, if an investigation were undertaken by Afghan 


epBfeo© Go©w© &©©m 
©^7©Q©[uiae0©aDO^7 
QQDOGDqPDDOHoO©!”] eCo© 
‘u’aHfoaDOo PafcfteBaooB 
teiSsOffigsDaB© ©odgD D@@s)D 

ffiMFOEPiteg PSIMSPQ©”] ["^7 
QGd© fins© UteDOT Gff ©t?DuQ©g 
MisCimj©”] \^] Ease© 
DuDQgpgfSin© ®[? [pEtpOSn® 


Fires 



security and political representatives about claims of abuse, those 
men would have to travel to the area, convene an inquiry and then 
make the consequences of their investigation stick. At that point, 
friction can occur, particularly if a man has to be fired or arrested 
because he demanded bribes or beat someone. If the coalition is 
part of the process, Afghans can feel confident that their decisions 
will be followed. The CF should assign staff to support government 
and security committees and enhance their understanding of 
tribal dynamics by expanding the human-terrain-team system and 
lengthening the tours of select officials. (Members of human-terrain 
teams are forward-deployed social scientists who help CF members 
understand the history and culture of a local area to improve their 
decision-making.) 

eyond mentoring. In addition to these mentoring, advising, 
liaison and support functions, the CF will also have to disperse 
among the tribes to bolster their fighting capability, advise their 
leaders, train their men and limit tribal conflict. The CF soldiers 
would have to live with the tribe or village full-time, as was done in 
many cases in Anbar Province, in numbers large enough to prevent 
their being overrun by the insurgents or, quite frankly, betrayed by 
the tribe, while facilitating an active defense of the village. This 
is especially needed in villages where tribal structures are weak 
or a leader’s capabilities are lacking. This aspect of Afghan tribal- 
engagement strategy will require more soldiers and a readjustment 
of existing forces into a population-protection posture. 

But not every tribe will need an increased CF presence. Many 
tribes are already able to provide their members security and need 


only occasional meetings with the GIROA and CF to replenish 
ammunition, provide weapons and humanitarian assistance, and 
coordinate strategy. Although a population-protection approach 
has largely been undertaken in eastern Afghanistan, it should 
be broadened to include the whole Pashtun belt. As our Soldiers 
live with the tribes, they will also have to undertake a mentoring 
program for the tribal lashgars, but their efforts shouldn’t be 
confined to security training. They should also initiate a literacy and 
administrative training program to better develop the abilities of the 
tribal members to manage their affairs. This kind of training will 
help tribes become better ANP members as the lashgars transition 
into official police forces. As our troops disperse among the tribes, it 
is imperative that they also receive civil affairs assistance and work 
closely with the local provincial-reconstruction team. As security 
becomes the norm, it will be necessary to follow up quickly with 
community projects. 

Winning and maintaining the support of the population must be 
a central feature of a tribal-security strategy. While the government, 
security committees, the judiciary and mullahs will adjudicate 
disputes and investigate claims of abuse and consequently reduce 
cases of mistreatment, we should also seek to enlist the population 
as the eyes and ears of the tribal security effort. 

One possible way of doing this would be to create an anonymous 
reporting system by which the people could regularly inform on 
tribal and government officials who abuse their authority. For 
example, during the 1950s, as the Philippine government battled 
the Huk insurgency, Philippine President Ramon Magsaysay 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 60 










Kuchi villagers gather in Herat province, Afghanistan, to meet with a joint U.S. and Afghan team, Feb. 17, 2009. (Photo by lcdr John Gay, u.s. Navy) 


initiated a system of postcards people could use to report abuses 
of authority directly to him. He would then investigate the claims 
and take prompt action, thus putting all government officials on 
notice that they would never know who might inform on them. 

That strategy could be adapted to Afghanistan by creating an 
anonymous reporting system. For the postcard system to work, 
postcards would have to be distributed throughout the area, at 
bazaars, mosques, government buildings, etc., and, when completed, 
dropped off anonymously at boxes erected at area mosques or given 
directly to a CF member. Because most Afghans attend a mosque 
regularly, their pattern of going to the mosque to pray would help 
keep them from being identified and subjected to reprisals. 

Because the population is mostly illiterate, each postcard could 
have a series of symbols indicating various abuses of authority or 
corruption, such as a picture of a hand with money in it for bribery, 
and colors for each checkpoint could indicate where an abuse had 
taken place. Additionally, a phone number could be posted for 
residents to anonymously report abuses. This process must be 
effective and produce results, and the CF must play a central role in 
its operations, if we hope to maintain the support of the people. 

Another element crucial to maintaining the support of the 
population is incorporating village mullahs into the tribal security 
process. Mullahs play a crucial role in Afghan village life because 
they are often the only literate person in the community, and they 
perform an important function as peacemaker and reconciler, as 
well as religious leader. While they shouldn’t have a formal role on 
a government or security committee, they should be incorporated 
into the process as observers. Appropriate roles include: serving on 


committees investigating abuse or serving as mediators between 
warring factions. 

Additionally, through their participation, they give the tribal 
security effort the imprimatur of religious sanction, blunting efforts 
by the Taliban to present the tribes as un-Islamic. Furthermore, if 
complaint boxes were located in each mosque, the local mullah 
could be given the responsibility for ensuring that no harm came 
to those who filed a complaint. A final benefit of having the help of 
the mullahs is that they can speak out in favor of the tribal effort, 
helping to maintain popular support by telling villagers they must 
help the tribes resist violence and intimidation. Their help could be 
facilitated by generous Civil Affairs assistance and other support. 

No matter how well-organized the tribal security effort may be, 
it must have a unifying theme and message to effectively counter 
the insurgents’ messages and propaganda and to inculcate the values 
of the tribal movement in its members. The tribal security effort 
should have a distinctive name that captures the aspirations of the 
people and, conversely, negatively portrays the Taliban. For example, 
the Taliban or “students” initially sought to eliminate warlordism 
and corruption from Afghan society by portraying themselves as 
students of Islam seeking to purify Afghanistan. One possible name 
could be “The Sarmaalim Movement” or “Principals Movement,” 
which would put the tribes in the dominant position of “teaching” 
and “directing” the Taliban “students.” 

Another possibility could be a Chegha Council, or “Call 
for Action” Council, because chegha is rooted in the code of 
Pashtunwali. The themes of law and order, security and justice could 
be reinforced by messages such as “power to the tribes,” justice 


61 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 










for the people” or “revenge for the innocent.” Those themes could 
be summarized as sialy (equality), ezaar (respect of all people), 
badal (revenge) and teega/nerkh (law). Deciding upon a theme and 
a message reinforces the goals of the tribal lashgar, establishes a 
code of behavior for tribal members, marginalizes the Taliban and 
captures the aspirations and hopes of the people. 

An individual code of behavior should also be crafted that can 
be posted in every village, broadcast over the radio, and seen at 
bazaars, checkpoints and government buildings. Much like the code 
former British officer John Bagot Glubb used when he treated the 
Southern Desert Camel Corps and professionalized the Arab Legion 
in Jordan, the code would spell out the positive behaviors that tribal 
members should follow and those they should avoid. For example, 
it could say such simple things as, “Treat the people with respect,” 
“Be polite and courteous,” “Work hard, be honest, and the people 
will reward you,” “Don’t lie, cheat or steal,” “Show up on time 
and work honestly.” These messages may sound a bit simplistic, 
but the goal is not only to set expectations for tribal behavior but 
also to limit the ability of the Taliban to feed off of popular distaste 
for the abuses of power that local security leaders often commit. 
If a tribal lashgar treats the people with respect and through its 
positive behavior earns the trust of the people, the people and the 
government will be united in defeating the Taliban. 

One of the central features of the Afghan political and military 
landscape is the warlord. Many of these men seized power during 
the struggle against the Soviets, and their corrupt and violent 
behavior following the communist withdrawal deeply alienated 
the Afghan people, who, in many cases, welcomed the rise of 
the Taliban as a force for justice against the depredations of the 
warlords. Following the toppling of the Taliban in 2001, U.S. policy 
focused on putting warlords back in power as an inexpensive and 
quick way to re-establish authority in the countryside. Since that 
time, the population has become increasingly alienated from the 
GIRO A because of the behavior of the warlords, many of whom are 
allies of President Karzai, and the people have often enlisted with 
the Taliban out of frustration. Though some warlords have been 
removed, their replacements, who have usually been technocrats, 
are often systematically undermined by the warlord. 

If the tribes are going to rise up against the Taliban, the CF must 
work to check the power of the warlords, but it must do so in a way 
that doesn’t prompt the warlords to sabotage the tribal movement. 
A necessary first step is to have CF troops train the warlord’s men 
and live among them. The goal of this effort is not only to train and 
professionalize the warlord’s militia but also to gather information 
on him and his men while monitoring their behavior. Over time, the 
CF will gain a better understanding of the sources of the warlord’s 
power, identify leaders within his camp who could be influenced to 
support the new security order, and have opportunities to mitigate 
the warlord’s predatory behavior toward the local population and 
to win his support for the tribal movement. 

The warlord will likely oppose or undermine the tribal movement 


if he doesn’t feel that it is in his interest to support it. If he sees 
the movement as a possible source of funds for his men, he will 
support it. If his sources of revenue are directly challenged (e.g., 
control of checkpoints), he will oppose it. If some of the warlord’s 
men are known to have committed abuses, it would be better to 
relieve them quietly and one at a time, so that they don’t have an 
opportunity to organize against the process. If warlord-controlled 
checkpoint is notorious for corruption, for example, it would be best 
to “Afghanize” it by putting the ANA in charge of it or by creating 
a joint tribal checkpoint. A strategy of warlord containment and 
enlistment should move carefully and deliberately to remove any 
obstacles that could prevent the tribal movement from working; 
reduce and remove tribal conflict points, such as checkpoint control 
and access to government resources; and seek to transform the 
warlord and his men into responsible citizens. 

As tribes assume a more central role in U.S. security policy for 
Afghanistan, it is essential that we modify the lessons of Iraq to 
reflect the history and tactical reality of Afghanistan. We should 
craft a pragmatic strategy that will achieve enduring security effects 
for the local population by taking advantage of traditional authority 
structures without replicating the rampant warlordism of the past. 
We must enlist Afghanistan’s tribes to help them forcefully confront 
the insurgency while maintaining the active support of the people 
and reducing their tendency to fight among themselves. 

We will have to embrace some additional risks for our troops as 
they live among the people and learn the intricate details of tribal 
political life. But their efforts will be worth it, because the Afghan 
people are with us, and if we work with them, breaking bread and 
suffering through the same struggles to secure their communities, 
we will decisively defeat the Taliban. As one tribal elder recently 
told a Marine in Helmand Province (as reported in the Associated 
Press), “When you protect us, we will be able to protect you.” 
Through this active partnership, Americans and Afghans can defeat 
terrorism, resist intimidation and set the conditions for peace through 
victory. 

Editor’s note: This article was originally published in the July- 
August 2009 edition of Special Warfare. The Fires Bulletin would 
like to thank Special Warfare for its permission to republish this 
article. 


Dan Green is a visiting fellow at the Terrorism Research Center in 
Ballston, Va. He left the policy office of the Office of the Secretary of 
Defense in January, where he worked as a special assistant to the 
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs. In 
2005-2006, he was the U.S. Department of State Political Adviser to 
the Uruzgan Province Provincial Reconstruction Team. In 2007, he 
deployed with the Navy to Iraq’s Anbar province, where he worked as 
a tribal-engagement officer. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 62 






























0HK3& Hamilton Award 


mmmrm mm® 

@@©g) Mbooogps 


B/IMGDSIBGd 0M°] ©SSq KIsse^ Utoffplte 

(steouDODSB TfegEmB §©3 Cd MteMSpy BtoMaa 


B /l-109th Field Artillery, 55th Heavy 
Brigade Combat Team, 28th 
Infantry Division, Nanticoke, Pa., 
won the Hamilton Best Army National 
Guard Battery Award for 2009. CPT Joseph 
Ruotolo commands the battery with 1SG 
Brian McMichael. 

Named for Alexander Hamilton, a 
Revolutionary War artilleryman and 
American statesman, the Hamilton Award 
was established in 2002. It annually 
recognizes a high-performing Army 
National Guard battery based on specific 
criteria and a narrative. 

B/l-109 Field Artillery excelled in 
2009 in all aspects from individual and unit 
readiness to training excellence to mission 
accomplishment. Throughout fiscal year 
2009, B/l-109 FA maintained an assigned 
strength percentage of 110 percent (127 
Soldiers assigned out of 115 authorized), 
recruited 10 new members (six non-prior 
service; four prior service) despite a 
shutdown in recruiting, beginning March 
2009 and lasting for the remainder of the 
fiscal year, had an extraordinary overall 
attrition rate of 9.4 percent (well below the 
National Guard Bureau goal of 18 percent) 
and an assigned duty military occupational 
skill qualification percentage of 91 percent. 
All in all, the battery had 88 Soldiers out of 
127 assigned (the maj ority of the remainder 
attending or awaiting Initial Entry Training) 
mobilized in support of deployments to 
Iraq, Afghanistan and Egypt (as part of 
Multinational Force and Observers). 

In November 2008, following a 
demanding eight-month deployment to 
Afghanistan as backfills to 3rd Battalion, 
103rd Armor, Pa. Army National Guard in 
support of its mobilization as a provincial 
reconstruction team security force battalion, 
46 Soldiers from the battery returned 
home to a well deserved heroes’ welcome. 



Soldiers of B/1 -109 Field Artillery prepare to load a round into their M777A2 howitzer. (Photo courtesy 

of CPT Joseph Ruotolo, U.S. Army) 


These Soldiers served with six separate 
provincial reconstruction team security 
platoons throughout the country, earning 
the admiration and respect of the leadership 
of 3-103 Armor. 

B/l-109 FA mobilized as a 90-man 
M777A2 howitzer battery as part of 
1-108 FA, 56th Stryker Brigade Combat 
Team, on September 19, 2008, with an 
additional 41 organic members of the 
battery mobilizing. The battery proceeded to 
Camp Shelby, Miss., to complete collective 
post-mobilization training, cannon live-fire 
exercises and preparation for 56 Stryker 
Brigade Combat Team’s mission readiness 
exercise at the Joint Readiness Training 
Center, Fort Polk, La., in November to 
December 2008. While at Camp Shelby, 
the battery qualified in accordance with 


Artillery Table 15 before receiving notice 
that they would serve as 1-108 FA’s main 
effort maneuver battery for the 5 6th Stryker 
Brigade Combat Team’s mission readiness 
exercise. The battery enabled 1 -108 FA and 
56 Brigade Combat Team to accomplish 
their missions, earning the admiration of 
the observer/controllers and 56th Brigade 
Combat Team’s chain of command. 

Arriving in Kuwait January 22, 2009, 
B/l-109 FA calibrated 10 out of the 
battalion’s 19 howitzers. After moving to 
Camp Taji, Iraq, B/l-109 FA, once again, 
was selected as the main effort for 1-108 
FA and initially tasked with a number of 
missions, including main entry control 
point security, security for 710th Explosive 
Ordnance Detachment and battalion quick 
reaction force. On March 23,2009, not much 



Hay aaMBoi] to §@®@ to aOD 

aspooB© (Jirddud HmUffcMfflaO amH oamBs pesHm©©© B® 
BFgftsfljOg) (M33ODDO0D®© B® Offlfegfl®® ®®a^[p[M]D[MXa]lB□ !I, 

63 March-April 2010 • Fires 






more than a month after transfer of authority, 
B/l-109 FA was given the additional task 
of providing a three-gun platoon in direct 
support of 1st Heavy Brigade Combat 
Team, 1st Cavalry Division, in the vicinity 
of Joint Security Station Istiqlaal, Iraq. At 
2040 hours local time on March 29, 2009, 
B/l-109 FA made history, firing its first 
combat artillery mission since World War 
II. The battery would again make history 
on April 15, 2009 as the first M777A2- 
equipped National Guard unit to destroy a 
target successfully with Excalibur. 

With transfer of authority in August 
2009, B/l-109 FA fired nearly 1,200 rounds 
in theater, all timely, accurately, precisely 
and safely, earning the admiration and 
respect of the Multi-National Division- 
Baghdad commanding general, MG Daniel 
P. Boger, 1st Cavalry Division. B/1-109FA 
had proven itself as artillerymen of the 
highest caliber, having accomplished every 
nonstandard mission received to the highest 
standards while simultaneously excelling 
on a new towed weapon system, doing all 


this while suffering no casualties and only 
minor injuries throughout. 

Not to be outdone, Battery B (Rear), 
1-109 FA conducted a rigorous training 
program throughout training year 2009 
designed to maintain its tradition of 
excellence. During Annual Training 2009, 
at Fort Pickett, Va., with more than 80 
percent of the battery not in attendance 
due to current OIF deployment or recent 
return from Operation Enduring Freedom 
deployments, the remaining 24 members 
of Battery B (Rear) fell in with the few 
remaining members of Battery A to man 
six Paladin howitzers and one battery 
operations center. This makeshift battery 
of 65 dedicated troops, many of whom 
had just completed Initial Entry Training, 
conducted Paladin Software Block II and 
Excalibur New Equipment Training in only 
three days rather than the usual five. They 
then certified as Paladin/battery operations 
center sections, firing 1,379 rounds in four 
days, all timely, accurately and safely with 
some of the finest effects on target the 


battalion has ever seen — no small feat 
given the harsh environment of southern 
Va. in the summer. Additionally, as part 
of both a counter-insurgency situational 
training exercise and a force-on-force 
mission readiness-type exercise, the battery 
conducted the same cordon and search live 
at F ort Pickett’s Urban Assault Course in the 
“run” phase of counter-insurgency training 
that they previously conducted in simulation 
during the Fires simulation exercise as the 
“crawl/walk” phase. 

These magnificent artillerymen, most 
of whom had very limited urban operations 
experience and training, successfully 
cleared two complex structures suspected 
of being insurgent strongholds, capturing 
two high-value insurgents in the process, 
all without any friendly or civilian 
casualties or collateral damage. The unit 
displayed the ability to go from the rigors 
of Paladin artillery operations one day to 
the uncertainties of counter-insurgency/ 
stability operations the next, demonstrating 
the kind of agility our Army needs. 



A Soldier of B/1 -109 Field Artillery visits Assyriah Elementary School. (Photo courtesy of cpt Joseph Ruotoio, u.s. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 64 













y Hil® Knox Award 


KNOX AWARD 

\MmmpB 

B Bassa^ <2 gGq SaBSgfflsDDE, §©sDd Ex$M3Fy B 
©r°] ODDLMiap^ HMgal]© ©SDuofeaS ‘u’esomD 

EftsomiiSifljQ EffaMsm 



B Battery Blackjacks , 4th Battalion, 25th Field Artillery, 3rd 
Infantry Brigade Combat Team, 1 Oth Mountain Division, Fort 
Drum, N.Y., is the winner of the 2008 Henry A. Knox Best 
Active Component Battery Award. B Battery is commanded by CPT 
Matthew Burnette and 1SG Joe Winstead. 

The annual award is named for the first Chief of Field Artillery, 
MG Henry A. Knox, a Revolutionary War hero, and recognizes an 
outstanding active U.S. Army battery based on specific criteria and 
a narrative of performance. A similar award was established in 1924 
but was phased out in 1940 as World War II loomed. The award was 
reestablished in 2002. 

B Battery started training in preparation for Operation Iraqi Freedom. 
Due to the mission requirements for Operation Iraqi Freedom, B/4-25 FA 
conducted several training 
exercises which focused 
on maneuver tactics, 
techniques and procedures. 

In October 2008, Bravo 
Battery was given a new 
mission; deploy in support 
of Operation Enduring 
Freedom. Its mission 
would be to provide direct 
support fires to the 3rd 
Brigade Combat Team, 

“TF Spartan.” Unknown to 
B/4-25 FA, it would receive 
an additional mission of 
conducting maneuver 
operations throughout 
the Jalrez Valley, Wardak 
province; one of the 
most dangerous areas of 
operation in the world. 

B/4-25 FA did not take its 
change of mission lightly; the unit certified on three different howitzer 
systems — M119A2, M198 and M777A2, while simultaneously 
conducting fires support coordination exercises in support of its 
brigade and performing platoon live fire exercises to stay proficient in 
infantry tasks. With 90 Blackjack Soldiers, B/4-25 FA would surpass 
all expectations in both field artillery and infantry tasks. 

Once deployed to Afghanistan, B/4-25 FA manned two M777A2 
and two M119A2 howitzers at Forward Operating Base Airborne 
and Command Outpost Sayed Abad, both with one gun section each, 
while also manning two M777A2 howitzers at Command Outpost 
Carwile. B/4-25 FA also conducted numerous artillery raids into Chak 
District in support of combat operations to oust enemy strongholds. 


B Battery fired more than 2,000 105-mm and 155-mm rounds 
throughout Wardak province. Combined, B/4-25 FA’s artillery 
platoon effectively covered more than 640 square kilometers 
of Wardak province with artillery fires, with the combat proven 
ability to raid into any district by ground or air. Even though 
B/4-25 FA was stretched from end to end of Wardak province, 
it effectively accumulated thousands of 105-mm and 155-mm 
rounds fired and more than 20 enemy killed in action, with every 
platoon in the battery achieving enemy killed in action due to 
artillery fires, all with absolutely zero incidents. 

While still providing artillery support to all of Wardak 
province, B/4-25 FAexcelled in the maneuver mission as well. On 
July 08,2009, B/4-25 FA was made the Ground Command Unit 

in the Jalrez District 
— a crucial valley 
with direct access to 
Kabul where many 
Taliban leaders 
reside and conduct 
operations against 
coalition and 
Afghan government 
officials. B/4-25 
FA conducted 
key leader en¬ 
gagements, com¬ 
mander’s emer¬ 
gency response 
program Projects, 
humanitarian aid 
and countless 
kinetic operations 
to maintain U.S. 
and Afghan 
interests. With only 
two Maneuver Platoons, B/4-25 FA conducted more than 200 
combat patrols. B Battery captured several detainees, one of 
which was a high ranking improvised explosive device cell 
leader responsible for many of the improvised explosive devices 
in the Jalrez Valley. 

During B/4-25 FA’s tour in the Jalrez Valley, it has been in 
several direct and indirect fires as well as improvised explosive 
device engagements with the enemy. While staying true to 
its mission, B/4-25 FA consistently engaged the enemy and 
ultimately pushed it out of the valley. In doing so, every Soldier 
in B Battery has earned his combat action badge, and three 
individuals have earned purple hearts. 


a3 TfljD© aDODOQaaO smmsl fe ooaouosl] 
flap GOdo Iftps® ©CtM of Haftal 





0 UhR 0 


1 


[RsaagjDites© aoo ©ooSsSaoD^ODOg] 
QJ.8. 





Old HU 


a 





m 


65 March-April 2010 • 


Fires 





















(MdMIB JMflM) 


§®@© \V^Q D Q Q @pg 

©apgjMne Hfc©5 (§Os®s [IfcgmftajD cO a ^pflteip 


T he Gruber Award was established 
in 2002 to recognize outstanding 
individual thought and innovation 
that results in significant contributions to 
or the enhancement of the field artillery’s 
warfighting capabilities, morale, readiness 
or maintenance. It is named after Brigadier 
General Edmund L. Gruber, who as a first 
lieutenant in 1908, composed the Caisson 
Song that the Army adapted as The Army 
Goes Rolling Along in 1952. 

SFC Brandon J. Aguilar of B Battery, 
1 st Battalion, 319th Airborne F ield Artillery 
Regiment, distinguished himself through 
exceptionally meritorious achievement 
while assigned to B Battery, 1st Battalion, 
319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, 
during Operation Iraqi Freedom 08-09. 
Aguilar’s performance as 1st platoon 
sergeant greatly contributed to the overall 
success of not only B Battery’s mission, but 
also the nonstandard maneuver mission of 
1-319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment. 
Under his leadership and direction, his 
platoon completed more than 600 combat 
missions, including time sensitive target 
missions, reconnaissance and surveillance 
patrols, mounted and dismounted patrols, 
checkpoint reinforcement and overwatch, 
quick reaction force missions, small kill- 
team operations and numerous humanitarian 
assistance deliveries, all while sustaining 
zero losses to personnel or equipment 
Operating a maneuver platoon with 21 
personnel, Aguilar also supported more 
than 20 battalion operations, and 30 battery¬ 
sized operations focused on providing and 
maintaining security for the local populace 
of Zafaraniyah. His dedication to duty and 
mission focus played a pivotal role in the 
battalion’s efforts to secure the Karadah sub¬ 
district of Zafaraniyah, eliminating Jaysh A1 
Mahdi/Special Groups and al Qaeda in Iraq 
elements from the Operating Environment, 
and promoting peace and stability with the 
local leaders and populace. 

In mid-August, the battalion commander 
and command sergeant major selected 
Aguilar’s platoon to take on an artillery 
training mission with MI09A6 155-mm 
Paladins to establish a “hot gun” capability 
for Multi-National Division-Baghdad 
capable of employing Excalibur. Aguilar 
moved the platoon — a Ml 19A2 105-mm 


howitzer platoon by modified tables of 
organization and equipment — from Joint 
Security Station Zafaraniyah to Forward 
Operating Base Hammer and trained 
on M109A6 Paladins to accomplish the 
counterfire and direct support role for the 
brigade combat team, should the need arise 
to replace the platoon from 1-82 FA. 

While this would be a daunting task 
to any artillery unit after operating for 
a year in a nonstandard maneuver role 
in full-spectrum operations, Aguilar’s 
element attacked the mission with the same 
consistent tenacity as all other tasks it had 
accomplished throughout the deployment, 
and 1 st Platoon excelled in its new role. The 
platoon’s training allowed it to participate 
in eight live-fire exercises from August 
12, 2009 to September 17, 2009. Despite 
working on an unfamiliar system, the 
platoon participated in the firing of more 
than 213 rounds with zero incidents or 
safety violations, while constantly achieving 
standard mission times. 

The battalion command sergeant major 
called upon Aguilar to coach, teach and 
mentor howitzer sections and key leaders 
in field artillery operations to support the 
battalion’s mission upon redeployment. He 
demonstrated superior knowledge in artillery 
tasks and gunnery, successfully developing 
four inexperienced gunners, four howitzer 
section chiefs and four lieutenants after 
conducting twelve months of nonstandard 
operations in Iraq. He worked tirelessly, 
constructing and supervising training that 
shaped the battery in basic artillery skills 
and consistently received praise from the 
battalion’s leadership. He was chosen due 
to his leadership abilities and commitment 
to excellence in his craft, which he 
demonstrated on numerous occasions. 

Throughout his tour and without 
exception, Aguilar consistently focused 
his efforts on improving the unit by 
implementing thorough training, rehearsals 
and after-action reviews following 
execution. His stalwart leadership and 
focus on standards had a lasting impact 
on the battery’s ability to accomplish any 
mission or task, showing versatility in both 
maneuver and field artillery operations. 
Aguilar established himself as a true 
combat multiplier, earning the respect and 


confidence of his superiors, subordinates 
and peers throughout the airborne artillery 
community. 

Aguilar demonstrated superb attention 
to detail and accountability while preparing 
all sensitive equipment, fifteen section 
and platoon equipment containers, and 
four Ml 19 howitzers for deployment in 
October and November of 2008. Aguilar 
supervised three unit movement officers, 
five custom inspectors and two gunnery 
sergeants during the preparation of all 
equipment for deployment, ensuring zero 
deficiencies in the battery’s equipment. His 
efforts enabled the battery to assume full- 
spectrum operations rapidly upon arrival 
in theater. 

With coalition forces moving out of 
the cities and rapidly undergoing many 
base closures and realignments during 
Operation Iraqi Freedom 08-09, he again 
moved the battery’s equipment, this time 
from Forward Operating Base Rustamiyah 
to Joint Security Station Zafaraniyah, all 
while maintaining a fierce battle rhythm in 
the operational environment. This NCO’s 
attention to detail and fierce enforcement 
of standards and property accountability 
resulted in the battery’s ability to maintain 
100 percent accountability of equipment 
despite multiple moves throughout the 
deployment. His knowledge and experience 
allowed them to do so in a manner that 
facilitated quick inventory of the equipment 
after each move and rapid fielding for 
combat operations. 

Aguilar coached and mentored his 
platoon’s fire direction chief, SSG Ronnie 
Mason, for the prestigious Sergeant Audie 
Murphy Club board. Mason received the 
second highest score in the brigade combat 
team and was inducted into the prestigious 
club on September 12, 2009. 

The success of B Battery and 1st 
Battalion, 319th Airborne Field Artillery 
Regiment, could not have been achieved 
without the diligent efforts of Aguilar. His 
actions are in keeping with the highest 
traditions of this prestigious award and 
reflect great credit on him, the 1 st Battalion, 
319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment; 
the 3rd Brigade Combat Team; the 82nd 
Airborne Division; and the U.S. Army. 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 66 


BHlES Gruber Award 




UlLj e Operation unified Response 



March-April 2010 





























LEFT: A paratrooper assigned to 2nd Battalion, 319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, 2nd Brigade Combat Team, 82nd 
Airborne Division, hands water from the back of a Light Medium Tactical Vehicle to a young girl living in Port-au-Prince, 
Haiti, Jan. 22, following the Jan. 12 earthquake that ravaged the Caribbean nation. (Photo by pfc Kissta m. Feidner, u.s. Army) 

ABOVE: SGT Jeremiah Elliott, a fire control sergeant assigned to A Battery, 2nd Battalion, 319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, 2nd Brigade 
Combat Team, 82nd Airborne Division, stops while on patrol through Port-au-Prince, Haiti to get coordinants for a community in need of help on 
Jan. 23. (Photo by PFC Kissta M. Feidner, U.S. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • March-April 2010 68 



















Soldiers assigned to B Battery, 2nd Battalion, 32nd Field Artillery Regiment, 4th Brigade Combat Team, 1st Infantry Division, use an Iraqi police check point to 
provide perimeter road blocks and a look-out during Operation Patriot Raptor; an operation led by Iraqi police forces to capture members of terrorist cells within 
the city Of Al Ad Dawr, Iraq, Jan. 13. (Photo by SPC Canaan Radcliffe, U.s. Army) 


PIN 086041 -000 










