Worldwide Research, Worldwide 
Participation: Web-Based Test Logger 

Thanks to the World Wide Web, a new paradigm has been bom. ESCORT (steady state 
data system) facilities can now be configured to use a Web-based test logger, enabling 
worldwide participation in tests. 

NASA Lewis Research Center's new Web-based test logger for ESCORT automatically 
writes selected test and facility parameters to a browser and allows researchers to insert 
comments. All data can be viewed in real time via Internet connections, so anyone with a 
Web browser and the correct URL (universal resource locator, or Web address) can 
interactively participate. As the test proceeds and ESCORT data are taken, Web browsers 
connected to the logger are updated automatically. 

The use of this logger has demonstrated several benefits. First, researchers are free from 
manual data entry and are able to focus more on the tests. Second, research logs can be 
printed in report format immediately after (or during) a test. And finally, all test 
information is readily available to an international public. 

This test logging system was recently demonstrated in Lewis' 10- by 10-Foot Supersonic 
Wind Tunnel. Wind tunnel data for a High Speed Research project inlet was automatically 
logged during a test, allowing researchers to concentrate on research activities instead of 
data entry. 

Because the test was in a secure facility, only computers within the facility's secure 
intranet were able to connect during the test. Nevertheless, after testing was completed, 
the data were moved to a secure Internet server. Select users could log in by user ID and 
password, and view encrypted logs and comments of the previous night's data. This test 
logger is being generalized into an updated (Java-based) Lewis- wide product that will be 
available to all Lewis test facilities. 

A split screen is available: 

Upper section 

• Viewing data 

• Printing data 

• Sorting, etc. 

Lower section 

• Entering notes 

• Making addendums 



Changing text 


Extreme right 

• Speed bar (quick reference for specific data points) 



Lewis contact: David A. Clark, (216) 433-5914, David.A.Clark@grc.nasa.gov 
Author: David A. Clark 
Headquarters program office: OASTT 
Programs/Projects: HSR, broad Government applications 


