November 1974 


B74-10203 


NASA TECH BRIEF 

Langley Research Center 



NASA Tech Briefs announce new technology derived from the U.S. space program. They are issued to encourage 
commercial application. Tech Briefs are available on a subscription basis from the National Technical Information 
Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. Requests for individual copies or questions relating to the Tech Brief program may 
be directed to the Technology Utilization Office, NASA, Code KT, Washington, D. C. 20546. 


Computer Program for Buckling Loads of Orthotropic Laminated Stiffened 
Panels Subjected to Biaxial In-plane Loads (BUCLASP 2) 


The problem: 

In the analysis of laminated and stiffened, flat and 
curved panels, detail design is important, and dependable 
estimates of the buckling loads are needed. 


theory with prebuckling stresses and deformations 
ignored. Prior to buckling, the panel is subject to 
uniform strains so that each element has a constant 
(but not necessarily the same) biaxial loading. 


The solution: 

A general-purpose computer program has been de- 
signed to perform exact instability analyses for structures 
such as unidirectionally-stiffened, rectangular composite 
panels. 


How it’s done: 

The structure is idealized as an assemblage of beam 
elements, laminated curved-plate elements, and lami- 
nated flat-plate elements. Each element extends the full 
length of the structure. The element edges that are 
normal to the longitudinal axis of the panel are assumed 
to be simply supported, and any external edge that is 
parallel to the longitudinal axis may be arbitrarily 
constrained by specifying the appropriate spring con- 
stants. The analysis is exact, based on linear elastic 


Notes: 

1. This program was written in FORTRAN IV and 
COMPASS for the CDC-series computers. 

2. Inquiries concerning this program should be directed 
to: 

COSMIC 
1 12 Barrow Hall 
University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 30601 
Reference: LAR-1 1 199 

Source: A. V. Viswanathan and 
M. Tamekuni of 
The Boeing Co. 
under contract to 
Langley Research Center 
(LAR-1 1199) 


Category 09, 06 


This document was prepared under the sponsorship of the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration. Neither the United States 
Government nor any person acting on behalf of the United States 


Government assumes any liability resulting from the use of the 
information contained in this document, or warrants that such use 
will be free from privately owned rights. 




