PostProc users do not need program- 
ming experience or extensive knowl- 
edge of human electrophysiological sig- 
nal processing. Routines written in 
Series Processing Language (SPL) can 
be modified to accommodate different 


biomedical instruments, calibration lev- 
els, or sampling rates. 

This program was written by Patricia S. 
Cowings and William Toscano of Ames Re- 
search Center and Bruce C. Taylor and 
Soumydipta Acharya of the University of 


Akron. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to the Ames Technology Partnerships Division 
at (650) 604-2954. Refer to ARC-15287-1. 


© Representation of Serendipitous Scientific Data 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A computer program defines and im- 
plements an innovative kind of data 
structure than can be used for represent- 
ing information derived from serendipi- 
tous discoveries made via collection of 
scientific data on long exploratory space- 
craft missions. Data structures capable of 
collecting any kind of data can easily be 
implemented in advance, but the task of 
designing a fixed and efficient data struc- 
ture suitable for processing raw data into 
useful information and taking advantage 
of serendipitous scientific discovery is be- 


coming increasingly difficult as missions 
go deeper into space. The present soft- 
ware eases the task by enabling definition 
of arbitrarily complex data structures 
that can adapt at run time as raw data are 
transformed into other types of informa- 
tion. This software runs on a variety of 
computers, and can be distributed in ei- 
ther source code or binary code form. It 
must be run in conjunction with any one 
of a number of Lisp compilers that are 
available commercially or as shareware. 
It has no specific memory requirements 


and depends upon the other software 
with which it is used. This program is im- 
plemented as a library that is called by, 
and becomes folded into, the other soft- 
ware with which it is used. 

This program was written by Mark James 
of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab- 
oratory. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer ■ to NPO-42086. ' 


NASA Tech Briefs, December 2006 


