Carbon -Carbon 
Structure 



impact Sphere 

Carbon foam energy absorber 
for off-nominal impact 


Carbon Phenolic 

Primary Heat Shield 


Orbiting Sample (OS) 

Mars soil sample 


An Integrated Tool for System Analysis of 
Sample Return Vehicles 


By 

J. A. Samareh, R. W. Maddock, and R. G. Winski 


2012 IEEE Aerospace Conference 
Big Sky, Montana 
March 3-10, 2012 


An Integrated Tool for System Analysis of 
Sample Return Vehicles 


Jamshid A. Samareh 
NASA Langley Research Center 
j amshid.a.samareh@nasa.gov 


Robert W. Maddock 
NASA Langley Research Center 
robert.w.maddock@nasa.gov 


Richard G. Winski 
Binera Inc. 

richard.g.winski@nasa.gov 


Abstract — The next important step in space exploration is the 
return of sample materials from extraterrestrial locations to 
Earth for analysis. Most mission concepts that return sample 
material to Earth share one common element: an Earth entry 
vehicle. The analysis and design of entry vehicles is 
multidisciplinary in nature, requiring the application of mass 
sizing, flight mechanics, aerodynamics, aerothermodynamics, 
thermal analysis, structural analysis, and impact analysis tools. 

Integration of a multidisciplinary problem is a challenging 
task; the execution process and data transfer among disciplines 
should be automated and consistent. This paper describes an 
integrated analysis tool for the design and sizing of an Earth 
entry vehicle. The current tool includes the following 
disciplines: mass sizing, flight mechanics, aerodynamics, 
aerothermodynamics, and impact analysis tools. Python and 
Java languages are used for integration. Results are presented 
and compared with the results from previous studies. 


Table of Contents 

1. Introduction 1 

2. Earth Entry vehicles 2 

3. Multidisciplinary Integration 2 

4. Results 5 

5. Summary 7 

References 7 

Acknowledgment 7 

Biographies 8 


1. Introduction 

Space exploration missions that perform in situ analysis 
have provided a wealth of information about extraterrestrial 
bodies. For example, the Mars Phoenix lander was a highly 
capable spacecraft with many sophisticated instruments that 
were used to analyze the Martian surface. However, there 
are certain analyses that can only be performed in 
laboratories on Earth. The Sample Return mission will 
address these situations. 

Sample return missions abound throughout the history of 
spaceflight. The Soviets had several successful robotic lunar 
sample-return missions in the 1970s. The NASA Genesis 


project was a sample return mission that was launched in 
August of 2001 to collect a sample of solar wind and return 
it to Earth. In September of 2004, the Genesis Earth entry 
vehicle crashed in the Utah desert when the parachutes 
failed to deploy, and the planned mid-air retrieval could not 
be performed. Stardust was a NASA sample return mission 
launched in 1999 to collect cosmic dust. The Stardust entry 
vehicle successfully landed at the Utah Test and Training 
Range in 2006. Hayabusa was a Japanese mission that 
collected dust from an asteroid, and it landed in June of 
2010 in the South Australian Outback. There is a plan for a 
follow-up mission for Hayabusa 2 scheduled for either 2014 
or 2015. Phobos-Grunt was a Russian sample return mission 
to Phobos. The mission was launched in November of 201 1, 
but a failure left the spacecraft stranded in low Earth orbit. 
China has a mission plan to return a lunar sample in 2017. 
There is also the Mars Sample Return plan, which is the 
most challenging of all existing sample return plans. 
Mattingly and May [1] provide the most up-to-date 
overview of this mission plan. 

Multi-Mission Earth Entry Vehicle (MMEEV) 

NASA’s In-Space Propulsion Technology (ISPT) Program 
has funded a system analysis project for the development of 
Multi-Mission Earth Entry Vehicle (MMEEV). Maddock 
[2-5] has documented the overall MMEEV project and its 
progress. The goal is to develop a flexible Earth Entry 
Vehicle (EEV) design that can be utilized by multiple 
sample return missions [2]. The MMEEV concept is based 
on the Mars Sample Return (MSR) EEV design [6] that is 
driven to minimize risks associated with sample 
containment. The vehicle, by necessity, is designed to be the 
most reliable space vehicle ever developed. By preserving 
key common elements, the MMEEV concept will provide a 
platform by which technologies, design elements, and 
processes can be developed and flight tested prior to 
implementation on MSR. This approach could not only 
significantly reduce the risk and associated cost in 
development of the MSR EEV, but all sample missions will 
benefit by leveraging common design elements. 

Maddock [3] provides the details of the MMEEV system 
components and the vehicle trade space. Galahad is one 
sample mission that MMEEV has used for the analysis and 
design. Galahad is an asteroid sample return mission 


U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright (978-l-4577-0577-l/12/$26.00 ©2012 IEEE) 


1 



proposal in response to the NASA New Frontiers 
solicitation. The Galahad design using the MMEEV concept 
is described in Ref. [4]. The second version of MMEEV is 
described in Ref. [5], where the MMEEV system level 
integration approach is introduced. 

The primary focus of this paper is on MMEEV system 
analysis tool integration. It also provides a brief description 
of existing MMEEV components and the details of the new 
impact module. 

This paper is organized into five sections. Section 2 
describes the nominal Earth Entry Vehicle (EEV) used in 
this paper. Section 3 describes the multidisciplinary 
integration approach used in this study. Section 3 also 
includes a discussion on the impact sphere and foam 
characterization used in this study. The results and summary 
are in sections 4 and 5, respectively. 


2. Earth Entry Vehicles 

The potential for terrestrial contamination from returned 
sample material is a major driver for Earth entry vehicle 
design. A planetary Entry, Descent, and Landing (EDL) 
system typically consists of a heatshield for entry, a 
parachute for descent, and either retro rockets or airbags for 
landing. 

Mitcheltree et al. [6] provide a discussion on two possible 
options for a reliable EEV design: either the design includes 
sufficient redundancy for each subsystem or eliminates the 
need for the subsystem. They propose a simple passive entry 
system solution that replaces the parachute and landing 
system with a hardened container surrounded by sufficient 
energy absorbing material to assure containment during 
ground impact. Dillman et al. [7] continued refining 
Mitcheltree ’s model, which is the basis for the current EEV 
analysis. 

Mission requirements have strong influence on the overall 
EEV design concept. For example, an EEV returning a solar 
wind sample will have a different design concept, compared 
to an EEV returning samples that could expose Earth’s 
biosphere to potentially catastrophic terrestrial 
contamination. Figure 1 shows an EEV design concept that 
was used for the MSR mission [7]. The design consists of a 
sphere cone body, an orbiting sample (OS) canister, an 
impact sphere to absorb the kinetic energy, a carrier 
structure, and a thermal protection system (TPS). 

The EEV outer mold line (OML) is a 60° sphere-cone with 
the spherical nose designed to control the maximum 
stagnation heat rate. The OML is designed to provide 
hypersonic re-orientation capability, even when spin- 
stabilized 180° backwards or tumbling, in the event of entry 
attitude failures due to spacecraft separation or meteoroid 
impact. 


Carbon* Carbon 
Structure 



Impact Sphere 

Carix>rc foam energy absorber 
for off-nominal impact 


Carbon Phenolic 

Primary Heat $hiel< 


Orbiting Sample (OS) 

Mars soil sample 


Figure 1 - MSR Earth Entry Vehicle [7] 

The backshell is concave, and it is connected to the 
heatshield at the shoulder with the appropriate shoulder 
radius to control the maximum heat rate. The baseline for 
the forward TPS is a fully dense carbon phenolic (PICA 
may be used for less severe thermal environments). Acusil 
and Silicone Impregnated Reusable Ceramic Ablator 
(SIRCA) are the TPS options for the backshell. 

The internal structures are made of carbon-carbon, designed 
to withstand only the launch and entry loads. The OS has a 
spherical shape and is designed to withstand entry and 
ground impact loads. An impact sphere with a cellular 
structure surrounds the OS. 


3. Multidisciplinary Integration 

The purpose of systems analysis of an EEV is to gain a 
better understanding of various entry system concepts and 
their limitations. Systems analysis teams typically include 
one or more systems engineers and discipline-specific 
experts in flight mechanics, aerodynamics, 
aerothermodynamics, structural analysis, impact analysis, 
thermal soak, and thermal protection systems. The systems 
analysis process may take from several weeks to several 
years. 

Integrated multidisciplinary analysis tools improve the 
performance of the systems analysis team by automating 
and streamlining the process, and this improvement can 
reduce the errors resulting from manual data transfer among 
discipline experts. The process improves and speeds up the 
design activities such as trade studies, sensitivity analyses, 
Monte Carlo analyses, and vehicle optimization. The role of 
discipline experts in the systems analysis process is 
indispensable and cannot be replaced by any tool. 

The implementation of the multidisciplinary analysis 
approach presented here is a modified version of the System 


2 


Analysis for Planetary EDL (SAPE) [8] code. This 
implementation is targeted for Multi-Mission Earth Entry 
Vehicles using SAPE (M-SAPE). The purpose of M-SAPE 
is to provide a variable-fidelity capability for conceptual and 
preliminary analysis within the same framework. M-SAPE 
uses a combination of Python and Java languages (platform- 
independent open-source software) for integration and for 
the user interface. The development has relied heavily on 
the object-oriented programming capabilities available in 
Python and Java. Modules will be provided to interface with 
commercial and government off-the-shelf software 
components (e.g., finite-element analysis). An important 
goal for M-SAPE is to provide an integrated environment 
such that a low fidelity system analysis and trade can be 
performed in hours (not days or weeks) with sufficient 
hooks to perform high-fidelity analysis in days. Another 
goal of M-SAPE is to use existing software components, 
especially open-source software to avoid unnecessary 
software development and licensing issues. 

A multidisciplinary problem can be decomposed into a set 
of key disciplines. These discipline tools, in this paper 
referred to as components, can be represented in matrix 
form using the Design Structure Matrix (DSM) approach. 
The matrix is a graphical approach for representing the 
interdependencies among the various components. The 
DSM is a square matrix with the analysis modules 
positioned along the main diagonal. Figure 2 shows a DSM 
representation for the EEV integrated analysis tool that 
includes seven analysis components: geometry, mass sizing, 
impact analysis, structural analysis, flight mechanics, TPS 
sizing, and thermal soak. For each analysis component 
shown along the DSM diagonal, relevant outputs are listed 
in the corresponding row; the inputs are listed in the 
corresponding column. For example, the required inputs for 
impact analysis are the OML, mass, terminal velocity, and 
temperature field. Impact analysis outputs include an 
estimate for the mass of impact sphere as well as the 


required impact stroke. The data exchanges among 
components listed below the DSM diagonal indicate a 
feedback loop. The DSM can be reordered to reduce the 
number of feedback loops or to exchange strong feedback 
loops with weaker ones. 

There are two approaches to implement a multidisciplinary 
analysis system: tightly-coupled or loosely-coupled. In a 
tightly-coupled implementation, the components are 
integrated at the module levels. This type of implementation 
results in a system with faster execution time, but it is 
difficult to implement and maintain. In a loosely-coupled 
approach, the components are integrated at the application 
levels. This type of coupling is relatively easy to implement, 
modify, and maintain. However, there is an additional 
computational overhead, albeit a very small one for this 
implementation. 

The current M-SAPE implementation combined geometry, 
mass sizing, impact analysis, and structural sizing into a 
single integrated tool referred to as the parametric vehicle 
model. The aerodynamics and aerothermodynamics models 
are combined with the flight mechanics tool. The thermal 
soak model is currently under development, and it will be 
integrated at a later date. The remainder of this section 
provides a brief description of each discipline used in the 
current M-SAPE system. 

Aerodynamics 

The MMEEV aerodynamic module is a database 
constructed from several sources, including Direct 
Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC), computational fluid 
dynamics (CFD), wind tunnels, and ballistics range data. 
The database covers free-molecular, hypersonic, supersonic, 
and subsonic regimes. The database has been integrated into 
the flight mechanics code, Program to Optimize Simulated 



Geometry Module 

Mass Sizing 

Impact Analysis 

Structural Analysis 

Flight Mechanics 

TPS Sizing 

Thermal Soak 

Geometry 

Module 

Geometry 

OML 

OML 

OML 

OML 

OML 

OML 

Mass Sizing 

Overall Size 

Mass Sizing 

Mass 

Mass 

Mass 



Impact Analysis 

Energy Absorber 
Stroke 

Energy Absorber 
Mass 

Impact Analysis 





Structural 

Analysis 


Structural Mass 


Structural Analysis 




Flight Mechanics 



Terminal Velocity 

Entry Loads 

Flight Mechanics 

Heat Load 

Heat Rate 

TPS Sizing 


TPS Mass 




TPS Sizing 

Temperature or q at 
Bondline 

Thermal Soak 



Temperature Field 

Temperature Field 



Thermal Soak 


Columns are inputs, and Rows are outputs 


Figure 2 - Design Structure Matrix (DSM) 


3 




Trajectories II [9] (POST2). 

A eroth ermodynam ics 

The convective heating for the MMEEV vehicle is 
calculated using the Sutton-Graves equations [10], while the 
Tauber-Sutton equation [11] is used for the radiative heating 
calculation. The Sutton-Graves equation is anchored [12] 
with CFD solutions to quickly characterize quantities 
pertinent to TPS design such as heat flux, heat load, and 
surface pressure. These quantities are then used as inputs for 
material response modeling to size the TPS [13] component. 
This aerothermodynamic model has been integrated into 
POST2. 


Flight Mechanics 

The Program to Optimize Simulated Trajectories II [9] 
(POST2) software was used for flight mechanics. The 
POST2 software is a generalized point mass, discrete 
parameter targeting and optimization program. 


Impact Dynamics 

The current impact dynamic analysis assumes a 1 -D 
cylinder and perfectly vertical impact. There are three 
approaches to model the impact dynamics. The first 
approach is based on the MSR EEV model development, 
where penetrometers were used to perform ground 
characterization tests [14] at the Utah Test and Training 
Range (UTTR). These test data were then used to develop a 
simple empirical relationship which could determine the 
total impact, or peak deceleration of the EEV when 
penetrating the soft clay surface of UTTR. The penetrometer 
results show that impact g’s are a function of EEV diameter, 
terminal velocity, and payload mass. 

The second approach uses a simplified energy balance to 
understand the impact of the MMEEV with a perfectly rigid 
surface. In this case, since penetration is not possible, the 
vehicle and/or payload must be allowed to decelerate over 
some distance, or stroke, while transferring the kinetic 
energy by crushing a material designed for this purpose. 
Since it is assumed that the payload is the only critical 
element of the MMEEV that needs to survive, the mass and 
size of the payload are used in conjunction with the assumed 
compression properties of impact foam, to determine the 
resulting payload stroke distance for calculating the design 
impact load limit. 


The third approach is based on an impact sphere described 
in Ref. 15. The impact sphere shown in Figs. 1 and 3 is the 
primary mechanism to protect the payload at landing. Kellas 
and Mitcheltree [15] describe a model of an energy- 
absorbing sphere that consists of three main components: a 
rigid inner shell to protect the OS canister, a crushable 
foam-filled cellular structure, and an outer shell. The 
cellular structure is made of fiber reinforcement and a 
matrix material with some variation in the stacking 


sequence. The concept is capable of withstanding an 
omnidirectional impact-load as well as offering penetration 
resistance (Fig. 3). The cellular concept is an efficient 
design that may be customized for any specific impact crush 
load. In addition to impact energy absorption, the foam will 
act as heat insulation to keep the payload within appropriate 
temperature limits. Kellas and Mitcheltree provide an 
analytical approach to predict the theoretical crush load 
based on the energy dissipated due to the folding of cell 
walls and the crushing of the impact foam cells. They 
obtained a good correlation between theoretical results and 
experimental tests. 

The theoretical approach of Kellas and Mitcheltree [15] has 
been implemented for this study. Figure 4 shows sample 
results from this implementation. The x-axis is the cellular 
web thickness, and the y-axis is the foam strength. The 


Containment 
Vessel, CV 



Sample 
Container, SC 


Inner Shell 
(Rigid) 
Foam Core 
Cell-wall 


Outer Shell 

(Deformable) 


Impact Orientation 


Figure 3 - Impact sphere [15] 


Sphere mass, kg 



4 


webThicknesses, mm 

Figure 4 - Impact sphere results 


broken contour lines are the mean crush loads, and the solid 
lines are contours of impact sphere mass. This is a 
standalone module that has not been yet integrated into M- 
SAPE. 

All impact spheres rely on foam to absorb the entire impact 
energy or a portion of it. Carbon and polymer foams are 
credible candidates for EEV applications. Rohacell™ is a 
polymer foam that comes in various densities and strengths. 

A series of static tests were conducted to characterize the 
mechanical properties of four high performance Rohacell 
foams: 200 WF-HT, 71 WF-HT, 110 WF-HT, and 110 XT- 
FIT. Figure 5 shows the test setup and sample crushed 
foams. The tests followed ASTM D1621 (Standard Test 
Method for Compressive Properties of Rigid Cellular 
Plastics) to allow for comparison with manufacturer- 
provided data. The results from this test have been 
incorporated into the integrated system used in this study. 



Figure 5 - Foam test setup and foams 


Parametric Vehicle Model 

The geometry, mass sizing, impact analysis, and structural 
sizing disciplines are combined into a parametric vehicle 
model (PVM), which was introduced in Ref. [3]. The model 
is a MATFAB script that is based on the MSR EEV design. 
The script creates the vehicle geometry in 2-D, and then 
rotates the geometry 360° to generate a 3-D vehicle model 
from which mass properties are estimated. The model is 
constructed from a series of curves based on geometric 


variables and relations defined within the trade space. The 
approach allows for automatic vehicle rescaling as input 
parameters are redefined. The script calculates mass, eg 
location and inertia components of the structure; aft TPS, 
and forward TPS. The mass and inertia properties are 
provided to the POST2 component for use in the simulation. 
The critical input parameters include: mission environment 
parameters (e.g., maximum entry load and terminal 
velocity), payload (mass and volume), vehicle shape (e.g., 
diameter and nose radius), TPS material selection, and 
carrier structure properties. 

Thermal Protection System (TPS) 

A mass-estimating relationship (MER [13]) was developed 
to calculate the thickness of the Carbon Phenolic (CP) and 
Phenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) TPS required 
for the MMEEV over the mission trade space. The MERs 
are based on the Fully Implicit Ablation and Thermal 
Analysis [16] (FIAT) program. The resulting MERs are 
fairly simple numerical fits based on 840 different 
simulations. 

4. Results 

The results for four sample test cases are presented in this 
section. Previous EEV baseline models and results [3] were 
used to verify the integrated analysis tool. Table 1 shows the 
list of input parameters for the baseline model. The payload 
mass includes mass of sample return material, as well as the 
orbiting canister mass. 

Figure 6 shows the results for various entry velocities and 
flight-path angles. The six plots in Fig. 6 share the same x- 
axis (velocity) and y-axis (flight path angle). The EEV 
escapes back to space for velocities greater than 12 km/s 
and flight path angles greater than -5° degrees. The EEV 
mass ranges from 40-48 kg. The entry load is a strong 
function of flight path angles and can vary from 20 to 220 
Earth g’s. The terminal velocity and foam thickness tend to 
follow the EEV entry mass. The heat load is higher for cases 
with shallow flight path angles and high entry velocities. 
Maximum heat rate is primarily a function of the entry 
velocity. 

The next three test cases demonstrate M-SAPE capability. 
The results are compared with the previous MMEEV 
version 2 results, and it is expected that the results will be 
slightly different, because the analysis modules have been 
updated. 

The second test case is a Mars Sample Return application 
[2]. The results from Ref. [2] and M-SAPE results are 
shown in Table 2. The peak heating and peak deceleration 
values are higher, and the terminal velocity is slightly lower. 
These differences are primarily due to the updates made to 
the aerodynamic model. 

The third case is the Galahad model [4], which is an asteroid 
sample return mission proposal response to the NASA New 


5 




FlightPathAngle (deg) FlightPathAngle (deg) FlightPathAngle (deg) 


Frontiers solicitation. The mission goal is to return a sample 
from the binary C-asteroid 1996 FG3 and to make extensive 
orbital measurements. The plan is to return 60 g of samples 
to Earth. Figure 7 shows the Galahad EEV concept. Table 3 
shows sample results for the Galahad EEV. The results are 
very similar: the total mass is within 4% of Ref. [4]. 

The last demonstration case is based on a Stardust-like 
mission that is based on the EEV concept presented in 
section 2. The MMEEV payload mass was adjusted, such 
that overall vehicle masses matched the Stardust entry mass. 
Table 4 shows a comparison between M-SAPE results and 
results from Ref. [17]. 


Table 1. Input Parameters for Case 1 


Diameter, m 

1.3 

Payload mass, kg 

12.5 

Payload density, kg/m3 

4000 

Nose radius/base radius 

.25 

Shoulder radius/base radius 

.07 

Mass margin, % 

30 


included PICA, HT-424 adhesive, and the aluminum 2024 
honeycomb; whereas the MMEEV FIAT analysis used only 
PICA. Second, the Stardust TPS thickness was margined 


Table 2. MSR Model Comparison 


Parameters 

Ref. [2] 

M-SAPE 

Diameter, m 

0.9 

0.9 

Mass, kg 

44 

44 

Entry velocity, km/s 

12 

12 

Peak heating, w/cm2 

1500 

1611 

Peak deceleration g’s 

130 

146 

Terminal velocity, m/s 

41 

39 



Figure 7 - Galahad EEV concept [4] 




Terminal Velocity (m/s) 



Figure 6 - Sample results for case 1 


The M-SAPE TPS thickness result is significantly lower 
than the Stardust value, but this is not unexpected for two 
reasons. First, the model stackup in the FIAT ablative 
thermal analysis code differed. For Stardust, the stackup 


Table 3. Galahad Model Comparison 


Parameters 

Ref. [4] 

M-SAPE 

Total mass, kg 

37.9 

36.3 

Maximum entry load, g's 

34.6 

34.1 

Total peak heat rate, W/cm2 

* 

373 

* 

355 

Total heat load, kJ/cm2 

* 

10.3 

* 

9.8 

PICA thickness, cm 

3.3 f 

2.24 

Time of flight, sec 

629 

638 

Impact velocity, m/s 

28.9 

28.5 

Impact load, g’s 

400 

456 

Impact stroke, cm 

3.1 

3.9 


*unmargined 

^conservative thickness estimate [4] 


Table 4. Stardust-like Model Comparison 


Parameters 

Ref. [17] 

M-SAPE 

Mass, kg 

45.8 

45.6 

Entry Load, g’s 

Unavailable 

37.59 

Total heat rate w/cm2 

1200 

1062 

Total heat load 
kJ/cm2 

28 

26.79 

PICA thickness 

4.8 

2.58 


6 






beyond what the MMEEV vehicle uses, which is just based 
on the convective heating. Also, subsequent analysis 
showed that the Stardust bondline temperature prediction 
was approximately 74°C lower than the design analysis 
[18]. 


5. Summary 

The paper describes an integrated system for the analysis 
and design of an Earth entry vehicle for sample return 
missions. The system includes geometry, mass sizing, 
impact analysis, structural analysis, flight mechanics, and 
TPS. The initial system integration has been completed, and 
four sample test cases were used to verify the integration. 
The test results compare favorably with the previous sample 
results. 

References 

[1] Mattingly, R., and May, L., “Mars Sample Returns as a 
Campaign,” IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MT 
2011. 

[2] Maddock, R. W., “Sample Return Challenges Multi- 
Mission Earth Entry Vehicle Design Trade Space and 
Concept Development Strategy,” Sixth International 
Planetary Probe Workshop, Atlanta, GA, June 2008. 

[3] Maddock, R. W., “Multi-Mission Earth Entry Vehicle 
Design Trade Space and Concept Development Status,” 
Seventh International Planetary Probe Workshop, 
Barcelona, Spain, June 2010. 

[4] Maddock, R. W., “An Application of the Multi-Mission 
Earth Entry Vehicle: Galahad,” Seventh International 
Planetary Probe Workshop, Barcelona, Spain, June 2010. 

[5] Maddock, R. W., “Multi-Mission Earth Entry Vehicle 
Design Trade Space and Concept Status (Version 2.0),” 
Eight International Planetary Probe Workshop, 
Portsmouth, VA, June 2011. 

[6] Mitcheltree, R. A., Kellas, S., Dorsey, J. T., Desai, P. N., 
and Martin, C. J., “A Passive Earth-Entry Capsule for 
Mars Sample Return,” AIAA- 1998-2851. 

[7] Dillman, R. Corliss, J., “Overview of the Mars Sample 
Return Earth Entry Vehicle,” Sixth International Planetary 
Probe Workshop, June 2008. 

[8] Samareh, J. A., “A Multidisciplinary Tool for 
Systems Analysis of Planetary Entry, Descent, and Landing 
(SAPE),” NASA-TM-2009-2 15950. 

[9] Brauer, G. L., Cornick, D. E. and Stevenson, R., 
“Capabilities and Applications of the Program to 
Optimize Simulated Trajectories (POST),” NASA CR- 
2770, Feb. 1977. 


[10] Sutton, K. and Graves, R. A.: “A General Stagnation- 
Point Convective-Heating Equation for Arbitrary Gas 
Mixtures,” NASA-TR-R-376, November 1971. 


[11] Tauber, M. E. and Sutton, K.: “Stagnation-Point 
Radiative Heating Relations for Earth and Mars Entries,” 
Journal of Spacecraft, Vol. 28, No. 1, Jan-Feb 1991, pp. 
40-42. 

[12] Trumble, K., Dyakonov, A., and Fuller, J., “Multi- 
Mission Earth Entry Vehicle: Aerodynamic and 
Aerothermal Analysis of Trajectory Environments,” 
Seventh International Planetary Probe Workshop (IPPW), 
Barcelona, Spain, June 2010. 

[13] Sepka, S., Trumble, K., Venkatapathy, E., Arnolds, J., 
and Maddock, R., “Development of a FIAT-Based 
Thermal Protection System Correlation Models for PICA 
and Carbon Phenolic,” Eighth, International Planetary 
Probe Workshop (IPPW), Portsmouth, VA, June 2011. 

[14] Fasanella, E.L., Jones, Y., Knight Jr., N.F., and Kellas, 
S., “Low Velocity Earth-Penetration Test and Analysis”, 
AIAA-2001-1388, April 2001. 

[15] Kellas, S. and Mitcheltree, R. A., “Energy Absorber 
Design, Fabrication and Testing for a Passive Earth Entry 
Vehicle,” AIAA-2002- 1224. 

[16] Chen, Y. K. and Milos, F. S., “Ablation and Thermal 
Response Program for Spacecraft Heatshield Analysis,” 
Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 36, No. 3, 1999, 
pp. 475—4-83. 

[17] Olynick, D., Chen, Y. -K., and Tauber, M. E., 
“Aerothermodynamics of the Stardust Sample Return 
Capsule,” Journal Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 36, No. 3, 
May- June 1999. 

[18] Covington, M. A., “Performance of a Light-Weight 
Ablative Thermal Protection Material for the Stardust 
Mission Sample Return Capsule,” Second International 
Planetary Probe Workshop; NASA Ames Research 
Center, April 2005 (NASA/CP-2004-213456). 


Acknowledgement 

MMEEV project is a multidisciplinary analysis and design 
activity, and the project would have been impossible to do 
without the help of MMEEV team. The authors would like 
to thank the MMEEV team members: Parul Agrawal, Jim 
Arnolds, Steve Sepka, Kerry Trumble, and Ethiraj 
Venkatapathy of NASA Ames; Anjie Baker, Artem 
Dyakonov, Lou Glaab, Sotiris Kellas, and Michelle Munk 
of NASA Langley; and Bob Gershman, Daniel Lyons, 
Richard Mattingly, Erik Nilsen, and Erick Sturm of NASA 
JPL. The authors would also like to thank Robin Hardy of 


7 



NASA Langley Structural Dynamic Branch for performing 
the static foam tests. The authors would like to thank Clyde 
Gumbert of Vehicle Analysis Branch for providing valuable 
feedback. 

Biographies 

Jamshid Samareh is a senior research aerospace 
engineer in the Vehicle Analysis Branch of NASA Langley 
Research Center. He received his Ph.D. in Mechanical 
Engineering and Mechanics from Old Dominion 
University in 1987. His current research interests are in 
multidisciplinary analysis and design optimization 
(MDO), Entry and Descent Landing (EDL), mass 
modeling, fluid- structure interaction, geometry modeling, 
and shape optimization. He is the recipient of NASA 
Public Service Medal in 1995 and two-time winner of 
NASA Software of the Year Award as a member of 
TetrUSS team in 1996 and 2004. He was an Associate 
Editor of the AIAA Journal, a member of the AIAA MDO 
technical committee (TC) and is an associate fellow of the 
AIAA. 

Rob Maddock is a senior engineer in the Atmospheric 
Flight and Entry Systems Branch at NASA Langley 
Research Center. He received his Bachelor’s degree in 
Aerospace Engineering from Parks College of St. Louis 
University in 1992, and then went on to receive a 
Master's degree in Aerospace Engineering from The 
University of Tennessee Space Institute in 1995. In 1996 
he joined the Jet Propulsion Laboratory where he worked 
in mission and trajectory design and systems engineering 
on several flight projects, including Cassini, the Shuttle 
Radar Topography Mission, and the Mars Science 
Laboratory. He also spent over 5 years in the Mars 
Advanced Studies Office supporting Mars Sample Return 
mission studies and technology development. In 2005, 
Rob joined NASA Langley to support EDL systems 
engineering and design for MSL. Since then, he has 
provided simulation and development support for the 
ALHAT technology project, lead Earth Entry Vehicle 
technology and systems analyses for sample return 
missions, and currently he is supporting the development 
of the Autonomous Aerobraking Development Software 
system. 

Richard Winski is an aerospace engineer in the 
Atmospheric Flight and Entry Systems Branch at NASA 
Langley. He received a B.S. in Aerospace Engineering 
from the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University (Virginia Tech) in 2004 and M.S. in 2006 
through Virginia Tech and the National Institute of 
Aerospace (NIA). While completing his M.S. he worked in 
the Atmospheric Flight and Entry Systems Branch at 
NASA Langley. His current work is in the area of flight 
dynamics and simulation for Entry, Descent and Landing 
(EDL). 



