Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Innovative 
Partnerships Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-17964-1. 


e Machine Aided Indexing 
and the NASA Thesaurus 

Machine Aided Indexing (MAI) is a 
Web-based application program for aid- 
ing the indexing of literature in the 
NASA Scientific and Technical Information 
(STI) Database. MAI was designed to be 
a convenient, fully interactive tool for 
determining the subject matter of docu- 
ments and identifying keywords. The 
heart of MAI is a natural-language 
processor that accepts, as input, any 
user-supplied text, including abstracts, 
full documents, and Web pages. Within 
seconds, the text is analyzed and a 
ranked list of terms is generated. The 
17,800 terms of the NASA Thesaurus 
serve as the foundation of the knowl- 
edge base used by MAI. The NASA The- 
saurus defines a standard vocabulary, 
the use of which enables MAI to assist in 
ensuring that STI documents are uni- 
formly and consistently accessible. Of 
particular interest to traditional users of 
the NASA Thesaurus, MAI incorporates 
a fully searchable thesaurus display 
module that affords word-search and hi- 
erarchy-navigation capabilities that 
make it much easier and less time-con- 
suming to look up terms and browse, 
relative to lookup and browsing in older 
print and Portable Document Format 
(PDF) digital versions of the Thesaurus. 
In addition, because MAI is centrally 
hosted, the Thesaurus data are always 
current. 

This program was written by Bill 
von Ofenheim for Langley Research Cen- 
ter. For further information, access 
http://mai. larc. nasa.gov. 

LAR-17 110-1 


Arbitrating Control of 
Control and Display Units 

The ARINC 739 Switch is a computer 
program that arbitrates control of two 
multi-function control and display units 
(MCDUs) between (1) a commercial 
flight-management computer (FMC) 
and (2) NASA software used in research 
on transport aircraft. (MCDUs are the 
primary interfaces between pilots and 


FMCs on many commercial aircraft.) 
This program was recently redesigned 
into a software library that can be em- 
bedded in research application pro- 
grams. As part of the redesign, this soft- 
ware was combined with software for 
creating custom pages of information to 
be displayed on a CDU. This software 
commands independent switching of 
the left (pilot’s) and right (copilot’s) 
MCDUs. For example, a custom CDU 
page can control the left CDU while the 
FMC controls the right CDU. The soft- 
ware uses menu keys to switch control of 
the CDU between the FMC or a custom 
CDU page. The software provides an in- 
terface that enables custom CDU pages 
to insert keystrokes into the FMC’s CDU 
input interface. This feature allows the 
custom CDU pages to manipulate the 
FMC as if it were a pilot. 

This program was written by Michael M. 
Madden of Langley Research Center 
and Paul C. Sugden of Unisys Corp. Fur- 
ther information is contained in a TSP 
(see page 1 ). 

LAR-17 178-1 


Q Web-Based Software for 
Managing Research 

aeroCOMPASS is a software system, 
originally designed to aid in the man- 
agement of wind tunnels at Langley Re- 
search Center, that could be adapted to 
provide similar aid to other enterprises 
in which research is performed in com- 
mon laboratory facilities by users who 
may be geographically dispersed. In- 
cluded in aeroCOMPASS is Web-inter- 
face software that provides a single, 
convenient portal to a set of project- 
and test-related software tools and 
other application programs. The heart 
of aeroCOMPASS is a user-oriented 
document-management software sub- 
system that enables geographically dis- 
persed users to easily share and manage 
a variety of documents. A principle of 
“write once, read many” is imple- 
mented throughout aeroCOMPASS to 
eliminate the need for multiple entry of 
the same information. The Web frame- 
work of aeroCOMPASS provides links 
to client-side application programs that 
are fully integrated with databases and 
server-side application programs. Other 
subsystems of aeroCOMPASS include 
ones for reserving hardware, tracking 
of requests and feedback from users, 
generating interactive notes, adminis- 
tration of a customer-satisfaction ques- 


tionnaire, managing execution of tests, 
managing archives of metadata about 
tests, planning tests, and providing on- 
line help and instruction for users. 

This program was written by Sherwood T. 
Hoadley; Anthony M. Ingraldi; Kerry M. 
Gough; Charles Fox, Jr.; Catherine K. Cronin; 
Andrew G. Hagemann; Guy T. Kemmerly; 
and Wesley L. Goodman o/Langley Research 
Center. For further information, access 
http: / /aerocompass. larc. nasa.gov. 

This invention is owned, by NASA, and a 
patent application has been filed. Inquiries con- 
cerning nonexclusive or exclusive license for its 
commercial development should, be addressed to 
the Patent Counsel, Langley Research Center, at 
(757) 864-3521. Refer to LAR-16442. 


Driver Code for Adaptive 
Optics 

A special-purpose computer code for 
a deformable-mirror adaptive-optics 
control system transmits pixel-regis- 
tered control from (1) a personal com- 
puter running software that generates 
the control data to (2) a circuit board 
with 128 digital-to-analog converters 
(DACs) that generate voltages to drive 
the deformable-mirror actuators. This 
program reads control-voltage codes 
from a text file, then sends them, via 
the computer’s parallel port, to a cir- 
cuit board with four AD5535 (or equiv- 
alent) chips. Whereas a similar prior 
computer program was capable of 
transmitting data to only one chip at a 
time, this program can send data to 
four chips simultaneously. This pro- 
gram is in the form of C-language code 
that can be compiled and linked into 
an adaptive-optics software system. The 
program as supplied includes source 
code for integration into the adaptive- 
optics software, documentation, and a 
component that provides a demonstra- 
tion of loading DAC codes from a text 
file. On a standard Windows desktop 
computer, the software can update 128 
channels in 10 ms. On Real-Time Linux 
with a digital I/O card, the software can 
update 1024 channels (8 boards in par- 
allel) every 8 ms. 

This program was written by Shanti Rao of 
Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labo- 
ratory. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1). 

The software used in this innovation is 
available for commercial licensing. Please 
contact Karina Edmonds of the California 
Institute of Technology at (626) 395-2322. 
Refer to NPO-43107. 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs, February 2007 


