
Professional 


Artillerymen 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin 



•|t'v y a _ 



In| fCiI 





1 

■r — -~»i 'Wijjj^ 




























Report Documentation Page 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 


1. REPORT DATE 

JAN 2010 


2. REPORT TYPE 


3. DATES COVERED 

00-01-2010 to 00-02-2010 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Fires. A Joint Publication for U.S. Artillery Professionals. January 
February 2010 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 


5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 


6. AUTHOR(S) 


5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Fires,Building 652, Room 203, McNair Road,Fort Sill,OK,73503 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS (ES) 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 


11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


14. ABSTRACT 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 

unclassified 


b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 


c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER 

ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Same as 

66 

Report (SAR) 



19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 








^=3 

Januany-Februany 201 □ 


featured 



Photo courtesy of LTC Steve Wertz (U.S. Army) 


While many of our 
comrades from around 
the military continue to 
fight terrorism in Iraq 
and Afghanistan, 2nd 
Battalion, 18th Field 
Artillery Regiment 
spent the past 15 
months fighting the 
same fight in a little- 
discussed area of the 
world that is ripe for the 
spread of extremism. 


Sust-aifiiii 

Page 7 Staying in the Game: Prevention of low back injuries 

By MAJ G. Damon Wells 



Page io Information Engagement: Operations in a permissive 
environment 

By MAJ Lyndon D. Jones 

Page 14 Engaging the media 

By Jennifer Blais 


Headquarters, Department of the Army • PB644-10-1 





































Page 17 Mind Fitness: Improving 

operational effectiveness and 
building warrior resilience 

By Elizabeth A. Stanley and Amishi P. Jha 

Page 25 Saving Soldiers from suicide: 

Army seeks to stamp out stigma 

By Kim Reischling 

Page 27 Restoring balance through 
reintegration 

By LTC Michael T. Morrissey 

Transform 

Page 39 Full-spectrum artillery 

By MAJ Richard L. Scott 

Page 43 Eating Soup with a Spoon: The 
employment of Fires brigades in 
the Global War on Terrorism 

By LTC John C. Hale 

Page 57 Fire support for the special 


DISCLAIMER: Fires, a professional bulletin, is published 
bimonthly by Headquarters, Department of the Army under 
the auspices of the Fires Center of Excellence (Building 
758, McNair Road), Fort Sill, Okla. The views expressed are 
those of the authors and not the Department of Defense 
or its elements. Fires' content doesn’t necessarily reflect 
the U.S. Army’s position or supersede information in other 
official Army publications. Use of news items constitutes 
neither affirmation of their accuracy norproduct endorse¬ 
ments. Fires assumes no responsibility for any unsolicited 

material. By Order of the Secretary of the Army: 

George W. Casey Jr. 

General, United States Army 
Chief of Staff 

°“ 

Joyce E. Morrow 

Administrative Assistant to the 
Secretary of the Army, 0932004 

David D. Halverson 

Major General, United States Army 
Commanding General 
Fort Sill, Okla. 


Editor-in-Chief: Sharon McBride 
Managing Editor: Jennifer M. Blais 
Art Director: Jason Kelly 
Assistant Editor: Tonya S. Goforth 

PURPOSE: Founded in 2007, Fires serves as a forum 
for the professional discussions of U.S. Army and Marine 
Field Artillery (FA) and Army Air Defense Artillery (ADA) 
professionals, both active and Reserve Component 
[RC); disseminates professional knowledge about the 
FA’s and ADA’s progress, developments and best use in 
campaigns; cultivates a common understanding of the 
power, [imitations and application of joint fires, both lethal 
and nonlethal; fosters joint fires interdependency among 
the armed services; and promotes the understanding of 
and interoperability between the FA’s and ADA’s active and 
RC units—all of which contribute to the good of the FA and 
ADA, Army, joint and combined forces, and our nation. 

OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION: Free copies are sent to USA 
and USMC FA units: 7 per corps artillery, FA/fires brigade, 
brigade combat team (BCT), Stryker cavalry regiment 
(SCR), FA Marine regiment and battlefield coordination 
detachment (BCD) headquarters; 13 per FA/fires/battalion/ 
squadron-3 oer fire support element (FSE), fires and ef¬ 
fects cell (FEC), effects coordination cell (ECC) fire support 
cell (FSC), fire support coordination center (FSCC). force 
fires coordination center (FFCC) and separate baffery or 
detachment; 3 per fire support team (FIST) and combat 
observation lasing team (COLn; and 1 per Master Gun¬ 
ner and Fire Support Officer (FSO). Free copies to Army 
ADA units: 7 per Army air and missile defense command 
(AAMDC) and ADA brigade headquarters; 13 per ADA 
battalion; and 3 per air defense airspace management 
(ADAM) cell and separate battery or detachment.me FA 
and ADA Schools’ departments, directorates and divisions 
each get 2 copies. Other U.S. Army and armed services 
units/organizations and U.S. government agencies that 
work with FA or ADA personnel, equipment, doctrine, 
tactics, training organization or leadership issues may 
request a free copy—including, but not limited to, ROTCs, 
recruiting commands, libraries, attaches, liaison officers, 
state adjutants general, pubfic affairs offices, military 
academies, laboratories, arsenals, major commands, etc. 
Contact Fires at http://sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/. 


operations task force 

By Majors Jason D. Adams, Deric Holbrook and 
Seth Knazovich 

Page 61 Targeting for a maneuver task 
force 

By CPT Justino Lopez Jr. 

Page 65 Winning World War IV: Part II of II 

By MAJ David Haynes 


SUBSCRIPTIONS: Those not eligible for official distribu¬ 
tion may subscribe to Fires via theTJ.S. Superintendent of 
Documents, P.O. Box37154, Pittsburgh. PA 15250-7954 
(1 -866-512-1800) or via membership in the U.S. Army FA 
Association (www.fieldartillery.org). 

SUBMISSIONS: Email to the Editor, Fires, at firesbul- 
letin@conus.army.mil; mail to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, 
OK 73503-0311; overnight to Building 758, Room 7, 
McNair Road, Fort Sill, OK 73503-5600: or call at DShl 
639-5121/6806 or commercial (580) 442-5121/6806. 


_nspk_ _,_, 

please credit Fires, the authorfs) and photographers. 


POSTMASTER: Fires( USPS 309-010) (ISSN 1935-4096) 
is published bimonthly; periodical postage paid by Depart¬ 
ment of the Army at Lawton OK 73501 and an additional 
mailing post office. Send address changes to Fires, P.O. 
Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311. 


ON THE COVER: Soldiers get a first hand view of the land from on top of a ridge near 
Forward Operation Base Lane, Zabul province, Afghanistan, Feb. 21,2009. (Photo by ssg Adam 

Mancini, U.S. Army) 


ADA 24/7 Hotline & Email 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 

DSN 978-5312 or 
(915)568-5312 
ada_fires@bliss.army. mil 


FA 24/7 Hotline & Email 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 

DSN 639-2204 or 
(580) 442-2204 
redleg@conus.army.mil 



hg mud to space 


Fit to fight: Maintaining a balance 


By MG David D. Halverson, 

Commanding General of the Fires Center of Excellence 


“That is what we have to do to rebalance the Army - sustain, 
prepare, reset and transform. We must do that while we are at 
war, and it will not be easy, but it is essential to keep the Army the 
‘Strength of the Nation. 

GEN George W. Casey, Chief of Staff of the Army 

A fter nearly nine years of war, attaining and maintaining 
balance is one of the biggest challenges facing our Army 
today. We are in the midst of a persistent conflict, which is 
the third-longest in America’s history and the longest ever fought 
by an all-volunteer force. 

The Army Chief of Staff, GEN George W. Casey Jr., has a plan 
to put the Army back in balance, but it is going to take a few years 
to get there. To execute the chief of staff’s plan, he has asked we 
focus on four areas: sustain, prepare, reset and transform - simul¬ 
taneously - of course that in and of itself requires balance. Our 
Fires Force is one of the highest deployed forces in the U.S. Army, 
so we must understand and adapt to maintain balance. 

Soldiers and leaders are the key to an Army that is defined 
as a “people” business. We can break equipment, we can lose 
contracts for a new weapon or computer, but we cannot operate 
without physically and mentally tough warfighters and families. 
The “total” or “whole” Soldier is one who maintains a good balance 
between his or her important tenants, such as family, community 
and mental, physical and spiritual fitness. This balance will enable 
the Soldiers to reach their full potential and recognize their greatest 
growth benefiting the Soldier, their family and our all important, 
all volunteer force’s own sustainment. 

S ustain. First and foremost, we want to ensure our people are 
well-cared for and have an opportunity to develop themselves 
whether they are at home, at work, on the battlefield or while serv¬ 
ing in garrison. It is important our forces maintain a consistent, 
healthy lifestyle in mind, body and spirit, regardless of the situation 
in which they find themselves. 

Our experiences at war have shown us we must better prepare 
our Fires Soldiers and their families to find their balance and to 
persevere with the challenges inherent to military service. With the 
start of Army initiatives such as the Army Family Covenant and the 
implementation of the Comprehensive Soldier Fitness program, we 
are on track to providing opportunities for our war fighting force 
community to excel and embrace the best of what military life has 
to offer. Additionally, the installation Family and Morale, Welfare 
and Recreation offers a variety of activities to help our Soldiers 
and their families balance their lives through recreational, social 
and educational events -1 encourage you to take advantage of all 

“The bottom line is that 
ourselves, we won’t be able 
and every person, Soldier 



of them. 

The bottom line is that if we don’t 
take care of ourselves, we won’t be 
able to take care of each other, and 
every person, Soldier or civilian, is 
a vital link. This is the reason we 
are so successful, because without 
the support we give each other we 
cannot succeed. Therefore, as we 
build upon our successes, we owe 

our Soldiers the very best equipment and systems we can develop 
and cannot allow innovation to slip away. This is extremely im¬ 
portant for our Fires Soldiers, especially after doing directed mis¬ 
sions. As a Fires community we must enlist, access and retain the 
highest quality leaders. This will ensure we are able to address the 
complexities of persistent conflict now and in the future. 

P repare. As a Fires Force, we are ensuring both our field artil¬ 
lery and air defense artillery Soldiers have the right training 
and equipment to do their jobs. The Fires Center of Excellence is 
striving to integrate key aspects of the two branches, while aspiring 
for unprecedented offensive and defensive Fires capabilities. We 
have emerging missions now, and tremendous potential for synergy 
between the two branches in supporting the warfighter. How the 
branches and Fires Center of Excellence approach modernization 
to address these emerging missions will shape the Fires Center of 
Excellence and the Army as a whole for years to come. We must 
get back to doing some of our core competencies. 

Time back from the fight assists training and learning in new 
and effective ways which are key to our future as an Army. On Dec. 
17, 2009, the Army Capstone Concept was released and earlier in 
the month the Army Deader Development Program was signed. 
These documents are shaping our thoughts on the future fight, and 
how we transform from current learning models to new systems is 
of vital importance in terms of funds and time. This is not business 
as usual and it requires the combined knowledge and efforts of the 
entire Fires Force be captured as we move through the Army Force 
Generation cycle. Also, we must look across the entire doctrine, 
organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel 
and facilities spectrum to address our needs. 

R eset. Major combat and stability operations in Iraq and 
Afghanistan are placing tremendous demands on our equip¬ 
ment. Amid the constant demands of war, the equipment is aging 
far more rapidly than projected. Because of the higher operating 
tempo, rough desert environments and limited maintenance avail¬ 
able in theater, equipment life has been dramatically shortened. 

if we don’t take care of 
to take care of each other, 
or civilian, is a vital link.” 


January-February 2010 


Fires 

















To maintain their operational effectiveness and to be prepared to 
deploy when needed, units must ensure their equipment is returned 
to optimal condition, or “reset,” after they redeploy from a combat 
or stability operation. Reset not only involves equipment; it involves 
our Soldiers and their family members. With the current strategic 
environment and a future of projected conflict, it is more important 
than ever to reset Soldiers, families and equipment properly. 

New technologies and changing enemy tactics, techniques and 
procedures require new equipment, new systems and new ideas about 
how we fight and win. Reset is the time to capture those lessons 
learned and turn them into new tactics, techniques and procedures 
for the next deploying unit. Reset provides leaders time, although 
not enough in many cases, to look back and analyze what took place 
and why. For example, where were the capability gaps, where did 
our Soldiers miss a sign or piece of critical information that better 
training or a different way of training would have caught? 

So along those notes, it is imperative every Fires professional 
strives to be a student of their trade and branch. In an information 
age, there are limitless opportunities to learn about what’s new, 
what’s happening in the Fires profession and to share what you 
know - don’t fire and forget - stay engaged. The Fires Center of 
Excellence (FCOE) is managing a series of social media applica¬ 
tions to increase collaboration between the war fighter and the 
FCoE. From the Fires Knowledge Network to Facebook 
to the Combined Arms Center Blog, we need warriors’ 
input as to how our systems, training and education 
are working and how we are doing at supporting the 
families. 

We must not only be schooled ^ 
in the basics of our jobs, but . 
we also must become adaptive 
leaders who are proficient in 
joint and combined expedi¬ 
tionary warfare, continuous 
full-spectrum operations, and 
leaders who are culturally astute 
and resilient to uncertain and ambiguous environ¬ 
ments. Being a professional means more than gaining 
military occupational specialty skills, it also means 
taking advantage of outside college courses. That is 
why as leaders, we must provide every opportunity 
for our Soldiers to participate in civilian training and 
college education, avenues of self-development and 
experience to continue to achieve success in all areas. 

Yes, we can and should teach ourselves and our Soldiers 
how to accomplish the mission by Army regulations, but these other 
types of experiences and education can give them the insight and 
the maturity to know when is appropriate to create other avenues 
of approach. 

T ransform. Critical for the success of Fires is the integration 
of the systems of the future while sustaining and upgrading 
our current weapons and enabling systems that support the current 
fight. In sync with bringing new systems online, we must have the 
capability to train more effectively and efficiently through the use 
of simulations and at combat training centers. This past year has 
seen several recently-fielded revolutionary munitions and systems, 
all of which enhance our ability as Fires professionals to integrate 
timely and effective lethal and nonlethal fires in support of the 
joint and combined maneuver commander. No single platform, 
including vehicles, operates alone. As a result, Army moderniza¬ 
tion will be undertaken while maintaining equipment of various 
classes and ages - a constant mix of upgraded legacy systems and 
new platforms. 





Wars now and in the future will almost certainly involve j oint and 
combined operations. We can see this in Afghanistan today where 
the U.S. Army is not fighting alone. Joint and combined operations 
have become the norm. The Fires Center of Excellence continually 
looks for opportunities to bring joint and combined training here 
because it exposes our Soldiers, and the leaders we are developing, 
to the operational environment they will be exposed to in the real 
fight. 

This was certainly the case with hosting Forging Sabre 2009. 
Because Fort Sill is the home of the Fires Center of Excellence and 
the Field Artillery School, a Singaporean air force contingent trav¬ 
eled to Fort Sill to validate their training with a live-fire exercise, 
which incorporated both U.S. and Singaporean forces. It made sense 
for these new High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System soldiers and 
airmen to validate their training with the U.S. Army’s fires experts 
because Fort Sill has the best joint and combined Fires training 
capabilities available. It also gives our Fires Soldiers valuable 
experience training in a combined environment. It was a win-win 
for both countries, and is the first of several historical training op¬ 
portunities to be held here at the Fires Center of Excellence. 

It’s important to note, transformation won’t stop with incorporat¬ 
ing joint and combined fighting opportunities. Transformation 
is accelerating at an all-time fevered pitch and has a new 
emphasis on homeland security and force protection to 
include preparing for hybrid warfare. Hybrid warfare is 
no longer a concept of the future, and we will continue 
to see conflict with blended or mixed warfare includ¬ 
ing conventional, guerrilla, counterinsurgency and 
terrorism. Hybrid warfare con¬ 
stantly shifts along the conflict 
continuum and will demand 
more dual-use and multi-role 
f platforms. Hybrid conflict 
will also require new and cre¬ 
ative approaches to operational 
problems, including the need for 
leaders to consider the formation of ad hoc, modular 
composite units where elements from other units could 
be attached depending on the particular mission. 

That’s why we are revamping all our courses 
and incorporating the idea of a Joint Combined Fires 
University, where it supports the pillars of a “univer¬ 
sity” as we define it, such as “education, research and 
development, currency and outreach” - to respond to this 
new way of fighting. 

Hence the 2010 January-February edition of the Fires Bulletin 
is dedicated to “maintaining a balance in an era of persistent con¬ 
flict.” Throughout this issue of the Fires Bulletin, authors discuss 
“maintaining balance” and touch on each area of the CSA’s im¬ 
peratives. Sustain focuses on the upkeep of our all-volunteer force. 
Prepare spotlights pre-deployment training. Reset brushes on the 
re-integration and dealing with our “in-ranks” enemy, suicide. Lastly, 
a look at transform as it touches on new tactics, techniques and 
procedures and new systems. The collection of articles contained 
in this edition highlights some of the best ideas and new ideologies 
in the Fires profession. It is a preverbal “how to” guide of what it 
takes to maintain a balance in an ever-changing era of persistent 
conflict. 

It has never been a more exciting time to be a Fires professional. 
So as we go about sustaining, preparing, resetting and transform¬ 
ing - we all must be involved and we all must share our combined 
wisdom. 

Fit to Fight - Fires Strong! 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 2 




featured article 




SSG Eduardo Alegria of B Battery, 2nd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery Regiment, discusses procedures 
with Ethiopian soldiers and civilians during a medical capabilities operation in Ethiopia. (Photo 

courtesy of LTC Steve Wertz, U.S. Army) 


lthough Afghanistan and Iraq^are at 

A\ THE EPICENTER OF AMERICA'S WAR ON TERROR, 


^TERRORIST GROUPS THREATEN OTHER PARTS OF THE 
WORLD AS WELL. ONE OF THE MOST DANGEROUS IS THE GREATER 
HORN OF AFRICA REGION - DJIBOUTI, ERITREA, ETHIOPIA, 
KENYA, SOMALIA AND THE SUDAN, ALONG WITH YEMEN, THEIR 
VOLATILE NEIGHBOR. AL QAEDA HAS ALREADY STRUCK IN THE 
REGION, AND THE AREAS COMPLEX HISTORY, SHARED POVERTY, 
POOR GOVERNANCE, UNDERDEVELOPMENT AND RENOWNED 
RESISTANCE AGAINST WESTERN COLONIZERS HAVE CREATED AN 
INTRICATE WEB OF OPPORTUNITY FOR POTENTIAL TERRORISTS." 

BATTLING TERRORISM IN THE HORN OF AFRICA, 
EDITED BY ROBERT I. ROTBERG 


January-February 2010 


Fires 


W hile many of our comrades from 
around the military continue 
to fight terrorism in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, 2nd Battalion, 18th Field 
Artillery Regiment spent the past 15 months 
fighting the same fight in a little-discussed 
area of the world that is ripe for the spread of 
extremism. The Horn of Africa is comprised 
of multiple countries, ethnicities, religious 
beliefs, government forms and cultures. Due 
to the relative instability of many countries 
in the Horn of Africa, it has been a target 
for extremist groups in recent years. 

I ndirect approach. The war on terrorism 
in the Horn of Africa is being waged much 
differently than in Iraq and Afghanistan. The 
majority of the U.S. government’s efforts in 
the Horn of Africa are being fought, not with 
bullets, but with ideas. Influence is critical. 
A common motto at Combined Joint Task 
Force-Horn of Africa is “Helping Africans 
solve African challenges.” 

The United States learned from its 
difficulties in Somalia in 1993 that direct 
military intervention is not always the best 
way to execute operations in this part of 
the world. In 2002, Combined Joint Task 
Force-Horn of Africa was established under 
U.S. Central Command in the small country 
of Djibouti, just off of the Gulf of Aden, 
as a mostly U.S. Marine Corps-led joint 
headquarters. Since its infancy, Combined 
Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa has evolved 
into a full-fledged joint task force with 
multiple lines of operation. The task force 
provides mentorship to multiple militaries 
in the region in both ground and maritime 
operations; provides medical, dental and 
veterinary support for the population; 
and builds schools, dairies, livestock 
slaughterhouses, bridges, roads, wells and 
other necessities in this poverty-stricken 
region. In October 2008, the task force was 
assigned to U.S. Africa Command. 

2nd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery 
Regiment deployed to Africa in March and 
May 2008. The battalion deployed under 
two infantry company requests for forces. 
Initially, the battalion and U.S. Central 
Command requested that the requests for 
forces be consolidated and that the entire 
battalion deploy. However, this request was 
denied. Despite not officially being on a 
request for forces, the battalion deployed 
its command element and a small staff 
to execute tactical command and control 
of the unit. The rest of the battalion task 
organized from its Multiple-Launch Rocket 
System battalion structure into two infantry 
companies that deployed in accordance 
with its latest arrival dates. Deploying 
the command and staff elements proved 











to be one of the most valuable decisions 
the battalion made. The Combined Joint 
Task Force-Horn of Africa staff is a mostly 
U.S. Navy-led joint staff that produces 
primarily operational-level staff work. 
The battalion staff’s presence allowed us 
to take operational guidance from the joint 
staff and turn it into tactical tasks for our 
batteries. Deploying the staff also allowed 
us to oversee the logistical needs of our 
Soldiers in Djibouti and throughout East 
Africa. 

2nd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery 
Regiment was the largest maneuver unit in 
Combined Joint Task F orce-Hom of Africa 
and the largest U.S. military formation inside 
Africa. Our primary responsibilities were 
foreign military training, force protection 
for civil-military projects and joint combat 
search and rescue throughout the area of 
responsibility. During the last five months of 
our deployment, we also executed security 
operations for Camp Lemonier, Djibouti, 
oreign military training. Perhaps 
the most exciting and challenging 
mission the battalion executed during our 
deployment was training and mentoring 
foreign militaries. We executed this task in 
a myriad of ways in multiple countries. The 
following paragraphs describe some of our 
larger foreign military training efforts. 

Ugandan NCO Academy. The battalion 
provided NCOs to mentor instructors and 
students in the Ugandan Junior and Senior 
NCO Academies in Jinja, Uganda. One 
of Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of 
Africa’s primary operational objectives 
is NCO professionalization within its 
area of responsibility. Most of the African 
countries that we worked alongside have 
very officer-centric armies. When soldiers 
show potential for leadership, they are made 
officers. However after observing the U.S. 
Army, many countries have begun to show 
a desire to professionalize their NCO corps. 
Uganda is one of the primary countries 
where these efforts are taking fruit. 

Our NCOs in Jinj a actually taught about 
25 percent ofthe courses in the two academies 
and mentored Ugandan instructors during 
their remaining instruction. Although our 
expertise was requested and desired, it was 
important that these courses had a Ugandan 
face on them. 

F ollowing the first iteration of the Junior 
and Senior NCO Academies, our instructor 
team developed an instructor qualification 
course for the Ugandan instructors. During 
this course, our team introduced new 
instructional subjects and mentored the 
Ugandans on their instructional techniques. 
This ad-hoc course will likely have the most 


lasting impact of all our efforts in Uganda. 
Improving Ugandan instruction through 
Ugandan instructors is truly paving the way 
for the future of the Ugandan NCO corps. 

Ugandan Counter Terrorism Course. 
Along the shores of Lake Victoria, our 
battalion provided an instructional team 
for what the Ugandans called their Counter 
Terrorism Course. In reality, this 16-week 
course, located in Kasenyi, Uganda, was 
a very basic infantry course made up of 
soldiers from throughout the Ugandan 
People’s Defense Force. 2nd Battalion, 18th 
Field Artillery Regiment NCOs were the 
primary instructors for this entire course. 
They were responsible for the Ugandan 
soldiers from sun-up until the duty day was 
complete. Our instructional team taught 
these young Ugandans basic marksmanship, 
physical fitness, basic soldier skills and 
some basic and advanced infantry tactics, 
techniques and procedures. 

Kenyan Warrior Leaders Course. In the 
beautiful Mount Kenya region, our Soldiers 
developed and executed what we called the 
“Kenyan Warrior Leaders Course” for the 
Kenyan army’s 20th Parachute Regiment. 
Our Soldiers got the full wilderness 
experience by living among monkeys, 
antelope and other wildlife in the bush along 
with their Kenyan counterparts. 

Ethiopian NCO Academy. 2nd Battalion, 
18th Field Artillery Regiment NCOs 
developed and taught an instructional 
qualification course to the cadre at the 
EthiopianNCO Academy in Tolay, Ethiopia. 
This venture was one of Combined Joint 


Task Force-Horn of Africa’s most high 
profile missions because it was the first U. S. 
military venture with the Ethiopian military 
in many years. Our NCOs deployed to this 
remote area of Ethiopia on short notice, 
believing they would simply be advisors to 
the Ethiopian instructors. A week after their 
arrival, they were teaching the Ethiopian 
cadre eight hours a day, five days a week. 
Not only did our instructional team develop 
a program of instruction for the instructor 
course while simultaneously teaching, they 
also developed programs of instruction 
for the newly created Master Sergeant and 
Sergeant Maj or’s Course. After one iteration 
of the instructor course, our instructors 
switched gears and began instructing the 
Sergeant Major Cadre Course. 

Liberia. Although not in the Combined 
Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa area of 
responsibility, the battalion also contributed 
an instructor team to the U.S. Africa 
Command’s foreign military training 
mission in Liberia. Following a lengthy 
internal conflict, this war-torn nation has 
begun rebuilding. In the past two years, 
Liberia’s military has started over from 
the ground floor. 2nd Battalion, 18th Field 
Artillery Regiment instructors mentored 
infantry battalion leadership at the battalion, 
company and platoon levels, and provided 
medical subject matter expertise and 
training in these rebuilding efforts. 

East Africa Stand-by Brigade. The U.S. 
government provides training assistance to 
various African countries through a program 
called Africa Contingency Operations 



SSG Christopher Crocker and SSG Steven Teets of C Battery, 2nd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery 
Regiment, instruct students from the Ugandan People's Defense Force on squad-level infantry 
tactics at the Ugandan Counter Terrorism Course in Kasenyi, Uganda. (Photo courtesy of ltc Steve 

Wertz, U.S. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 4 











.-. 

and Training Assistance. The U.S. State 
Department led program, which couples 
military contractors and active-duty military 
members, provides training and assistance 
to African militaries. This training usually 
occurs before African nations send forces 
to execute stability operations in locations 
such as Sudan and Somalia. 

In the past few years, the African Union 
has developed five regional security forces 
to be deployed regionally should conflict 
arise. The East Africa Stand-by Brigade was 
in the conceptual phase when 2nd Battalion, 
18th Field Artillery Regiment deployed, but 
throughout our deployment the battalion’s 
contributions enabled this concept to 
become a reality. The East Africa Stand¬ 
by Brigade staff consists of officers and 
NCOs from the 13 member nations. Should 
situations arise that require the deployment 
of this force, member nations from within 
the East Africa Stand-by Brigade will 
contribute tactical forces to the mission. 

In assisting with this mission, we 
contributed one of our majors to work full¬ 
time with the British Peace Security Team 
in Karen, Kenya. This officer, initially MAJ 
Todd Mefford and later MAJ Mark Simpson, 
worked as a planner in developing several 
training and certification exercises for the 
East Africa Stand-by Brigade staff. We 
| also contributed command, operations and 
logistics officers and NCOs to mentor the 
East Africa Stand-by Brigade staff during 
several Africa Contingency Operations 
and Training Assistance Program training 
exercises and, ultimately, the staff’s 
certification. 

This was an incredibly rewarding 
venture for both the African soldiers 
and 2nd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery 
Regiment personnel. As you can imagine, 
taking officers from multiple countries with 
different military philosophies and doctrines 
and forming a trained, cohesive staff can 
be difficult. Although many challenges lie 
ahead for the East Africa Stand-by Brigade, 
we feel very satisfied the work done over 
the past 15 months has allowed East Africa 
to make huge strides in its security. 

ther Africa Contingency Operations 
and Training Assistance Program 
missions. Besides working with the 
East Africa Stand-by Brigade, we also 
contributed instructor teams to other Africa 
Contingency Operations and Training 
Assistance Program training missions in 
Ethiopia and Rwanda. These instructors 


worked with battalion Soldiers and their 
staffs to prepare for regional deployments 
to Darfur and southern Sudan. 

Force protection. A second major 
mission the battalion executed during 
its deployment was force protection for 
various operations throughout the area of 
responsibility. Due to the lack of resources 
in most areas within the Horn of Africa, 
the U.S. government, through the military, 
is executing numerous civil-military 
projects. 2nd Battalion, 18 th Field Artillery 
Regiment Soldiers provided security for 
civil affairs teams, Army well-drillers and 
Navy Seabees who are executing these 
projects, which include the construction of 
schools, livestock slaughterhouses, wells, 
bridges and many other facilities. Medical, 
dental and veterinary assistance was also 
provided to the people of this region through 
Combined Joint Task F orce-Hom of Africa. 
Besides executing force protection for each 
of these operations, we also provided medics 
for multiple medical capabilities operations 
and Soldiers simply to hold animals during 
veterinary capabilities operations. 

The battalion’s two most prominent 
enduring force protection missions were 
located in Dire Dawa, Ethiopia, and Manda 
Bay, Kenya. In Dire Dawa, the battalion 
deployed a sizable force protection team to 
assist multiple civil affairs and Navy Seabee 
missions in eastern Ethiopia. In Manda 
Bay, Mission Ready Soldiers provided 
camp security for a small U.S. contingency 
operating location on the northeast coast 
of Kenya. Our Soldiers at Manda Bay 
also provided force protection for Army 
civil affairs teams operating in the region. 
Although these two missions endured for 
our entire deployment, the battalion also 
executed force protection for other missions 
in Djibouti, Ethiopia, Uganda, Kenya and 
Tanzania. 

Joint combat search and rescue. Mission 
Ready Soldiers executed the important 
mission of fixed-wing and rotary wing 
security for Combined Joint Task Force- 
Horn of Africa’s joint combat search and 
rescue operations. Working closely with 
Air Force parajumpers assigned to the 
command, a platoon of Mission Ready 
Soldiers executed this mission for the 
entirety of our deployment. This challenging 
mission was great for our Soldiers; they 
constantly trained in advanced infantry 
tactics and executed numerous training and 
real-world missions. 


Camp security. Although camp security 
was not initially one of our assigned 
missions, circumstances required that the 
battalion execute this important task during 
the final five months of our deployment. 
Marines have executed security operations 
for Camp Lemonier and the U.S. Embassy 
in Djibouti since its origination in 2002. 
However, due to global commitments 
elsewhere, the U.S. Marine Corps ceased 
executing this mission in April 2009. No 
replacements were provided to perform this 
task. Although the threat to our operating 
location in Djibouti was quite different 
from the threat in Iraq or Afghanistan, the 
camp is located six miles from the border 
of Somalia. Thus, security remains a very 
important task. Combined Joint Task 
Force-Horn of Africa asked our battalion 
to execute this mission until the force 
assigned to this task arrived in August. 
However, the command also required 
that we continue most of our missions in 
East Africa as well as our joint combat 
search and rescue mission. Executing this 
mission with the forces and equipment on 
hand required detailed staff work, creative 
manning solutions and a shift in training 
focus. We completely reorganized our 
forces, redeployed and moved Soldiers all 
over the area of responsibility and re-trained 
our Soldiers on new tasks. Ultimately, we 
were able to successfully execute this task 
as well as continue our work throughout 
the area of responsibility. 

mportant lessons learned. During the 
2009 Year of the NCO, nowhere were 
the contributions of U. S. Army NCOs more 
apparent than in our operations in Africa. 
To call 2nd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery 
Regiment’s operations decentralized is 
an understatement. While our battalion’s 
command and staff played a very important 
role in developing force structure and 
materials and providing logistical support 
for our teams in East Africa, as well as filling 
a huge tactical command and control void for 
Combined Joint Task F orce-Hom of Africa, 
we did not direct the daily operations of our 
deployed forces. This task was left to the 
junior officers andNCOs that led our teams. 
For the majority of our missions, sergeants 
first class, staff sergeants, or even sergeants 
were in charge. We only deployed officers 
to areas where their presence was needed 
to liaise with their African counterparts. 
Even in those locations, officers primarily 
executed coordination; NCOs executed 



“This was an incredibly rewarding venture for both 
the African soldiers and 2nd Battalion, 18th Field 
Artillery Regiment personnel.” 

Fires 


5 January-February 2010 • 




“Influence and ideas are what will ultimately win 
the battle against extremism in the Horn of Africa.” 


the majority of the training and leadership 
tasks. 

To get a realistic picture of the degree of 
autonomy our deployed Soldiers operated 
under, you must understand the geographic 
separation that existed between our teams 
and their battery and battalion headquarters. 
Our teams executed operations literally 
thousands of miles from their parent 
organizations. Personal responsibility 
and extreme competence were required to 
succeed. Our Soldiers performed brilliantly 
in this environment. They coordinated and 
directed operations with senior officer 
and NCO leaders from multiple nations, 
built programs of instruction and taught 
courses with little guidance or assistance, 
provided force protection for strategic level 
projects and performed many other tasks 
with no actual oversight. When given the 
opportunity to lead in this environment, 
our young leaders rose to the occasion. 
They did all this while maintaining the 
highest standard of personal conduct and 
endearing themselves to the Africans they 
worked and lived with. The success of our 
battalion and Combined Joint Task Force- 
Horn of Africa during our deployment is 
directly attributable to our NCO and small 
unit leaders. 

frican pride. Our entire unit was very 
impressed by the competence of the 
African militaries we worked with. Africans 
are highly intelligent and, in many cases, 
well-schooled. Countries such as Kenya, 
Uganda and Rwanda are steeped in Western 
military doctrine based on their colonial 
past. These countries educate many of 
their officers in the United States, Great 
Britain and France - among other places. 
Most of the officers and veteran soldiers 
we encountered have multiple operational 
deployments, executing stability operations 
in Darfur, southern Sudan, the Democratic 
Republic of Congo and Somalia. Thus, 
when we discussed and trained for stability 
operations in Africa, it was important that 
we understood that our African counterparts 
actually knew more than we did. The maj or 
difference between them and us is resources. 
Training and operational budgets are very 
limited, and their equipment is old or non¬ 
existent. However, this does not stop them 
from beating the bush for hours each day, 
marching miles without water, while they 
hunt down rebel factions who threaten the 
local population. The truth is that most of 
the African nations we worked with are good 
at what they do and take immense pride in 
the quality of their work. Embracing this 


fact was critical in allowing our Soldiers to 
effectively mentor and work with them, 
ulture. In order for our Soldiers 
to succeed, it was imperative that 
they become fully immersed in both the 
military and social cultures of the countries 
where they operated. It was vital that they 
establish credibility as professionals who 
truly cared about the people they mentored 
and the civilian population they interacted 
with. Our Soldiers lived in a variety of 
conditions. They ranged from a two-story 
house in the middle of Jinja, Uganda, where 
a housekeeper cooked for the team, to a 
building at the Ethiopian NCO Academy, 
that was condemned by U.S. standards, 
where our Soldiers survived for months 
on meals ready to eat, Ethiopian food and 
Spam sandwiches. 

Regardless of the living conditions, one 
of the keys to our success was embracing the 
culture. Our Soldiers in Uganda interacted 
daily with the local population, attended 
church, festivals and other local activities. 
Our Soldiers in Dire Dawa, Ethiopia, played 
weekend basketball games with locals and 
dined in local eating establishments. Our 
troops in Tolay, Ethiopia, played daily 
volleyball games with the students and 
cadre at the NCO academy. Our Soldiers did 
many other things to immerse themselves 
in the local culture, which was yet another 
key to our success. 

o the extra mile. People from all over 
the world can tell whether you truly 
care about them or not. Early on in our 
deployment, one of our battery commanders 
organized a group of Soldiers who began 
spending time with local orphans in 
Djibouti. Weekly, our Soldiers gave their 
time, energy and, ultimately, their resources 
to help these people who have absolutely 
nothing. To say that the people of Djibouti 
and the other countries where we worked 
live in poverty is an understatement. Most 
people live in homemade huts without 
electricity, running water or any of the other 
luxuries that we take for granted. To see 
this and live among it is truly eye-opening. 
However, our Soldiers did something about 
it. They inconvenienced themselves enough 
to show the population they cared. The 
efforts in Dj ibouti grew throughout our time 
in theater to the degree that service members 
from throughout Camp Lemonier began 
participating and American individuals and 
organizations began sending items for these 
needy people. 

In Jinja, Uganda, our NCO-in-charge 
organized his crew and spent over 1,000 


man hours working with a local orphanage 
school. They built and planted an orchard 
that will someday feed over 80,000 people in 
this area of the world where food is a scarce 
resource and people go hungry. What’s 
more, they gave of themselves to truly get 
to know the people and children who lived 
and worked there. This group and others 
worked with local schools, churches and 
other organizations to invest in the lives of 
the communities where they worked. They 
did not do this at the direction of their chain 
of command or to earn public accolades; 
they did it because they are good people 
who care. 

The truth is that our Soldiers are the 
only Americans most of these Africans 
have ever met or will ever meet. I am 
confident that we had a very positive 
influence on the Africans we instructed and 
worked alongside - both professionally and 
personally. We performed our assigned tasks 
in a professional, competent manner and 
had operational impact for Combined Joint 
Task Force-Horn of Africa and U.S. Africa 
Command. However, I believe the impact 
our Soldiers had on the local populations - 
most of whom had never met any Americans 
- through their acts of compassion and 
generosity had an even greater impact in 
this area of the world for our country. 

Influence and ideas are what will 
ultimately win the battle against extremism 
in the Horn of Africa. To this end, 2nd 
Battalion, 18th Field Artillery Regiment 
contributed mightily. God knows, it was 
quite the experience. Our African adventure 
has changed our perspective and is an 
experience most of us will value forever. 


Lieutenant Colonel Stephen Wertz, field 
artillery, is the commander of 2nd Battalion, 
18th Field Artillery Regiment (MLRS) at Fort 
Sill, Okla. His previous assignments include 
operations officer for the 3rd Battlefield 
Coordination Detachment, Osan Airbase, 
Republic of Korea; brigade operations officer 
for 212th Field Artillery Brigade and battalion 
operations officer for 6-32 Field Artillery, Fort 
Sill; fire support officerfor Combined Support 
Coordination Team #3, Yongin, Republic of 
Korea; gunnery instructor and chief of the Fire 
Direction Branch, Cannon Division, Gunnery 
Department, Fort Sill; regimental fire support 
officer, squadron fire support officer and 
howitzer battery commander, 3rd Armored 
Cavalry Regiment, Fort Carson, Colo. He is 
a veteran of Operation Desert Storm, Opera¬ 
tion Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring 
Freedom. 





sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 6 





Pneventi 



By MAJ G. Damon Wells 

T he ability to move while wearing 
a full combat load and handle 
bulky and heavy equipment 
is vital to the combat mission of 
most Soldiers, especially the field 
artilleryman’s. The cannoneer’s 
duties are multifaceted, including 
a variety of multiplane movements 
that involve the rotation and 
extension/flexion of every joint in 
the body with and without 



added external resistance. To be optimally effective, Soldiers 
must be trained and primed in proper body mechanics and 
injury prevention. The potential for injury is always present 
and must be contemplated by first-line supervisors and leaders 
before every mission and during day-to-day activities. Due to 
the impact of productivity lost to injuries, specific awareness of 
injury prevention should be practiced in every field artillery unit, 
and it should be part of weekly physical training. It is important 
to understand why these injuries occur and more importantly 
how can they be prevented. 

A chronic or recurring injury is a Soldier’s worst nightmare. 
These injuries can affect both mission accomplishment and career 
productivity. The prevalence of work-related lower back injuries 
is on the rise. With the Army’s current operational tempo and 
little foreseeable relief, it makes sense to implement a lower back 
injury prevention plan to keep artillerymen healthy and in the 
fight longer. About 60 to 80 percent of Americans experience 
l lower back problems and the related consequences 
during their lifetimes. For individuals who are 
physically active and engage in repeated lifting 
of heavy items, the risks are increased. It was 
estimated from a 2007 study that back pain 
affects more than 150,000 Soldiers 
yearly, accounting for compromised 
missions, lost productivity and 
higher healthcare costs. 

The primary 
enemies related to 
lower back injuries 
include improperly 
executed heavy 
physical work; 
inappropr¬ 
iate static 
posture; 
repetitive 
, work without 
proper rest; 
slipping, tripping 
or fal ling; 
twisting while 
the spine is loaded; 
vibration while driving 
heavy vehicle; fatigue/poor 
muscle endurance; “attitude” at 
work leading to poor decisions; 
and mental fatigue impeding lifting 
techniques. An evaluation of these tasks 
reveals that 90 percent of them fall within 
the duty description of a Soldier. Luckily, by 
mitigating these risks, lower back injury is one of the 
most preventable ailments in the Army. 

echanics. The architecture of the human body 
is both complex and resilient. The spine, for 
example, is capable of supporting thousands of pounds 
and, when treated properly, can last a lifetime injury 




ng in the Game: 

Dn of low back injuries 


free. Unfortunately, many Soldiers are never taught the proper 
mechanics for lifting and frequently sustain lower back injuries. 
In addition, most Army units use running as the primary tool for 
cardio respiratory fitness development, which adds to physical 
stress the spine receives throughout an entire military career. 
Because the spine is comprised of a series of vertebrae separated 
by connective tissue (cartilage), it is inherently susceptible to injury 
due to improper use. When the connective tissue is pinched between 
two vertebrae (uneven disk compression), injury is likely. Proper 
lifting mechanics ensures that the disks are aligned properly over 
the cartilage and that the compression forces are equally distributed. 
Implementing a lower back injury prevention program should be 
based on appropriate knowledge and application of biomechanics 
and training techniques and also must include a variety of activities 
for cardio respiratory fitness that provides relief to physical stress 
on the spine and vertebrae. 

The proper application of biomechanics and proper body 
alignment is a crucial component of lower back injury prevention. 
The spine can be engaged in a number of ways, but there are a few 
ways to place the body into proper lifting positions that minimize 
the risk of injury. Notably, a rounded back should be avoided at all 
costs. It is worth the time to take a block of physical training time 
to train how to employ an 
“active back.” 

An active back ensures 
the spinal erectors (low 
back) and hamstring 
muscles are engaged 
properly and can work 
without risk of damage 
to connective tissue or 
muscle. To train an active 
back, one’s spine must be 
straight or slightly arched 
with shoulders (shoulder 
blades) retracted and flexed. From the side there should be a 
straight line from the base of the spine just above the buttocks to 
the base of the skull. The knees should be bent to whatever degree 
is necessary, and the head should remain in a neutral position. Avoid 
the common misperception to look up as this puts the cervical spine 
in an unnatural position. To lift with the active back, extend your 
shoulders up while maintaining the straight back position. 

Weak hamstrings and lower back muscles can cause a rounding 
of the back, which is extremely harmful and to be avoided. Also, 
many Soldiers have overly tight back and hamstrings that can cause 
a rounding of the lower back. This can be corrected with proper 
training and flexibility drills (stretching). Furthermore, adding a 
dedicated block of instruction on the active back indicates to the 
Soldiers in your formation that it is important to maintain proper 
posture under exertion. It would also give them the knowledge 
to make corrections when they see improper lifting techniques 
employed by other members of the unit. 

revention plan. Field artillery leaders must incorporate three 
simple concepts into their physical training regimens — 
strength, mobility and flexibility. The first pillar of the lower back 
injury prevention plan is strength. A strong structure provides the 


basis for injury prevention by developing and maintaining tough 
muscle, bones and connective tissues (tendons and ligaments). The 
primary focus for lower back injury prevention strength training 
should be the core muscles, including the abdominals and the oblique 
complex on each side of the body. These muscles work to provide 
balance and stability to the spine and ensure better posture throughout 
the day whether the Soldier is sitting, standing or lifting. 

Strength. Strength is developed through the thoughtful 
application of resistance training on a weekly basis. Three key 
principles for developing optimal strength are progression, overload 
and balance. Progression is the week to week improvements that are 
made during the program. Increased resistance, shorter rest periods 
and added sets are examples of good progression techniques. The 
key to progression is adding small improvements each week. Those 
small increases in intensity are known as overload. By keeping 
track of workouts, small unit leaders can ensure that each Soldier 
is making weekly progress by using the overload principle, thus 
becoming stronger. Be cautious about using the typical “more is 
better” technique. Small increments over time yield the best and 
longest lasting results, and they are less likely to lead to injury, as 
well. 

Another vital component of strength is balance. Unlike 

the traditional definition 
(maintaining one’s 
equilibrium), balance 
as a component of 
strength references equal 
distribution ofwork across 
the entire body. This is 
also a key component of 
injury prevention, and 
leaders must monitor 
workouts to ensure that 
all muscles are worked 
equally. Units that focus 
heavily on pushups (not pull-ups), sit-ups (not lower back) or upper 
body (not lower body) are at a higher risk for injury. Training out of 
balance is common throughout the Army and is one of the easiest 
fixes for injury prevention. 

Mobility. Mobility is the second pillar of the lower back injury 
prevention plan. Mobility is the ability to translate force into 
productive movement. This is especially applicable in combat 
situations, where efficient movement is critical and chances of 
injury are high. Broadly defined, mobility includes tasks such as 
jumping, landing and changing directions quickly (agility). Because 
force is being applied to many parts of the body at changing degrees 
and directions, the chance of sustaining an injury during mobility 
operations is high. Implementing appropriate mobility drills into a 
physical training program is essential. In addition, mobility drills 
can be a great substitute to the development of high intensity 
cardio respiratory fitness and can ease the impact of a traditional 
four to five times a week running program. Mobility drills not only 
give you an opportunity to train the transferability of weight, but 
also allows for the inclusion of some variety into your physical 
development programs. 

Flexibility. Flexibility, while frequently under employed, is 


“A chronic or recurring injury 
is a Soldier’s worst nightmare. 
These injuries can affect 
both mission accomplishment 
and career productivity.” 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 8 



To be optimally effective, Soldiers must be trained and prime 
proper body mechanics and injury prevention. The potential for in 
is always present and must be contemplated by first-line supervi; 
and leaders before every mission and during day-to-day activil 

(Photo by Timothy L. Hale) 


vital to lower back injury prevention because overly tight muscles 
are a frequent cause of strains in the low back and hamstrings. For 
example, a tight hamstring muscle changes the anatomical position 
of the pelvis and changes the amount of stress that the lower back’s 
vertebrae receive during movement. While Soldiers do not need 
to be as flexible as yoga and martial arts participants to be mission 
capable, they do need a requisite amount of flexibility to mitigate 
lower back injuries as much as possible. Tight muscles in the core 
(including lower back) and hamstring area are one of the most 
common causes of lower back injury. 

During movement, whether it is mobility oriented or lifting 
objects, inflexible muscles prevent a full range of motion and 
force supporting muscles to compensate and put undo stress on 
joints and connective tissue. This stress can lead to an acute injury, 
like a muscle tear or strain, or a chronic injury that leads to lower 
back pain over time. Flexibility training should not be confused 
with warm-up drills. Before physical training, units should focus 
on warming the muscles in preparation for movement. Flexibility 
training is most effective after physical training is finished, when 
muscle are loose and pliable. Employing weekly flexibility training 
at the end of morning physical training is a valuable tool in a lower 
back injury prevention plan. 

Flexibility programs also can be conducted in isolation at the 
individual level in any environment. After a several drills in the 
field, muscles can become tight and may need some flexibility 
exercises to return them to their normal length and so they can 
continue to function properly. Every time there is a significant 
amount of muscular activity, Soldiers must consider a quick stretch 
of the larger muscles of the body. 

Implementing a training program oriented on a well executed 
lower back injury prevention plan is a simple task and is a necessity 
at the battery level. First, ensure that batteries are planning detailed 
physical training programs at least eight weeks in advance. This 
is enough time to verify that all units are employing a logical 
progression in their routines. The initial stages of the routine should 
include plenty of core-strengthening work, such as abdominal, hip 
flexor and lower back focused exercises. 

These workouts also should be closely monitored by junior 
leaders to ensure that every Soldier uses proper biomechanics and 
an active back. Daily operations should be monitored for the same 
reasons. Keep the workouts similar enough to see some overload at 
each workout. If every workout is completely different, it is difficult 
to determine if one workout was more intense than the last, as this 
becomes a subjective matter. 

Incorporating balance into the weekly regimen is also important. 
Place an equal value on every muscle group to prevent muscular 
imbalances that inevitably lead to injuries. Lastly, make every 
member of unit an advocate of your lower back injury prevention 
plan program. If they are all looking after each other, proper 
techniques will be applied, lower back injuries will be minimized 
and productivity and quality of life will be improved. 

Major G. Damon Wells, field artillery, is an instructor in the Department 
of Physical Education at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, N.Y. 
He commanded Headquarters and Headquarters Battery, 41st Fires 
Brigade, Fort Hood, Texas, during Operation Iraqi Freedom V; and 
Headquarters, Headquarters and Service Battery, 4th Infantry Division, 
Fort Hood. During Operation Iraqi Freedom I, he was the squadron 
fire support officer for 1st Squadron, 10th U.S. Cavalry, 4th Infantry 
Division, Fort Hood; the battery fire direction officer for C Battery, 2nd 
Battalion, 319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment at Fort Bragg, N.C.; 
and the company fire support officer for C Company, 3rd Battalion, 
325th Infantry. He holds a Master of Science in Kinesiology from Texas 
A&M University at College Station, Texas. 










By MAJ Lyndon D. Jones 


W ith the publication of Field Manual 
3-0 Operations in February 
2008, the Army changed the 
conceptual framework for information 
operations. Instead of information operations 
performing an integrating function for the 
staff, the new Army information tasks 
institutionalize information operations 
functions into separate staff divisions. This 
change addresses the cognitive domain 
of the information environment below 
the operational level in a way that Joint 
Publication 3-13 Information Operations 
does not. Field Manual 3-0 accomplishes 
this by grouping the message (strategic 
communication and defense support to 
public diplomacy) and the means (leader, 
Soldier, public affairs, psychological 
operations and combat camera) into one of 
five Army information tasks—Information 
Engagement. 

U.S. Army South is the Army Service 
Component Command for U.S. Southern 
Command and, therefore, conducts much of 
its operational planning with respect to j oint 
doctrine. However, many of the exercises 
within the focus area are executed below the 
divisional level by forces from the reserve 


component. Beyond the Horizon is one such 
example of an Army South mission led by 
a brigade-level commander in a permissive 
environment. 

nformationengagementbestpractices. 

With the update of Field Manual 3-0 , 
how does the Army translate joint doctrine, 
including Joint Publication 3-13 and 
associated policy statements, into useful 
information engagement applications in a 
theater of operation? I will use Beyond the 
Horizon to demonstrate how employing 
information engagement in permissive 
environments can support the delivery 
of strategic messaging best and discuss 
some best practices to ensure operational 
success. 

Appoint an information engagement 
officer Beyond the Horizon is conducted 
in Southern Command’s permissive area 
of responsibility and carried out largely 
by Soldiers from the reserve component. 
Beyond the Horizon integrates engineering, 
medical, small-unit familiarization program 
engagements, reciprocal platoon exchanges, 
subject matter expertise exchanges and state 
partnership activities under one umbrella. 
Beyond the Horizon makes best use of 
resources while simultaneously building 
partner-nation capabilities and benefiting 
the affected local populations. 


During these missions, the information 
engagement officer is the tactical 
commander’s strategic linchpin between 
the operational planning and tactical 
implementation that translates Joint 
Publication 3-13 into effective information. 
The information engagement officer 
provides the strategic key player to facilitate 
continuity, effective coordination and 
synchronization of capabilities, resulting in 
a more productive and robust information 
environment plan that enables training 
opportunities for reservists and supports 
the commander’s strategic communication 
objectives. 

According to my experience, it is 
imperative that an information engagement 
officer be appointed to serve on staff. 
The challenge of Beyond the Horizon 
begins with manning. Reserve component 
brigades, battalions and companies often 
deploy without an information engagement 
officer. U.S. Army South’s assigning an 
information engagement officer provided an 
effective bridge to cover potential continuity 
gaps. This action officer is responsible for 
planning that begins in the early stages and 
continues through execution, ideally with 
the information environment action officer 
serving as the information engagement 
officer. This practice was very effective 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 10 


Photo by SSG Sean A. Foley (U.S. Army) 





















“Just as every Soldier is a 
rifleman, ©2MJ^7 Q°0°Bap 03 a 
sapassgps Dm3@@@mg]@[p and should 
be trained accordingly.” 


in establishing expectations for each 
capability based on command guidance and 
coordination with respective directorates, 
translating Joint Publication 3-13 into 
effective information environment as 
outlined in FM 3-0. 

The information engagement pre¬ 
deployment tour. During the planning 
phase, an information operation is always 
a stated priority, but frequently becomes 
overshadowed by logistical and operational 
issues. In an attempt to support information 
operation obj ectives without compromising 
the focus, U.S. Army South’s G7 (Fires and 
Effects Directorate) and G3 (Operations 
Directorate), and the Beyond the Horizon 
exercise commander and his S3 (Operations 
Officer for the exercise) or conducted a 
one-week information environment pre- 
deployment tour in coordination with 
military assistance and advisory group 
and the U.S. Embassy in Santo Domingo 
in support of Beyond the Horizon 2009 - 
Dominican Republic. 

This tour consisted of two components, 
the key leader engagements and media 
engagements. The tour succeeded in terms 
of pre-deployment messaging, reaching 
key-partner nation’s political and civic 
leaders, as well as important media sources. 

Just as one sends scouts out 

ON A ROUTE RECONNAISSANCE, 
ONE MUST GET AN INFORMATION 
ENVIRONMENT OFFICER OUT 
EARLY TO MEET RESPECTIVE KEY 
LEADERS. The information environment 
pre-deployment tour is recommended as 
standard practice and serves as an effective 
intelligence preparation of the information 
environment. 

A joint operation named New Horizon 
2006 - Dominican Republic was the 
catalyst for the information environment 
pre-deployment tour. There was little or 
no pre-deployment messaging to inform 
the public of the scope and details of the 
exercise; as a result, Dominicans were left 
to draw their own conclusions. 

Consider the context, it is 2006 and the 
U.S. is engaged in the War on Terrorism. 
Bystanders observed bulldozers on the 
backs of flatbed trucks driven by U.S. 

11 January-February 2010 


Soldiers moving through their towns. A 
generation of Dominicans vividly recalled 
the U. S. intervention and occupation in 1965 
during the height of the Vietnam conflict. 
The media, unaware and always game for a 
sensational story ran with a negative story 
line. The result? Soldiers who deployed 
expecting to train and put their skills to 
good use were left frustrated. As a result, 
the U. S. taxpayer got less than what a sound 
information strategy could have achieved. 

For 2009’s exercise, U.S. Army South, 
Puerto Rico’s National Guard, Dominican 
Republic’s state partner and the Beyond 
the Horizon headquarters element led with 
a tour a month before the operation. The 
populace got the opportunity to understand 
the purpose and intentions of the U.S. 
presence as an invited guest and valued 
partner nation through the use of traditional 
media and key leader communications. 

Leader and Soldier engagement and 
the information environment reception 
briefing. At U.S. Army South, G7 developed 
an information environment brief that is 
provided as part of the reception brief for 
all incoming Beyond the Horizon Soldiers. 
The brief underscored the critical role of the 
leader and Soldier as strategic messengers 
in the context of national security. In the 
case of Beyond the Horizon, leaders and 
Soldiers have a unique training opportunity 
that enables relationships between Soldiers 
and partner-nation members that can 
serve to propagate the strategic message 
directly. THEREFORE, SOLDIER 
LANGUAGE AND ACTIONS SHOULD 
BE CONSISTENT WITH THEMES AND 
MESSAGES. 

Just as every Soldier is a rifleman, 
every Soldier is a strategic messenger and 
should be trained accordingly. Ultimately, 
a reception brief addressing leader and 
Soldier engagements is only as effective 
as the leadership that reinforces Soldier 
expectations throughout each Soldier’s tour 
of duty as a strategic messenger. 

The Soldier has a unique and significant 
role in his ability to reinforce and amplify 
positive actions and increase goodwill and 
support for the friendly mission. To reinforce 
Soldier expectations, the G7 designed a 


simple, yet effective, assessment tool to 
capture the public relations posture on the 
ground and to serve as an early warning 
and mitigation mechanism should concerns 
arise. In effect, it serves as an inside-out 
view of how we see ourselves in relation 
to the local populace. 

ublic service announcements. This 
year U.S. Army South’s G7, with 
support from the Office of Strategic 
Communication, developed a template for a 
public service announcement script as away 
to leverage mass communications despite 
budget constraints. Because public service 
announcements are based on donated 
media time and the benefits of Beyond 
the Horizon’s medical readiness training 
exercises and related services represented 
need-to-know public information, the 
public service announcement served as a 
cost-effective means to increase awareness 
within the construct of the partner-nation’s 
local media while also serving as a 
catalyst for all other Beyond the Horizon 
activities. 

The public service announcement 
initially was employed in the Dominican 
Republic and proved to be very effective. 
While on the surface it gives the appearance 
of a simple promotional announcement, 
there are several subtle key messages. This 
public service announcement included the 
partner-nation’s lead and ownership of 
Beyond the Horizon, the state partnership 
program between Dominican Republic and 
Puerto Rico, and the exercise’s duration. 
The initial assessments were that the 
public service announcement script was 
received well and was overwhelmingly 
preferred to the audio product. Reports 
indicate that recipients of the public service 
announcement heard it more than three times 
daily. Additionally, the initial recipients 
forwarded the read-script to their affiliates 
and professional peers, expanding the 
overall coverage. 

Our recommendation is to develop the 
public service announcement as a three-part 
package consisting of a read-script, audio 
format and video format, accommodating 
radio and television formats. As a rule, 
the public service announcement should 
not exceed 45 seconds. The commander 
may select the highest quality of each for 
recommended distribution in coordination 
with the respective security cooperation 
offices and the U.S. Embassies. 

The public service announcement, due 
to its negligible production requirements, 
should be the minimum standard. Local 
populations are only one of several 
important audiences. The media itself is 
another audience; the better informed the 


Fires 






media is, the less likely it will be to entertain 
and promote negative propaganda stemming 
from uninformed speculation. 

oving from stovepipes to 
partnerships. Conceptually, 
information engagement is sound and 
considerably easier to grasp as an Army 
information task than joint and former 
Army information operations doctrine. 
Doctrinally, the coordinating and integrating 
civil-military operations remains an issue 
of debate. Tactically, there is significant 
work to overcome the friction that exists 
between unit sections and their respective 
organizational cultures. Keeping the 
functions segregated into their respective 
“stovepipes” is inefficient and results in 
the underuse of capabilities and resources. 
Successful information engagement comes 
from an understanding of purpose and 
successful partnerships. 

ducating tactical commanders. The 
information proponent office at Fort 
Leavenworth is working hard to train 
enough Functional Area 30 Information 
Operations officers to meet Army tactical- 
level needs. The Information Officer 
Qualification course is the only course in 
the Army inventory that requires officers 
to pass an oral comprehension board as a 
condition of graduation. This is an important 


feature that enables graduates to educate the 
Army at-large with respect to information 
engagement and emerging doctrine. 

In practice, some exercises are too 
short in duration to allow for tactical 
commanders to begin learning on day one. 
With information engagement, timing and 
momentum are the keys to success. For 
example, New Horizon 2006 - Dominican 
Republic, the task force found themselves 
adrift responding to misinformation 
because the messaging was reactive versus 
proactive. 

Trained Functional Area 30 officers, 
when available, understand information 
operations and have the ability to articulate 
them to tactical commanders. They need 
to have the time and resources to educate 
commanders and shape the information 
environment. 

nderstanding strategic 
communication. Effective strategic 
communication is a top priority for U.S. 
military leaders. But that does not mean 
that every military leader conceptually 
understands strategic communication. 
Some of our peers are brave enough 
to ask the question, “What is strategic 
communication?” So what is strategic 
communication and who is responsible for 
it at the tactical level? 


Strategic communication 

IS MESSAGING. JUST AS EVERYONE 
IS A SAFETY OFFICER REGARDLESS 
OF RANK THE SAME APPLIES TO 
STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION 
— EVERYONE IS A STRATEGIC 
MESSENGER. As with safety, in which 
the commander designates an officer to be 
responsible for the overall coordination of 
safety measures, the S7, or the information 
officer at the brigade or battalion level, 
serves the tactical commander as the chief 
communication officer. In the Army, this 
officer is normally Functional Area 30 
Information Operations trained individual 
responsible for incorporating strategic 
communication into all operations, actions, 
activities, andproducts to maximize available 
capabilities, means and methods. 

In joint commands, however, the 
strategic communication may fall in a 
separate directorate. For that reason, there 
is a need to doctrinally differentiate from 
Joint Publication 3-13 to Field Manual 
3-0 as it applies to the tactical commander 
so as not to confuse it with information 
engagement. Information engagement is 
the broad umbrella that incorporates both 
the message and the means. Although 
civil affairs is not included in information 
engagement’s broad umbrella as a doctrinal 





1LT Francis Lamb, a personnel officer with 301 st Reserve Support Group, sits down to talk with school children in La Granja, Honduras, where U.S. and 
Honduran Soldiers renovated their school, May 2, 2008. The renovation project was part of Beyond the Horizon. (Photo by ssg Sean a. Foley, u.s. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 12 
















capability, it is a means and key enabler 
in support of strategic messaging at the 
grassroots through key leader engagement 
and civic action projects. 

-staff versus s-staff. Planning at the 
tactical level, according to Field Manual 
3-0 and Field Manual 5-0 Army Planning 
and Orders Production, is intentionally and 
inherently different for U. S. Army and joint 
forces. This excerpt from Field Manual 3-0, 
Appendix D is instructive. “Army forces 
do not use the joint systems analysis of 
the operational environment, effects-based 
approach to planning, or effects assessment. 
These planning and assessment methods 
are intended for use at the strategic and 
operational levels by properly resourced 
joint staffs.” 

It is important to understand that 
while a sprinkling of multiservice may 
constitute j oint forces, it doesn’t necessarily 
constitute a joint staff or j-staff. This is 
important because a j-staff implies joint 
doctrine. Joint information operations 
doctrine is not designed to address the 
cognitive domain below the operational 
level. Operational planning for the j-staff is 
inherently more applicable to the strategic 
and operational levels. 


The s-staff represents the tactical 
implementation through the Army military 
decision-making process that takes place 
at division and below. The S7’s roles and 
responsibilities should remain aligned 
with tactical Army doctrine, including the 
decision-making process and the conduct of 
the tactical information engagement mission 
and strategic communications to address 
the cognitive domain of the information 
environment better. 

This article provides a snapshot of the 
current state of information engagement 
for the permissive environment within 
a service component command. THE 
INFORMATION ENGAGEMENT 
PRACTITIONER SHOULD EMPLOY 
THESE RECOMMENDED BEST 
PRACTICES WITHOUT DELAY. The 
information engagement pre-deployment 
tour, in support ofpre-deploymentmessaging 
requirements, is the primary method for 
deploying the best practices described in 
advance of an operation, activity or action 
in a permissive environment. 

With representation from each 
participating capability, including civil 
affairs and command and staff, this is 
effective in promoting the partnership and 


educating the tactical commander regarding 
information engagement and strategic 
messaging. Planners must make every 
effort to support this activity and ensure the 
selection and availability of key leadership 
for this requirement. 

One additional recommendation, from 
a professional development standpoint, 
is to implement a system or functional 
area cross training and assignment to 
promote the migration from “stovepipe” to 
partnership and promote education within 
staff and command structures. Using the 
Army example, a public affairs officer 
cross-trained and assigned in information 
operations or vice versa would enable the 
collaborative partnerships necessary. 


MAJ Lyndon Jones is a Functional Area 30 
Information Officer assigned to U.S. Army 
South’s G7 Directorate of Operational Fires 
and Effects Synchronization, Information 
Operations branch at Fort Sam Houston, 
Texas. 

Editor’s note: The author would like to thank 
COL James M. Lowman for his contributions to this 
article. 


The latest information on the 
Fires community is 
just a click away... 



http://www.facebook.com/ 

FiresCenterofExcellence 


Become a fan of the 
Fires Center of Excellence on 


facebook 


HiCwterffB i .u l ii 


IfruCwriErff EacHIfftef ^ 


13 January-February 2010 • 


Fires 












Engaging the media 



By Jennifer Blais 
Managing Editor 


Barbara Starr, Pentagon correspondent for CNN, interviews GEN David 
Petraeus, commander United States Central Command, at Kabul 
International Airport, Dec. 1 5, 2009. (Photo by P02 Christopher Hall, U.s. Navy) 


A s Thomas Jefferson once said, “All that tyranny needs to gain 
a foothold is for people of good conscience to remain silent.” 
Never have these words been truer than in today’s world. 
With embedded media and news organizations on every comer, you 
have to live under a rock or way off the grid to avoid the media. 
The media, whether it is print, radio or television, is going to be out 
in the mix of events including training exercises, combat deploy¬ 
ments, ceremonies and even funerals. The question we have to ask 
at this point is, why avoid them? Why not go out and tell the field 
artillery story, the air defense artillery story or the Army’s story? 
We, as servicemembers, families and civilians, must be aware and 
more importantly prepared for the media to tell a positive story. 
The first thing to remember is they are not the enemy. 

The media can be a very successful tool 

TO EDUCATE, PROMOTE AND CELEBRATE THE 
ACHIEVEMENTS OR OUR ARMED FORCES. As a former 
servicemember, I observed many Soldiers unsure of the media and 
even their own public affairs representatives. The chain of command 
at every level should be proactive in engaging a media strategy and 
bolstering the confidence of their Soldiers to build a strong and 
stable relationship with their public affairs officer and the civilian 


press, both U.S. and local nationals. You, as a servicemember, are 
the subject matter expert for your field. If you do not tell the story, 
someone else will do it for you. 

This asset is changing in a way that is shaping the world today. 
During World War I and World War II, it would take weeks if not 
months for a letter to get home to the families. Now, in today’s 
information age, I could text a friend who is in Kuwait, Iraq or 
Afghanistan and they could have a message back to me on Facebook 
30 seconds later. This tool has increasingly become more powerful 
and influential, but as a wise comic book writer once wrote, “With 
great power comes great responsibility.” 

The power to tell the Army’s story has never been easier and 
with a little responsibility we can shine a positive light on the 
good work each of the branches is doing. Remembering what you 
say or what you do not say can save your buddy’s life. With the 
number of media outlets and the accessibility we have to those 
outlets both at home and abroad, it is every Soldier’s and family 
member’s job to enforce information security. USING COMMON 
SENSE AND DISCRETION ARE THE CORE POINTS TO 
ALL PUBLIC AFFAIRS AND SOCIAL MEDIA REGULATIONS 
AND MEDIA ON THE BATTLEFIELD TRAINING. Things that 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 14 



^prepare 










may be happening in your area of operations can have international 
implications. Documenting exact troop numbers and strengths, and 
tactics, techniques and procedures are all good examples of sensitive 
information that needs to be protected. Of course, a Soldier should 
never lie about anything, but any question outside of their ‘comfort 
zone’ or their realm of responsibility should be fielded through a 
public affairs representative or their chain of command. Everyone 
is responsible for operational security. 

Another piece to the media-Soldier puzzle is training. GETTING 
THE RIGHT TRAINING AND PREPARING FORTHE MEDIA 
IS JUST AS IMPORTANT AS DOING PREVENTATIVE 
MAINTENANC E ON YOUR WEAPON. They are tools to fight in 
the international conflicts we support and as such should be handled 
carefully but with confidence. “Unfortunately, unrealistic portrayals 
of media on the battlefield reinforce bad habits and perceptions of 
journalists on the battlefield. When the platoon finally deploys, it 
encounters embedded local and international media on the battlefield. 
And the world reads, watches and listens as opportunities to tell 
the Soldiers’ stories are lost,” said LTC Randy A. Martin, public 
affairs officer observer/controller, Joint Readiness Training Center 
operations group. “With a little preparation, creativity, planning and 
resources, training centers can create an information environment 
that promotes effective media on the battlefield training.” 

And of course when in doubt, research and educate yourself on 
the policies, procedures and regulations. There are no firm policies 
which directly refer to the use of the major social networking sites 


such as Facebook, Flickr, You Tube, etc; however Army Regulation 
360-1 can assist with many media-related questions. As regulation 
currently stands, it is important for Soldiers as well as public affairs 
professionals to remember the two guiding documents that apply 
to all public communication: operations security and the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice. As those regulations are written, Soldiers 
must maintain professional conduct and good order and discipline 
in the virtual world in the same ways they would in the real world. 
Special care should be taken to ensure that public facing profiles, 
to include Facebook pages and sites, present an appropriate picture 
of Army life. Army Regulation 530-1, Operations Security policy, 
states that Soldiers who blog and identify their affiliation with the 
Army must let their commander know they’re blogging. 

Overall the things to remember, the lessons to take forward are 
4 You, as a Soldier or family member, are not an official spokesperson 
for the U.S. Army, the President or the State Department.’ 

Care must be taken to present a professional, 

KNOWLEDGEABLE AND ACCURATE PORTRAYAL OF ANY 
GIVEN SITUATION WITHOUT JEOPARDIZING MISSION 
READINESS, EFFECTIVENESS OR SECURITY. Knowing 
when to ask for help, whether from a public affairs representative 
or the chain of command can aid each Soldier from ‘flying blind.’ 
The expectation of knowing an M-16A2 rifle with no training, 
guidance or practice would not be recommended on the battlefield 
and neither is being unprepared for the media that awaits all of us 
around every corner. 



MEDIA ENGAGEMENT 

SMART CARD 



Things to know and do 

1) Remember the media is a powerful 
communication device, which you can use 
to tell the Army’s story and support the 
overall information strategy. All Soldiers 
and leaders are potential ambassadors/ 
spokespersons for your country and unit. 

2) Soldiers do have a right not to talk to 
the media; however, those who refuse to 
speak may send a powerful message that 
something is being hidden or the operation 
is going badly. 

3) Media are influential members of the 
public. They are not the enemy. They are 
after a story; so, tell your story. 

4) Do not refuse to talk to unescorted 
media. During early stages of an operation, 
media are likely to be uncredentialed and 
unescorted. In this case, be courteous and 
as long as it does not interfere with the 
mission, talk with them. 


Prepare for the media 

1) Never go into a situation blind. Ask a 
public affairs representative for help and 
guidance (if you need it). Anticipate issues 
and questions and develop responses that 
include relevant command messages. In 
addition to your unit’s role and the Army, 
consider current issues in the national and 
international communities. You can affect 
them all. 


Interviews don’ts 

1) Do not schedule or participate in an 
interview or an event if it will interfere with 
your mission. However, do not use the 
unit’s mission or being “too busy” as a 
“smokescreen” to avoid the media or an 
interview. 

2) Do not attempt to cover negative events 
with a cloak of secrecy. Do, however, talk 
about matters over which you have direct 
responsibility. 

3) Everything is “on the record.” Never 
answer “off the record” questions. Watch out 
for the “turned off recorder” being on. 

4) Never lie. Always be careful of personal 
opinions, which may be viewed as 
representing your unit or the Army. 

5) Do not discuss exact numbers, troop 
strengths or specific vehicle modifications. 
Use terms like approximate, light, heavy or 
moderate. 

6) Do not discuss political or foreign policy 
matters. Don’t be caught speaking for the p 
resident or State Department. Stay in your 
lane and talk about things within your 
specific areas. 

7) Do not provide the enemy with 
propaganda material by grumbling and 
thoughtlessly complaining. 

8) Don’t get trapped. If a reporter tells you 
he got information from another unit, refer 
him to those sources for more details. Use 
common sense. 


Helpful hints 

1) If you can’t talk about something, tell the 
media why. 

2) Be careful of statements of absolute 
nature. 

3) Know what you can say and how to show 
the media as well as the things you cannot 
discuss or show. 

Final thoughts 

1) What you say or don’t say can save your 
buddy’s life. 

2) What may happen in your area of 
operations can have international 
implications. 

3) Remember what you say to the reporter is 
not as important as what the reporter says to 
the world. 


“Public Affairs fulfills the Army's 
obligation to keep the American 
people and the Army informed\ 
and helps to establish the 
conditions that lead to confidence 
in America l s Army and its 
readiness to conduct operations 
in peacetime, conflict and wan” 

Army Public Affairs Mission 


15 January-February 2010 • 


Fires 













A rticle subjects. Fires strives to be 
“forward-looking.” We’re at the 
dawn of a new Army transformation. 
Many exciting things are taking place in 
the field and air defense artillery fields of 
expertise. Article subjects should therefore 
be current and relevant. Writers may share 
good ideas and lessons learned with their 
fellow Soldiers, as exploring better ways 
of doing things remains a high emphasis 
with Fires. 

If an article subject is significant and 
pertains to field artillery or air defense 
artillery and its diverse activities, as a rule 
of thumb we’ll consider it appropriate for 
publication. Article subjects include (but 
aren’t limited to) technical developments, 
tactics, techniques and procedures; how¬ 
to pieces, practical exercises, training 
methods and historical perspectives (Army 
Regulation 25-30, Paragraph 2-3, b). 

We are actively seeking lessons-learned 
articles which will enhance understanding 
of current field and air defense artillery 
operations. The magazine’s heart is 
material dealing with doctrinal, technical 
or operational concepts. We especially 
solicit progressive, forward-thinking and 
challenging subject matter for publication. 
In addition to conceptual and doctrinal 
materials, we encourage manuscripts 
dealing with maintenance, training or 
operational techniques. 

Good ideas or lessons-learned articles 
should have two closely related themes: 
one, what did you learn from what you 
did? The second theme is: what is most 
important for others to know, or what will 
you do differently in the future? Include 
only the pertinent information on how you 
did it so someone else can repeat what you 
did. Don’t include a blow-by-blow of your 
whole deployment. The article’s emphasis 
should be that your unit has a good idea or 
some lessons-learned to share. 

Steps involved in submitting an article 
to Fires are outlined following. 

All articles should have the bottom line 
up front; however, to better ensure your 
chances of publication, we recommend 
that you read all the criteria contained in 
this article as well as apply the guidance 
contained in the Fires style manual at 
sill-www. army.mil/firesbulletin/style. 
asp for more details. We do not pay for 
articles or illustrations other than providing 


contributors with complimentary copies of 
the magazine. 

Fires is not copyrighted. All material 
published is considered in the public domain 
unless otherwise indicated. (Occasionally 
we use copyrighted material by permission; 
this material is clearly marked with the 
appropriate legal notification.) 

If you get permission to use someone 
else’s graphic or photo, especially from 
the private sector, we need proof of that in 
writing. 

etting started. Select a relevant topic of 
interest to the U.S. Army field and air 
defense artillery community. The topic must 
professionally develop members of these 
fields. Write an outline to organize your 
work. Put the bottom line up front and write 
clear, concise introduction and conclusion 
paragraphs. Follow the writing standard 
established in Army Regulation 25-50, 
Preparing and Managing Correspondence, 
Section IV (the Army writing style), and 
Department of the Army Pamphlet 600- 
67, Effective Writing for Army Leaders, 
especially Paragraphs 3-1 and 3-2. 

The Army standard is writing you can 
understand in a single rapid reading and 
is generally free of errors in grammar, 
mechanics and usage. Also see Fires' 
style manual. Maintain the active voice as 
much as possible. Write “Congress cut the 
budget” rather than “the budget was cut 
by Congress.” (Department of the Army 
Pamphlet 600-67, Paragraph 3-2, b[l]). 
Write as if you were telling someone face-to- 
face about your subject: use conversational 
tone; ‘I, ‘you’ and ‘we’ personal pronouns; 
short sentences and short paragraphs. 
Articles should be double-spaced, typed, 
unpublished manuscript, between 3,000 
and 3,500 (or less), but no more than 
5,000 words, including inline citations as 
appropriate. 

Authors should check their articles’ 
contents with unit commanders or 
organization directors or S2s/G2s to 
ensure the articles have no classified or 
operations security information in them. 
Clearance requirements are outlined 
in Army Regulation 360-1, Chapter 5, 
Paragraph 5-3. Headquarters Department of 
the Army/Office of the Secretary of Defense 
clearance is required if your article meets any 
of the criteria listed there. Article clearance 
is further covered in Paragraph 6-6, with 


procedures on how to do so outlined in 
Paragraph 6-9. The bottom line on most 
article clearance is discussed in Paragraph 
6-6. While you certainly may ask your 
local Public Affairs Office’s advice, it is the 
“author’s responsibility to ensure security 
is not compromised. Information that 
appears in open sources does not constitute 
declassification. The combination of several 
open-source documents may result in a 
classified document.” 

So while the Fires staff may question 
the sensitivity of an article we receive, it 
is not our responsibility to officially clear 
articles, however if we do see something 
within an article that might cause concern, 
we reserve the right to withhold publication 
of such an article until it is thoroughly 
vetted with the proper subj ect matter expert 
or Army authority. But it still remains the 
author’s responsibility, as outlined in Army 
Regulation 360-1, not to compromise 
national security or U.S. Army operational 
security matters. 

We reserve the right to edit an article, so 
the Fires staff will edit all manuscripts and 
put them in the magazine’s style and format. 
The author of an article or interviewee will 
receive a courtesy copy of the edited version 
for review before publication, however, if 
the author does not get back to the Fires 
staff with any questions or concerns within 
a specified suspense date (typically five to 
seven working days) it will be assumed the 
author concurs with all edits and the article 
will run as is. 

Except in the case of Armywide news 
items, authors shouldnot submit amanuscript 
to Fires while it is being considered 
elsewhere. A comprehensive biography, 
highlighting experience, education and 
training relevant to the article’s subject and 
credentialing the author as the writer of the 
article. Include e-mail and mailing addresses 
and telephone, cell and fax numbers. Please 
keep this information current with Fires 
for as long as we’re considering the 
manuscript. 

hotographs and graphics. See the 

“Fires Bulletin Photographer’s Guide” 
on page 42 of this edition for information 
on submitting photographs. 

end the article. E-mail the editor at 
firesbulletin@conus.army.mil; or mail 
them to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, Oklahoma 
73503-0311. 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 16 










m reset 




By Elizabeth A. Stanley and 
Amishi P. Jha 


T oday’s complex, fluid, and 
unpredictable operational environ¬ 
ment both demands more from the 
military in terms of mission requirements 
and exposes troops to more stressors and 
potential trauma than ever before. On the 
one hand, situational awareness, mental 
agility and adaptability are characteristics 
that the military wants to cultivate to succeed 
in such complex environments. In part, 
this complexity comes from the number 
and nature of the different missions the 
military must concurrently fill. The military 
needs to be able to mix offensive, defensive 
and stability operations conducted along 
multiple lines of operations, without the 
benefit of a clearly demarcated “frontline.” 
Many Soldiers liken this complexity and 
unpredictability to “the faucet,” that is, 
needing to adjust to situations that could 
change from cold to hot instantaneously. 
Moreover, service members must navigate 
morally ambiguous situations with balance 

17 January-February 2010 • Fires 


and non-reactivity, while drawing on stores 
of cultural awareness to “win hearts and 
minds.” Finally, these missions require 
that decision making be pushed down to 
the most junior levels, as the doctrine of 
“distributed operations” makes clear. Such 
challenges require a tremendous amount 
of attentional capacity, self-awareness, and 
situational awareness. 

On the other hand, because of the 
stressors and challenges of this operating 
environment, the U.S. military is showing 
signs of strain. In 2007, the Army exper¬ 
ienced its highest desertion rate since 1980, 
an 80 percent increase since the United States 
invaded Iraq in 2003. The warning signs of 
future retention problems are increasingly 
apparent: suicide, post-traumatic stress 
disorder, substance abuse, divorce, domestic 
violence, and murder within the force are 
on the rise. Recent attention has focused on 
the growing number of suicides, with the 
Marine Corps experiencing more suicides 
in 2008 than since the war began and the 
Army logging its highest monthly total in 
January 2009 since it began counting in 
1980. Not surprisingly, post-traumatic stress 
disorder rates are highest among Iraq and 


Afghanistan veterans who saw extensive 
combat (28 percent). However, military 
health care officials are seeing a spectrum 
of psychological issues, even among those 
without much combat experience. Various 
surveys provide a range of estimates, with 
up to half of returning National Guard 
and Reservists, 38 percent of Soldiers and 
31 percent of Marines reporting mental 
health problems. [Consult L. Baldor’s 
“Army desertions surge in past year” 
(San Jose Mercury News)', “Mental Health 
Problems, Use of Mental Health Services, 
and Attrition from Military Service after 
Returning from Deployment to Iraq or 
Afghanistan” by C.W. Hoge et al. in 
the Journal of the American Medical 
Association ; “Longitudinal Assessment of 
Mental Health Problems among Active and 
Reserve Component Soldiers Returning 
from the Iraq War” by Charles S. Milliken 
et al. in the Journal of the American 
Medical Association; “Alcohol Abuse Rises 
among Combat Veterans: Study” (Reuters); 
“Divorce Rate Up in U.S. Army, Marine 
Corps” (Associated Press); A. Keteyian’s 
“Suicide Epidemic among Veterans,” (CBS 
News); Tony Perry’s “Marine suicides in 











2008 at a yearly high since Iraq invasion” 
{The Los Angeles Times); Lizette Alvarez’s 
“Army Data Shows Rise in Number of 
Suicides” {The New York Times); “Across 
America, Deadly Echoes of Foreign Battles” 
by D. Sontag and L. Alvarez {The New 
York Times); Invisible Wounds of War: 
Psychological and Cognitive Injuries, 
Their Consequences, and Services to Assist 
Recovery; and Office of the Surgeon Multi- 
National Force-Iraq, Office of the Command 
Surgeon and Office of the Surgeon General 
United States Army Medical Command, 
Mental Health Advisory Team.] 

It is no wonder. Troops manning 
checkpoints or on patrol have to make 
split-second decisions on when to use lethal 
force, and veterans say fear often clouded 
their judgment. As Army SGT Dustin Flatt 
put it, “The second you left the gate of your 
base, you were always worried. You were 
constantly watchful for IEDs [improvised 
explosive devices]. ... If you’ve been in 
firefights earlier that day or week, you’re 
even more stressed and insecure to a point 
where you are almost trigger- 
happy.”(See “The Other War” 
by C. Hedges and F.Al-Arian 
in the July 30-Aug. 30, 2007 
edition of the The Nation.) 

The perpetual uncertainty 
is mentally exhausting and 
physically debilitating, and 
often its effects linger even 
after returning home. 

What can be done to 
enhance the military’s 
capacities to operate in such 
complex environments while simultaneously 
protecting against the stressors inherent in 
them? This article proposes a new training 
program for both improving operational 
effectiveness and building resilience to the 
stressors of deployment: mindfulness-based 
mind fitness training (MMFT, pronounced 
M-Fit). This program includes techniques 
and exercises that previous research in 
civilians has demonstrated to be effective 
at enhancing the capacities central to mind 
fitness, such as mental agility, emotion 
regulation, attention and situational 
awareness. Importantly, these exercises 
appear to achieve improvements in mind 
fitness by changing brain structure and 
function so that brain processes are more 
efficient. Our pilot research, conducted 
in pre-deployment Marine Reservists, 
suggests that mindfulness-based mind 
fitness training is similarly successful 
at bolstering mind fitness and building 
resilience against stressors in a military 
cohort. Drawing on the well-documented 
theory of neuroplasticity, which asserts that 


experience changes the brain, this article 
argues that mind fitness training could 
complement the military’s existing stress 
inoculation training by developing skills to 
promote resilience against stress and trauma 
so that warriors can execute their missions 
more effectively. 

tress can degrade performance. 

A variety of research indicates that 
harmful conditions such as chronic stress, 
neglect and abuse can produce harmful 
changes in the brain. (See Does Stress 
Damage the Brain? Understanding 
Trauma-related Disordersfrom Mind-Body 
Perspective by Douglas Bremner and The 
Trauma Spectrum: Hidden Wounds and 
Human Resiliency by Robert Scaer) Stress 
is produced by real or imagined events that 
are perceived to threaten an individual’s 
physical and mental well-being. Today, 
stress is commonly understood to mean 
external events or circumstances, and as a 
result, we tend to think of stress as something 
external to us. However, stress is actually 
a perceived, internal response. The right 


amount of stress will allow a decision 
maker to function at peak performance. 
However, excessive stress has biological 
and psychological consequences that reduce 
the capacity to process new information 
and learn. Stress may also bias decision 
making more toward reactive, unconscious 
emotional choices. 

Recent empirical research about decision 
making in stressful military environments 
demonstrates that trauma and stress lead to 
deficits in cognitive functioning. One large 
study of Army troops found that Soldiers 
who served in Iraq were highly likely to 
show lapses in memory and an ability to 
focus, a deficit that often persisted more 
than two months after they arrived home. 
(See “Neuropsychological outcomes of 
Army personnel following deployment to 
the Iraq War” by Jennifer J. Vasterling et 
al. in the Journal of the American Medical 
Association which was published in 2006.) 
In the study, 654 Soldiers who deployed to 
Iraq between April 2003 and May 2005 did 
significantly worse in tasks that measured 


spatial memory, verbal ability and the ability 
to focus than 307 Soldiers who had not 
deployed. In contrast, the Soldiers who had 
deployed outperformed those who had not in 
terms of quick reaction time (for example, 
how long it takes to spot a computer icon 
and react). In effect, the deployed Soldiers’ 
brains built the capacity for quick reaction, 
a function more necessary for survival in 
Iraq, while experiencing degradation in 
other mental capacities. 

In another study, Soldiers who screened 
positive for mental health problems after 
returning home were up to three times 
more likely to report having engaged in 
unethical behavior while deployed. (Consult 
the Office of the Surgeon Multi-National 
Force-Iraq, Office of the Command 
Surgeon, and Office of the Surgeon 
General United States Army Medical 
Command for additional information.) 
Such behavior, including unnecessarily 
damaging private property or insulting 
or physically harming noncombatants, is 
obviously counterproductive to winning 
the confidence of the local 
population. This finding 
suggests a strong linkbetween 
the negative effects of stress, 
which degrades Soldiers’ 
capacity to manage their 
own emotions and thereby 
control impulsive, reactive 
behavior and a decrease in 
their ability to perform their 
mission effectively. 

Other studies of military 
environments have found 
substantial degradation in cognitive 
performance when subjects experience 
sleep deprivation and other environmental 
stressors. One recent study of sleep 
deprivation among Navy SEAFs and 
Army Rangers during a field training 
exercise demonstrated that the lack of 
sleep affected troops so badly that after a 
week they performed worse on cognitive 
tests than if they were sedated or legally 
drunk. In this study, the SEAFs and Rangers 
showed severe degradation in reaction time, 
vigilance, visual pattern recognition, short¬ 
term memory, learning and grammatical 
reasoning skills. (See “Severe decrements 
in cognition function and mood induced 
by sleep loss, heat, dehydration and under¬ 
nutrition during simulated combat” by 
Harris R. Fieberman et al. in Biological 
Psychiatry which was published in 2005.) 

Another group of studies examined more 
than 530 Soldiers, sailors and pilots during 
military survival training, including time in 
mock prisoner of war camps, to prepare them 
to withstand the mental and physical stresses 


“The perpetual uncertainty 
is mentally exhausting and 
physically debilitating, and 
often its effects linger even 
after returning home.” 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 18 


of capture. In these studies, exposure to 
acute stressors resulted in symptoms of 
dissociation (alterations of one’s perception 
of body, environment and the passage 
of time), problem-solving deficits (as 
measured by objectively assessed military 
performance), and significant inaccuracies 
in working memory and spatial memory (as 
measuredby eyewitness identification tests). 
(See “Accuracy of eyewitness memory for 
persons encountered during exposure to 
highly intense stress” by Charles A. Morgan 
III et al. in the International Journal of Law 
and Psychiatry which was published in 2004 
and “Stress-Induced Deficits in working 
memory and visuo-constructive abilities in 
Special Operations Soldiers” by Charles A. 
Morgan III et al. in Biological Psychiatry 
which was published in 2006.) These 
findings corroborated with other studies that 
found multi-stressor environments lead to 
substantial degradation of executive control 
capacity and cognitive skills, and such 
degradation has been linked to battlefield 
errors, such as friendly fire incidents and 
collateral damage. (See D.R. Haslam’s 
“The military performance of soldiers 
in sustained operations” in Aviation, 
Space and Environmental Medicine 
which was published in 1984; “Effects of 
caffeine, sleep loss and stress on cognitive 


performance and mood during U.S. Navy 
Seal training” by Harris R. Lieberman et 
al. in Psychopharmacology which was 
published in 2002; K. Opstad’s “Circadian 
rhythm of hormones is extinguished during 
prolonged physical stress, sleep and energy 
deficiency in young men” in the European 
Journal of Endocrinology which was 
published in 1994; “Sustaining Performance 
during Continuous Operations: The U.S. 
Army’s Sleep Management System” by 
G. Belenky et al. in the Pennington Center 
Nutritional Series ; and Countermeasures 
for Battlefield Stressors.) 

ind fitness training and perfor¬ 
mance. Optimal combat readiness 
requires three things: mission essential 
knowledge and skills, physical fitness and 
mind fitness. All three components are 
crucial for equipping warriors to handle 
the challenges and stressors of deployment. 
The military devotes substantial resources 
to the first two categories, both in terms of 
funding and time on the training schedule. 
However, there is virtually no focus on 
mind fitness training today. The Army’s 
Battlemind program is a first effort to raise 
Soldiers’ awareness of the psychological 
health issues associated with deployment, 
but Battlemind mostly occurs after Soldiers 
return home and provides no skills training. 


Instead, it introduces them to the cognitive 
and psychological effects ofbeing deployed, 
provides psychological debriefing sessions 
and helps them identify warning signs for 
when to seek help. In short, the military 
generally lacks proactive mind fitness 
training programs designed to give warriors 
skills that optimize performance and protect 
against the stressors of deployment. 

Most military training is “stress 
inoculation training” because it exposes 
and habituates warriors to the kinds of 
stressors they will face while deployed. 
Paradoxically, however, as the previous 
section demonstrates, stress inoculation 
training depletes warriors ’ executive control 
capacity — that is, the mental capacity that 
allows us to focus on demanding cognitive 
tasks and/or emotionally challenging 
situations. As we explain below, mind 
fitness training may counteract this 
cognitive degradation that results from 
stress inoculation training. Therefore, 
it could complement existing military 
predeployment training, as it helps warriors 
to perceive and relate to deployment 
stressors differently. In other words, mind 
fitness training may provide “mental 
armor” to protect troops as they prepare for 
deployment and experience the stressors of 
deployment itself. 




Optimal combat readiness requires three things: mission essential knowledge and skills, physical fitness and mind fitness. All three components are 
crucial for equipping warriors to handle the challenges and stressors of deployment. (Photo by sgt Travis Zielinski, u.s. Army) 


19 January-February 2010 • 


Fires 













Just as stress and trauma can functionally and structurally change the brain, so too can training, 
practice and expertise. (Photo by SrA Julianne Showalter, U.S. Air Force) 


Just as stress and trauma can functionally 
and structurally change the brain, so too can 
training, practice and expertise. The brain of 
an expert — such as surgeon, taxi driver or 
musician—is functionally and structurally 
different from that of a non-expert. In one 
study of London cab drivers, for example, 
researchers found that cab drivers have 
larger hippocampi than matched controls 
and that the longer an individual worked as a 
cab driver, the larger the hippocampus. The 
hippocampus is the brain region that controls 
conscious memory, obviously needed to 
navigate London’s circuitous streets. These 
differences in hippocampus size were the 
result of experience and training as a cab 
driver, not of preexisting differences in the 
hippocampal structure. (See “Navigation 
expertise and the human hippocampus: a 
structural brain imaging analysis” by E.A. 
McGuire et al. in Hippocampus which was 
published in 2003.) 

The London cab driver study high¬ 
lights the well-documented theory of 
neuroplasticity, which states that experience 
changes the brain. (See The Mind and the 
Brain: Neuroplasticity and the Power of 
Mental Force by Jeffrey M. Schwartz and 
Sharon Begley.) Areas of the brain may 
shrink or expand — become more or less 
functional — based on experience. In other 
words, the brain, like the rest of the body, 
builds the “muscles” it uses most, sometimes 
at the expense of other abilities. This 
concept is something athletes, musicians 
and martial artists have known for a long 
time: with physical exercise and repetition of 
certain body movements, the body becomes 
stronger, more efficient and better able to 
perform those movements with ease. A 
similar process can occur with the brain: with 
the engagement and repetition of certain 
mental processes, the brain becomes more 
efficient at those processes. This improved 
efficiency arises because any time we 
perform a physical or mental task, the brain 
regions that serve task related functions 
show increased neuronal activity. Overtime, 
as we choose to build a new mental skill, the 
repeated engagement of the brain regions 
supporting that skill creates a more efficient 
pattern of neural activity, for example, by 
rearranging structural connections between 
brain cells involved in that skill. In other 
words, experience and training can lead to 
functional and structural reorganization of 
the brain. 

Thus, there is a profound parallel between 
physical fitness and mind fitness. Athletes 
know that with repetition, physical fitness 
exercises can produce training-specific 
muscular, respiratory and cardiovascular 
changes in the body. They know that specific 


training will correspond to specific benefits 
and promote better recovery from specific 
injuries. For example, sprints can build 
fast-twitch muscles, while longer runs can 
teach the body to bum fat instead of glucose. 
Similarly, specific mental exercises may 
allow the mind to become more “fit” and 
better protected against certain types of 
challenges by neuroplastic changes in the 
brain. 

Mind fitness in today’s operational 
environment entails having a mind with 
highly efficient capacities for mental 
agility, emotional regulation, attention and 
situational awareness (of self, others and the 
wider environment). Just as physical fitness 
corresponds to specific enhancements in 
the body, mind fitness may correspond to 
enhancements in specific brain stmctures 
and functions that support these capacities. 
And, like physical fitness, mind fitness 
may be protective: it may build resiliency 
and lead to faster recovery from cognitive 
depletion and psychological stress. We 
propose that mind fitness can be maintained 
even in high-demand and high-stress 
contexts by regularly engaging in certain 
mental exercises. These exercises engage 
and improve core mental processes, such as 
working memory capacity, which lead to a 
more mentally agile, emotionally regulated, 
attentive and situationally aware mode of 
functioning. 

This scientific understanding is starting 
to be recognized and applied with many 
recent research studies and popular books 
describing training programs to bolster 
mind fitness. (See Train Your Mind, Change 
Your Brain by Sharon Begley, Train Your 
Brain: 60 Days to a Better Brain by Ryuta 
Kawashima and Train Your Brain: The 


Complete Mental Workout for a Fit and 
Agile Mind by Joel Levy.) These training 
techniques have existed for thousands 
of years, originating in Eastern spiritual 
traditions. In recent decades, they have been 
adapted for secular use, including in medical 
and mental health settings, corporations, 
prisons, and elementary schools. The 
most common and well-validated training 
program is mindfulness-based stress 
reduction; more than 250 U.S. hospitals 
offer mindfulness-based stress reduction 
programs, and more than 5 0 research articles 
document its utility in many domains. (See 
“Attention regulation and monitoring in 
meditation” by A. Lutz et al. in Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences which was published in 
2008 and “Mindfulness Training Modifies 
Subsystems of Attention” by A.R Jha et 
al. in Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral 
Neuroscience which was published in 
2007.) 

Mind fitness can be enhanced through 
a variety of training techniques, but the 
foundational skill cultivated in both 
MBSR and our MMFT program is 
called “mindfulness.” Mindfulness has 
been described as a process of “bringing 
one’s attention to the present experience 
on a moment-by-moment basis” (See 
“Mindfulness and Meditation” by G.A. 
Marlatt and J.L. Kristeller in Integrating 
Spirituality into Treatment: Resources for 
Practitioners which was published in 1999.) 
and as “paying attention in a particular way, 
on purpose, in the present moment and 
nonjudgmentally.” (See Wherever You Go, 
There You Are: Mindfulness Meditation in 
Daily Life by Jon Kabat-Zinn.) Mindfulness 
differs from a more conceptual mode of 
processing information, which is often 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 20 








the mind’s default way of perceiving and 
cognizing. In other words, paying attention 
is not the same thing as thinking, although 
we often equate the two. 

A growing body of empirical scientific 
evidence supports the efficacy of 
mindfulness-based interventions. Clinical 
studies demonstrate that civilian patients 
who participated in such programs saw 
improvement in many physical and 
psychological conditions and reported a 
decrease in mood disturbance from, and 
stress related to, these conditions. Similarly, 
numerous studies have documented 
how mindfulness training positively 
alters emotional experience by reducing 
negative mood as well as improving 
positive mood and well-being. (See P.C. 
Broderick’s “Mindfulness and Coping 
with Dysphoric Mood: Contrasts with 
Rumination and Distraction” in Cognitive 
Therapy and Research which 
was published in 2005 and 
Ruth A. Baer’s “Mindfulness 
Training as a Clinical 
Intervention: A Conceptual 
and Empirical Review” 
in Clinical Psychology: 

Science and Practice which 
was published in 2003.) 

Mindfulness training has 
also been shown to increase 
tolerance of unpleasant 
physical states, such as pain, 

(Consult Joshua Grant’s 
presentation “Pain Perception, 

Pain Tolerance, Pain Control 
and Zen Meditation” at the 
Mind and Life Summer 
Research Institute on June 
5, 2007.) produce brain 
changes consistent with more 
effective handling of emotions under stress 
and increase immune functioning. (See 
“Alterations in brain and immune function 
produced by mindfulness meditation” by 
Richard J. Davidson et al. in Psychosomatic 
Medicine which was published in 2003.) 
Finally, many studies have shown that 
mindfulness training improves different 
aspects of attention, which is the ability to 
remain focused on task-relevant information 
while filtering out distracting or irrelevant 
information. (See “Mindfulness Training 
Modifies Subsystems of Attention” by A.P. 
Jha et al., “Meditation and attention: A 
comparison of the effects of concentrative 
and mindfulness meditation on sustained 
attention” by E.R. Valentine and P.L.G. 
Sweet in Mental Health, Religion and 
Culture which was published in 1999 and 
“Mental Training Affects Distribution of 
Limited Brain Resources” by Heleen Slater 

21 January-February 2010 • 


et al. in PLoSBiology which was published 
in 2007.) 

While this research draws from civilian 
populations, its findings clearly have 
implications in the military context. These 
techniques have already been extended to 
war veterans with post-traumatic stress 
disorder, and preliminary results from this 
work suggest a reduction in symptoms. 
[Consult “Pilot Study of a Mindfulness 
based Group Therapy for Combat Post- 
traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)” A.P. 
King et al.] In addition, mindfulness training 
could help optimize warrior performance 
by cultivating competencies critical for 
the modern battlefield, such as improved 
self-regulation, better attentional skills and 
enhanced situational awareness. 

orking memory capacity and 
mental armor. Mind fitness, as we 
have operationalized it here, comprises 


mental faculties critical for military 
effectiveness, such as mental agility, 
emotion regulation, attention and situational 
awareness. Interestingly, the cognitive 
neuroscience construct of “working 
memory capacity” has also been linked to 
these faculties. Working memory capacity is 
the ability to maintain relevant information 
online while resisting interference from 
irrelevant information. Growing evidence 
suggests that working memory capacity 
is tied to the ability to engage in abstract 
problem-solving and counterfactual 
thinking. Recently, neuroscientists report 
that in addition to these “cold” cognitive 
processes requiring a high degree of mental 
flexibility and agility, “hot” emotional 
regulation processes also rely on working 
memory capacity. 

While individuals differ in their 
baseline working memory capacity, 


everyone’s working memory capacity can 
be fatigued and degraded after engaging in 
highly demanding cognitive or emotional 
tasks. (See B.J. Schmeichel’s “Attention 
control, memory updating, and emotion 
regulation temporarily reduce the capacity 
for executive control” in the Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General which 
was published in 2007.) Conversely, 
working memory capacity can be improved 
and strengthened through training. Studies 
have shown that individuals with higher 
working memory capacity have better 
attentional skills, abstract problem-solving 
skills and general fluid intelligence (that is, 
the ability to use rather than simply know 
facts). They also suffer less from emotionally 
intrusive thoughts and are more capable 
of suppressing or reappraising emotions 
when required. In contrast, individuals 
with lower working memory capacity 
have poorer academic 
achievement, lower 
standardized test scores 
and more episodes of 
mind-wandering. They 
are more likely to suffer 
from post-traumatic stress 
disorder, anxiety disorders 
and substance abuse, and 
are more likely to exhibit 
prejudicial behavior toward 
personally disliked groups. 
(See “Working memory 
span tasks: Amethodological 
review and user’s guide” 
by A.R. Conway et al. 
in Psychonomic Bulletin 
& Review which was 
published in 2005.) Thus, 
working memory capacity 
corresponds to an individual’s 
success at willfully guiding behavior 
while overcoming cognitive or emotional 
distractions or impulsive tendencies. 
Warriors with higher working memory 
capacity are more likely to have better 
mind fitness and thus be better equipped for 
responding to the cognitive and emotional 
challenges that come from preparing for 
and experiencing deployment. These 
warriors are also more likely to maintain 
an effective level of performance when 
confronted by obstacles, setbacks and 
distractions, and return to their baseline 
functioning after being exposed to stressors 
or traumatic experiences. Nonetheless, all 
warriors (even those with higher working 
memory capacity) are likely to suffer from 
some degree of working memory capacity 
degradation through the deployment cycle 
because the stressors of this time period 
are so depleting of cognitive and emotional 


..mindfulness training 
could help optimize warrior 
performance by cultivating 
competencies critical for 
the modern battlefield, 
such as improved self¬ 
regulation, better attentional 
skills and enhanced 
situational awareness.” 



Fires 


resources. Moreover, an individual’s 
position within the military command 
structure may exacerbate the problem 
because recent evidence suggests that 
being lower in a power hierarchy reduces 
working memory capacity. (See “Lacking 
power impairs executive functions” by P.K. 
Smith et al. in Psychological Science which 
was published in 2008.) 

Thus, an important component of optimal 
combat readiness should be to maintain 
or increase baseline levels of working 
memory capacity, despite the increase 
in stressors over the deployment cycle. 
Because working memory capacity can be 
strengthened through training, performance 
on both cold cognitive processes and hot 
emotional regulation can be enhanced. 
Maintaining or enhancing warriors ’ baseline 
levels of working memory capacity could 
have cascading effects for effective decision 
making, complex problem solving and 
emotional regulation processes, all of which 
are heavily taxed over the deployment cycle 
and are crucial for mission effectiveness. In 
other words, training to improve working 
memory capacity may provide “mental 
armor” to protect against impending 
deployment-related degradation in mind 
fitness. 

MFT. Mindfulness-based Mind 
Fitness Training is a 24-hour course 
that is taught over eight weeks in groups 
of 20 to 25 service members. Mindfulness- 
based Mind Fitness Training is based 
on the well-established mindfulness- 
based stress reduction course known 
to improve attentional functioning and 
reduce the negative effects of stress. 
However, Mindfulness-based Mind Fitness 


Training is tailored for the military 
predeployment training cycle, with real- 
world examples from the counterinsurgency 
environment that show how mind fitness 
skills can enhance performance and mission 
accomplishment. During the course, troops 
learn about the stress reaction cycle and its 
effects on the mind and body. They also 
learn how mind fitness training can boost 
resilience to stress. Most importantly, and 
unlike the Army’s Battlemind training, 
Mindfulness-based Mind Fitness Training 
provides skills training through mind 
fitness exercises. These exercises are 
practiced 30 minutes a day. Some exercises 
build concentration by focusing on one 
object of attention, such as a particular 
body sensation. Others build situational 
awareness and non-reactivity through 
wider attention on internal and external 
stimuli. And some exercises use focused 
attention to reregulate physiological and 
psychological symptoms that develop from 
traumatic or stressful experiences. The 
exercises are incorporated into physical 
training and other mission essential tasks 
and completed during the duty day, in groups 
and/or individually. Thus, an important 
component of the course is engaging in 
Mindfulness-based Mind Fitness Training 
training exercises each day. 

We recently conducted a pilot study 
of Mindfulness-based Mind Fitness 
Training with a detachment of 31 Marine 
Reservists, who received the training 
before they deployed to Iraq. (In March 
2009, they returned home from this 
deployment.) While some Marines resisted 
the effort required by the training, the 
initial exposure was relatively positive. 


The entire detachment received training, 
and Mindfulness-based Mind Fitness 
Training’s didactic information and group 
practices helped to socialize the concept. 
Once deployed, the Marines personalized 
their approach to the Mindfulness-based 
Mind Fitness Training exercises, differing in 
how they incorporated them into their daily 
routines. From their anecdotal reports during 
and after the deployment, it appears some 
Marines continued the exercises during 
their down time, some incorporated them 
into their physical fitness regimes, some 
employed them as part of their permission 
rehearsals and some employed them to 
keep themselves alert and focused while 
on missions. Many Marines reported using 
the exercises at bedtime, which they said 
helped them to quiet their minds, fall asleep 
faster and sleep more soundly. 

Before and after Mindfulness-based 
Mind Fitness Training training (before they 
deployed), the Marines participated in a 
battery of behavioral tasks to measure their 
cognitive capabilities. We had predicted 
that the increase in stressors during 
predeployment training would degrade the 
Marines’ cognitive performance. However, 
statistical analysis shows that the Marines 
who spent more time engaging in mind 
fitness exercises (on average, 10 hours 
outside of class) saw an improvement in their 
cognitive performance compared to Marines 
who spent less time engaging in the exercises 
(on average, two hours outside of class). 
(See “Examining the Protective Effects of 
Mindfulness Training on Working Memory 
Capacity and Affective Experience” by A.P. 
Jha et al. which was reviewed by Emotion.) 
Specifically, despite the real increase 




Dr. Michael J. Roy conducts a demonstration of a life-like simulator that represents a new form of post-traumatic stress disorder treatment with SGT 
Lenearo Ashfordon in Washington, D.C., Sept. 16, 2008. (Photo by John Kruzei) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 22 














“...mind fitness training’s beneficial 
effects could continue long after 
the deployment is over, increasing 
the likelihood that rcvflT te 

[RmiS^g \gflffljDg] QtnS ofoO© 0® (atepDsg/ 
agjata \5 e0q@dq 


in stressors during the predeployment 
period, the Marines who engaged in more 
mind fitness training maintained the same 
perceived stress level and preserved or even 
improved their working memory capacity 
over their initial baseline. 

In contrast, the Marines who engaged 
in less mind fitness training experienced 
an increase in their perceived stress levels 
and the predicted decrease in their working 
memory capacity. This degradation in their 
working memory capacity produced test 
scores of working memory capacity on 
par with populations that have suffered 
psychological injuries such as post-traumatic 
stress disorder and major depression. (See 
“Working memory capacity and suppression 
of intrusive thoughts” by C.R. Brewin, 
and L. Smart in the Journal of Behavioral 
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry 
which was published in 2005, “Reduced 
autobiographical memory specificity 
and post-traumatic stress: Exploring the 
contributions of impaired executive control 
and affect regulation” by T. Dalgleish et 
al. in the Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
which was published in 2008 and “Reduced 
specificity of autobiographical memory 
and depression: The role of executive 
processes” by T. Dalgleish et al. the Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: General which 
was published in 2007.) It is important to note 
that this degradation in working memory 
capacity occurred before deployment, and 
thus does not reflect the additional stressors 
of the deployment itself. The apparent costs 
of the predeployment context are striking, 
given that the intention of the predeployment 
training is to prepare service members 
physically, emotionally and cognitively for 
the stressors of deployment. Our findings 
highlight the potential importance of 
providing mind fitness training within the 
predeployment time period to buffer against 
working memory capacity depletion. 

While we have not yet fully analyzed the 
data from their postdeployment cognitive 
behavioral testing, it is clear from a 
postdeployment survey that the Marines 

23 January-February 2010 • Fires 


continued to engage in mind fitness training 
and/or use the skills they learned while 
deployed. Sixteen percent of the Marines 
said that they “practiced regularly while 
deployed,” while 35 percent gave neutral 
responses and 48 percent said they did not 
practice regularly. In contrast, 26 percent of 
the Marines said that they practiced mind 
fitness exercises “after particularly stressful 
or traumatic experiences,” while 35 percent 
gave neutral responses and 38 percent said 
they did not. Perhaps more importantly, 54 
percent of the Marines said that they “used 
the skills learned in this course downrange,” 
while 27 percent gave neutral responses, and 
the rest said they did not use Mindfulness- 
based Mind Fitness Training skills while 
deployed. 

Thus, while only 16 percent practiced 
mind fitness exercises regularly during the 
deployment, more than a quarter used the 
practices to reregulate themselves after 
stressful experiences and more than halfused 
Mindfulness-based Mind Fitness Training 
skills during the deployment. These findings 
suggest the need for adding more structured 
mind fitness exercise sessions into a unit’s 
daily schedule during deployment. They 
also highlight again the parallel to physical 
fitness: just as building muscle requires 
repetitive physical exercise, improving 
cognitive and emotional performance 
requires engaging in mind fitness exercises 
in a sustained, disciplined manner. While 
mind fitness skills are quickly and easily 
taught, they require ongoing commitment 
to develop and strengthen over time. 

We acknowledge several limitations 
to this pilot study. Our cohort was a 
convenience sample, consisting of a 
detachment that agreed to receive training. 
There was no wait list or active control 
group, although we are currently gathering 
control group data for further analysis. We 
think this weakness was partially mitigated 
by our use of well validated cognitive 
behavioral instruments shown to be stable 
over time. This minimizes simply reflected 
measurement artifact. Nonetheless, the fact 


that all Marines started with similar working 
memory capacity scores and that changes 
in their scores over time correlate, in a 
statistically significant way, with the amount 
of time spent engaging in mind fitness 
exercises highlights the need for further 
study. To this end, we have recently received 
funding from the Department of Defense 
to examine how mind fitness training can 
build resilience and combat readiness 
among Army Soldiers. The first study will 
compare Mindfulness-based Mind Fitness 
Training to the Army’s Battlemind program 
in a predeployment context. The second 
study will compare different versions of 
Mindfulness-based Mind Fitness Training 
in a non-deployment context, to see which 
version is most effective at producing 
optimal cognitive and psychological 
performance among warriors. 

As this article has shown, mind fitness 
training can immunize against stress by 
buffering the cognitive degradation of stress 
inoculation training and by permitting more 
adaptive responses to and interpretation of 
stressors. Mind fitness training can also 
enhance warrior performance by cultivating 
competencies critical for today’s security 
environment. Finally, beyond its immediate 
effects for managing stress and enhancing 
mission performance, mind fitness training 
is protective: it builds resiliency and leads to 
faster recovery from cognitive degradation 
and psychological injury. While warriors 
may choose to engage in mind fitness 
exercises to optimize their performance 
downrange, the protective effects will still 
be accruing — likely leading to a decrease 
in psychological injury upon returning 
home. As a result, mind fitness training 
could reduce the number of warriors in 
need of professional help and thereby 
reduce caregiver burnout among Armed 
Forces’ chaplains and medical and mental 
health professionals. In other words, mind 
fitness training’s beneficial effects could 
continue long after the deployment is over, 
increasing the likelihood that warriors will 
be ready, willing and able to deploy again 
when needed. 


Dr. Elizabeth A. Stanley is an assistant profes¬ 
sor in the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign 
Service and Department of Government at 
Georgetown University. Dr. Amishi P. Jha is an 
assistant professor in the Department of Psy¬ 
chology at the University of Pennsylvania. 


Editor’s note: Fires would like to thank Joint Force 
Quarterly for its permission to reprint this article, which 
has been edited for Fires's style and format. 









REACHING OUT MAKES A REAL DIFFERENCE. 

Discover real stories of courage in the battle against combat stress. REAL WARRIORS*REAL BATTLES 

Call Toll Free 866-966-1020 ★ www.realwarriors.net 


REAL STRENGTH 









By Kim Reischling 
Fort Polk Public Affairs Office 


T he phone call devastated his world, 
crumbling to dust his hopes and 
dreams for the future. 

Several days elapsed, days filled with 
the mind-numbing grief that follows 
the end of a once-loving marriage. He 
felt helpless; thousands of miles away, 
deployed to Iraq, there was little he could 
do. He somehow got through those days, 
unthinkingly making the motions because 
his mind was elsewhere. 

To rid himself of the physical 
memories, he placed the items she 
had sent in a box, each gift, each letter 
summoning a memory that magnified his 
loss. The wedding ring was the last to go. 
As he twisted it off his finger, something 
snapped inside. What snapped? It’s hard 
to define. 

Perhaps he was overwhelmed by 
the mistaken belief that his burdens had 
become insurmountable, that life was no 
longer worth living. 

In that instant he made an irrevocable 
decision. Grabbing his rifle, Specialist 
Joe Sanders placed the muzzle against 
his throat and pulled the trigger. 

More than 33,000 people in the 
United States committed suicide in 2006. 
That year, in fact, suicide was the 11th 
leading cause of death. For every one 
of those deaths, an estimated 12 to 25 
people attempted suicide, according to 
the National Institute of Mental Health. 

Suicide rates are rising, 

AND THAT HOLDS TRUE EVEN 
WITHIN THE Army. In 2008, 140 
Soldiers in the active-duty Army took 
their own lives. That puts the 2008 active- 
duty suicide rate at 20.2 per 100,000 - the 
highest ever for the Army, according to 
Army reports. 

roactive stand. The Army is taking a 
proactive stance to combat suicide. 
“It is clear to all of us that the increased 
suicide rate in our Army represents an 
unacceptable loss to the Army and the 
nation,” said Vice Chief of Staff of the 
Army General Peter W. Chiarelli, in a 
report dated April 19, 2009. That’s why 


the Army Comprehensive Soldier Fitness 
Program was developed, to raise “mental 
fitness” to the same level the Army considers 
physical fitness. 

A high-velocity bullet entering the brain 
almost always causes massive, irreversible 
damage, but that wasn’t the case for Sanders. 
He survived his attempted suicide because 
his M-4 failed to fire. 

Sanders said he immediately went into 
“Soldier mode. I had to know why my 
weapon malfunctioned, so I took it apart 
and discovered the firing pin was missing,” 
he said. 

Sanders confronted the only other 
person who had access to the weapon: 
His roommate and battle buddy, Specialist 
Albert Godding. “I asked Godding if he 
knew where the firing pin was and he told 
me he had taken it out. Then he asked me, 
‘How do you know I took it out?”’ 

With that question, a flood of emotions 
spilled from Sanders - grief and despair 
over his failed marriage; anger over what he 
perceived as a betrayal by Godding; shock at 
being alive when only moments ago he was 
facing death. Sobbing, Sanders confessed 
to his battle buddy that he had tried to take 
his own life. Godding immediately called 
for a medic. 

Godding’s vigilance saved Sanders 
life. 

“After the phone call, Joe grew distant,” 
Godding said. “He started talking about 
killing himself while on guard duty. He said 
it jokingly, and I really didn’t think he was 
serious. But it weighed on me. So while he 
was out one night, I took the firing pin out 
of his weapon as a precaution. I questioned 
myself about doing that, but I felt it was 
necessary,” Godding said. 

Sanders received the intensive counsel¬ 
ing and support he needed. 

“There was no prejudice against me 
because of what I had done,” Sanders said. 
“And maybe I’m just lucky, but my chain 
of command was very helpful. There was 
no doubt that they were concerned about 
my welfare.” 

limate changed. It wasn’t just luck. 
The Army climate has changed. Open 
communication and positive encouragement 
by command at all levels is the key to 
stemming the rise in suicidal behaviors, 



Chiarelli said. 

“Inmy recent visits to the field, I’ve seen 
how the stigma related to seeking behavioral 
health treatment represents one of the 
greatest barriers to individuals accessing 
care and improving overall performance 
and well-being.” 

PART OF HELPING SOLDIERS 
IS MAKING IT PERMISSIBLE FOR 
THEM TO HELP THEMSELVES, THE 
GENERAL SAID. That means changing 
the culture so Soldiers are not ashamed to 
seek out mental health care. Chiarelli said 
recent assessments in theater have shown 
more Soldiers are willing to seek out mental- 
health care without the concern that it is 
perceived as weakness or that it will affect 
their careers. 

And Sanders’ career is going strong, said 
Command Sergeant Major Sheon Alderman, 
4th Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain 
Division. 

“This Soldier is motivated. I asked him 
if he was ready for the promotion board and 
he was. Next he attended the Soldier of the 
Month board and was neck to neck with the 
winner. Then he went to the Warrior’s Leader 
Course and he did well. We’re going to be 
pinning sergeant’s stripes on this Soldier 
very soon,” said Alderman. 

Sanders hopes that by speaking out, he 
can help other Soldiers understand that they 
don’t have to be embarrassed or ashamed 
to get help. 

“If I can help one Soldier out there, then 
telling my story publicly is well worth it. 
Getting help is the strong thing to do. It 
takes courage to speak out instead of hiding 
those emotions away,” he said. 

Chiarelli said that “first line supervisors, 
battle buddies, friends and loved ones are 
a Soldier’s first line of defense against the 
threat of suicide.” 

Sanders fervently agreed. 

“I get to be here today. I get to someday 
become a great husband and a father. I get 
to lead Soldiers. I get to do what I love to 
do because of my battle buddy, because he 
saw the signs that something was wrong 
and acted on them.” 

Editor’s note: This article was released on the 
Department of the Armys website, Sept. 21, 2009. 
Since then, reports indicate the number of Soldier 
suicides in 2009 exceeded the total for 2008. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 26 






























m reset 


Restoring balance 
through reintegration 

W E ARE AN Army that remains out of balance with a few more tough 
YEARS AHEAD OF US. FORTUNATELY, WE HAVE MADE SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS 
OVER THE PAST SEVERAL YEARS WITH THE HELP OF OUR DEPARTMENTAL AND 

Congressional leaders, we've expanded our force and transformed it to be 

MORE EFFECTIVE IN THE TYPES OF CONFLICTS WE ARE FIGHTING TODAY. TODAY THE ARMY 
IS 70,000 PEOPLE LARGER THAN IT WAS JUST FIVE YEARS AGO ... 40,000 PEOPLE LARGER 
THAN IT WAS JUST TWO AND A HALF YEARS AGO ... WITH 11 MORE COMBAT BRIGADES AND 
SUBSTANTIALLY MORE ENABLING FORCES. WE ARE BETTER POSITIONED NOW — THAN WE 
WERE TWO YEARS AGO — TO ACCEPT SOME INCREASED DEMAND, BUT WE ARE NOT OUT 
OF THE WOODS YET.” 

General George w. Casey, Chief of Staff of the Army 



By LTC Michael T. Morrissey 


T he current war is the longest the U.S. 
has conducted with an all-volunteer 
force. Conflicts in Iraq and Afghanis tan 
continue as the president recently announced 
the decision to send an additional 34,000 
troops to Afghanistan. Beyond Iraq, 
Afghanistan, well-known threats from 
global terrorism, China and North Korea, 
there are also insidious dangers to the U.S. 
that threaten to destabilize the security of 
national interests in ways that would require 
substantial U.S. military involvement 
beyond the current commitment. They 
include unconventional threats; political 
extremism, toxic anti-American populism, 
nuclear proliferation and expanding political 
and economic vulnerability (See “Toward 
a Risk Management Defense Strategy” a 
study by Nathan R Freier). 

General Casey appropriately explained 
the future as one of persistent conflict, “a 
period of protracted confrontation among 
states, non-states and individual actors, that 
are increasingly willing to use violence 
to achieve their political and ideological 
ends,” in his statement before the House 
Committee on Appropriations, Military 
Construction, Veteran’s Affairs and Related 
Agencies on May 6,2009. In this demanding 
environment, the Army plays an essential 
role protecting national interests and 
American freedoms. As an experienced 

27 January-February 2010 • 


force provider, General Campbell, U.S. 
Forces Command commander, aptly 
explained the challenge in this environment, 
“While in a persistent conflict, we continue 
to generate forces in a condition where the 
global demand for land forces exceeds the 
available supply. Despite this, our nation and 
the combatant commanders expect the Army 
to produce a sustained supply of trained and 
ready forces and since 2003, we have met 
those expectations.” (See General Charles 
C. Campbell’s article “ARFORGEN: 
Maturing the Model, Refining the Process,” 
in the June 2009 edition of Army Magazine.) 
The combined effects of an extended war 
along with insufficient recovery time for 
personnel and families have resulted in 
readiness consumption at an unsustainable 
rate impacting strategic flexibility and 
causing symptoms at the Soldier and family 
level. 

ymptoms. While the Army has a 
combat-experienced force like no other 
time in its history, the demand has taken a 
personal toll. In 2007, Casey explained the 
Army was not broken, but out of balance. 
Although there appears to be little research 
on the subject indicating a link between an 
extended war with insufficient recovery 
time and a negative impact on Soldiers 
and families, fissures in the force’s human 
dimension are evident. Since January 
2009, 211 Soldiers, active and reserve, are 
suspected to have committed suicide (See 
Ann Scott Tyson’s article “Army’s Record 


Suicide Rate ‘Horrible,’ General Says” in 
the Washington Post). Up from 128 in2008, 
the steady increase during the last four years 
does not have a direct correlation to the long 
war, but is believed to be a symptom. 
Despite the many programs designed to 
help struggling married couples cope 
with deployment, the military divorce rate 
was 3.6 percent for fiscal year 2009, an 
increase from previous years according 
to Pauline Jelinek in his Associated Press 
article “Military Divorces Increasing 
from War Stress.” In addition, in his USA 
Today article “Alcohol Abuse by GIs Soars 
Since ’03,” Greg Zoroya states, “The rate 
of Army Soldiers enrolled in treatment 
programs for alcohol dependency or abuse 
has nearly doubled since 2003 — a sign of 
the growing stress of repeated deployments 
in Iraq and Afghanistan, according to 
Army statistics and interviews.” 

Approximately 20 percent of returning 
veterans also suffer from post-traumatic 
stress disorder or depression (See, “Invisible 
Wounds of War: Psychological and 
Cognitive Injuries, Their Consequences, 
and Services to Assist Recovery,” a study by 
Terri Tanielian and Lisa H. Jaycox, RAND 
Corporation). Finally, Rand Corporation 
released another study, “The Experience 
of Children from Military Families,” on 
7 December 2009, which only begins to 
address the symptoms of extended, multiple 
deployments on families such as increased 
emotional difficulties. 



Fires 





Multiple deployments and extended 
separations with insufficient recovery time 
incur a mental toll and cause wounds that 
are not easily visible. Suicide, divorce, 
substance abuse and behavioral health 
issues clearly do not define our great 
Army institution. Although each case 
is unacceptable, they are but a small 
percentage compared to the overall force. 
However, they are symptoms of an Army 
out of balance and have the potential to 
proliferate and erode readiness. 

estoring balance. Army leadership 
is working aggressively to address 
the complex challenge of rebalancing the 
force, while keeping its dominant edge in 
the 21 st century. Restoring balance requires 
a comprehensive approach, including 
increasing Army end strength, transitioning 
from a garrison-based, Cold War operational 
set to an expeditionary force, transforming 
to modular brigade formations, realigning 
bases and implementing the Army Force 
Generation model. In addition, our 
leadership’s commitment to end Stop Loss 
and 15 month deployments plus increase 
boots on the ground-dwell time to (1 year 
deployed and 2 years at home for active 
units and 1 year deployed and 4 years at 
home for the Reserve Component) is having 
an effect and, ultimately, will help reduce 
stress on the force. 

Equally important, restoring balance 
requires a focus on Soldiers and families, 
a concerted effort to reduce the mental and 
physical toll of a committed expeditionary 
Army. On March 26,2007, Secretary of the 
Army Preston M. “Pete” Geren approved 
implementation of the Deployment Cycle 
Support Directive, which codifies the need 
for deploying Soldiers and Department of 
the Army civilians to receive the opportunity 
for personal reconstitution, family reunion/ 
reintegration and reestablishment of 
personal readiness. In the last few years, 
Congressional, Department of Defense 
and Army leaders committed resources 
and implemented programs to restore the 
wellbeing of Soldiers and families. In 
October 2007, Secretary Geren and General 
Casey unveiled the Army Family Covenant, 
an incredible pledge that codifies renewed 
support to Army families. 

The Army recently instituted a 
Comprehensive Soldier Fitness Program to 
build resiliency and prepare Soldiers better 
for the challenges associated with multiple 
deployments. Family life counselors and 
resiliency teams are now within brigades 
to deal with mental fitness proactively. 
The Army’s in-depth suicide awareness 
campaign also is beginning to show positive 
signs. On December 9, 2009, the Vice 


Chief of Staff of the Army, General Peter 
W. Chiarelli, directed leaders to address 
behavioral health support during initial and 
subsequent performance counseling. 

These are just a few of the many 
programs, and it is heartening to see the 
investment and commitment. However, 
programs and policies alone will not 
restore nor recover Soldiers and families. 
Ultimately, rebalancing the all-volunteer 
force rests on dedicated leaders at all levels, 
conducting detailed planning and focused 
execution to ensure these programs are 
used and achieve their objectives. Easy 
answers and effortless solutions will not 
suffice. Restoring balance requires an 
appreciation of the challenge at hand. It 
requires dedication and follow through 
on a key component of restoring balance 
— reintegration. This article focuses on 
Soldier/family reintegration and proposes 
a holistic approach beginning when a unit 
is notified. 

efore deployment. To set conditions for 
successful reintegration, preparation 
begins when a unit is notified of a 
deployment. Soldier and family readiness 
programs must be planned and executed 
with the same detail and command emphasis 
as pre-deployment training. Approximately 
56 percent of the force is married, so 
incorporate family-related activities into 
the road to war training plan. Commanders 


must identify caring, dependable volunteers 
to lead unit family readiness groups. Early 
identification allows for these volunteers 
to attend necessary training and begin the 
team-building process within their battery 
family and across the battalion. Schedule 
regular sessions where the volunteers come 
together to share ideas and information. 

Establish commander’s intent early 
so there are no misunderstandings during 
the deployment. Empower and provide 
family readiness group leaders with the 
information they need to be successful; 
a simple technique of alerting a family 
readiness group leader of new arrivals goes 
a long way toward integration. Command 
presence at family readiness group events 
is a must, but understand when the group 
may want to meet without “green-suiters.” 
Without command emphasis, you’ll 
find little support from subordinates. In 
addition, battalion commanders must select 
a dependable family readiness support 
assistant early. Don’t be confused, the family 
readiness support assistant does not run the 
program; he or she supports the command 
team, family readiness group and families. 
When done right, a family readiness support 
assistant is an amazing resource. 

As part of planning and preparation, 
commanders, in conjunction with their 
family readiness support assistant, schedule 
Army Community Service programs such 





sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 28 








as “Building Family Resiliency,” “Cycles 
of Stress” and “Stress Management” for 
Soldier and families. These events allow 
Soldiers and loved ones to begin preparation 
and realize the emotions they’re feeling are 
normal. They also encourage discussion on 
important topics such as finances, power of 
attorney and child care. Include children 
in family programs when appropriate. 
You’d be amazed at the benefit of children 
discussing their own ranges of emotions. 

A conscious effort must be made to 
ensure spouses understand the Army 
casualty notification process. Single parent 
Soldiers or dual military parents must decide 
who they want to care for their children 
during the deployment. Once their family 
care plan is complete, the commander must 
call the designated provider and confirm to 
validate the plan. In support of information 
flow, a simple technique is for the command 
team to mail each family a personal letter 
addressing the importance of family 
readiness and highlighting upcoming unit 
family events. Besides ensuring the widest 
information dissemination, a personal 
letter will confirm or deny whether or not 
the unit has accurate 
addresses. 

Activities should 
not be simply 
instructional. 

Successful teams will 
plan and resource 
Soldier/family 
cohesion events to 
draw out families and 
build a sense of camaraderie. These events 
are important, developing trust and allowing 
spouses to establish relationships with other 
spouses and share concerns. Done right, 
unit events, such as BBQs, picnics, dinners 
and fall festivals to name a few, nest well 
with information related briefs. Finally, be 
patient, but persistent. It may take a while 
to draw young families into unit activities. 
It is important for families to attend pre¬ 
deployment activities so they understand the 
many resources available to them and how 
to prepare for the deployment separation. 
For some Soldiers, there may be a belief, 
“my spouse is not in the Army; I don’t want 
her involved.” Attack this mindset head on, 
not as an invasion of privacy, but simply 
to support family readiness and prevent 
potential problems later. 

Leaders, first-line supervisors through 
commanders, should have accurate 
information on families within their units: 
first or multiple deployers, Exceptional 
Family Member Program, families intent 
on remaining local during the deployment 
or moving back home, English as a second 


language and whether or not the spouse has 
a driver’s license. Encourage the Soldier 
and spouse to discuss and establish goals 
during the deployment such as financial and 
educational. This will give them a common 
aim to strive for and encourage discussion. 
Early family preparation pays big dividends 
for a successful reintegration and mission 
accomplishment. As then-Army Chief of 
Staff, General John A. Wickham explained in 
his white paper titled, “The Army Family,” 
if a Soldier is worried about his family, he’s 
not focused on the mission; a healthy family 
environment allows Soldiers to concentrate 
fully on their mission. 

Although the bulk of this discussion 
deals with married Soldiers and families, 
equally plan for and prepare single Soldiers. 
Monitor “at risk” Soldiers and families 
especially as the deployment date draws 
closer. Additional stress may cause a 
regrettable incident if preventive measures 
are not in place. Finally, organize and stand 
the rear detachment up within a month or 
two of notification, so the commander and 
command sergeant major can coach the 
leaders and establish clear expectations. 


“Communication throughout 
deployment does not guarantee an 
easy deployment or reintegration, 
but it can facilitate 


Selecting the rear detachment command 
team will be an important choice; only the 
commander and command sergeant major 
will really know if the right choice was 
made or if they simply assumed risk and 
took all the stars forward. 

Counsel the rear detachment command 
team in writing and review the useful 
reference U.S. Army Rear Detachment 
Commander s Handbook that they should 
keep close throughout the deployment. 
Involve the rear detachment in each 
component of the unit train up. For example, 
include the rear detachment in unit mission 
rehearsal exercises so events involve their 
actions and decision making as well. 
Rehearse and exercise battle drills such 
as casualty, serious injury of a spouse 
and Red Cross. Make sure these tasks are 
well-understood by both leaders in the rear 
detachment and forward unit. Do not allow 
the first time they are executed to be the 
real thing. These techniques early during 
the deployment cycle have a direct impact 
on a successful deployment and ultimately 
redeployment/reintegration. 


A ctions during deployment. The train 
up, deployment, relief-in-place and 
transfer of authority will go by rapidly at an 
astonishing pace. Soon enough, the unit will 
be conducting operations and focusing on 
mission accomplishment. During this phase 
in the deployment cycle, there are three areas 
of communication that not only support 
the mission, but also set conditions for 
successful reintegration — Soldier/family, 
engaged leaders and cross-talk between the 
forward unit and rear detachment. 

Soldier/family. Communication between 
the Soldier and family is paramount and can 
take any form — phone, email or webcam. 
Although it varies based on services 
available in theater, encourage Soldiers to 
communicate with their families routinely 
and incorporate it into their battle rhythms. 
Family discussion on progress toward 
achieving those goals established before 
deployment is important and helps ease the 
separation. Discussion and appreciation of 
the challenges each side faces is healthy. 
Communication throughout deployment 
does not guarantee an easy deployment or 
reintegration, but it can facilitate success. 

The unit 
can help them 
stay connected by 
something as simple 
as having routine 
family-oriented video 
teleconferences and 
an effective mail 
operation. In addition, 
photos or videos 
regularly published on a unit website or 
mailed back enable family members to 
see their loved ones in their environments. 
Letters sent by the command team to 
spouses or loved ones, such as mom or 
dad, highlighting positive events are also 
helpful. Communication also facilitates 
rumor control. Transparency in unclassified 
unit operations or decisions will fill a gap 
unfortunately filled by a rumor otherwise. 
Finally, sustaining battle buddies both 
forward and in the rear to include families 
is another safeguard to welfare. Battle 
buddies with the personal courage to 
help if a situation arises are a tremendous 
resource. 

Engaged leaders. Active listening and 
counseling do not stop while deployed. 
Leaders must continue to be engaged with 
their Soldiers. Counseling requires focused 
discussion not only on performance, but 
also on concerns and stress that may 
impact performance. It requires leaders 
to understand Soldier fears, motivations, 
family background, domestic situation, 
goals, personalities, previous combat 


29 January-February 2010 


Fires 



LTC Nathan Blood, brigade effects coordinator for 4th Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain Division (Light), Multi-National Division-Baghdad, shares 
a high-five with his 16-month-old daughter, Mackenzie, during a web camera communication, Aug. 16, 2008. Blood was high-fiving Mackenzie from 
Forward Operating Base Loyalty, Iraq, and she returned it from Fort Polk, La. (Photo courtesy of 4th Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain Division Public Affairs) 


experience and an appreciation of their 
stressors. Because of their involvement 
before deployment, the leader will have 
a good sense of their Soldiers’ families. 
Engaged leaders will be conscious of their 
Soldier’s change in behavior and involved 
to determine what may be troubling him. 
Leaders also must know the signs of 
stress not just in their Soldiers, but also in 
themselves. 

Foster a desire within the team to win 
and actively maintain team morale through 
esprit de corps events. Continue to develop 
a sense of unit identity, and coach effective 
methods to deal with stress, such as physical 
training. Leaders can use the Unit Risk 
Reduction Leader Tip Card for reference 
when assessing Soldiers. R&R affords an 
opportunity to discuss some aspects of 
reintegration before and after leave is taken. 
R&R either may help reintegration or act 
as catalyst for problems later, but requires 
some preparation by leaders depending on 
a Soldier’s situation. Be alert for distinct 
changes in behavior before and after R&R. 
As they did in garrison, leaders must closely 
track their “at risk” Soldiers. This is not 
“NCO business,” but leader business. This 
does not mean those Soldiers are labeled or 
stigmatized. It simply means they may be 
carrying around added stressors that require 
additional leader focus. Include special 
emphasis for those involved in Family 
Advocacy Program before the deployment 
or involved in domestic incidents. Finally, 


command team battlefield circulation will 
not only provide valuable tactical situational 
awareness, but also insights into unit 
morale and cohesion and offer Soldiers an 
opportunity to share concerns. Actively 
use the chaplain to assess the human 
dimension and as a directed telescope when 
necessary. 

Cross-talk between forward unit and 
rear detachment. As part of the battle 
rhythm, there must be routine cross-talk 
between the forward and rear elements at 
both command and staff levels. Green-tab 
discussion and assessment does not happen 
only in theater. The rear detachment and 
family readiness group provide invaluable 
feedback on the health of families to forward 
leaders. As situations develop on either 
side, cross-talk on relevant information 
may enable problem-solving, kill rumors 
and avert potential problems, ultimately 
supporting reintegration. Throughout the 
deployment, situational awareness in areas 
such as R&R and incidents both in and out of 
theater help leadership be preventive rather 
than reactive, especially as redeployment 
approaches. 

edeployment and reintegration. 

Redeployment planning begins 
approximately four months out. 
Reintegration must be an integral portion 
of redeployment planning and requires the 
same focus. Coordination must be done to 
ensure the rear detachment and installation 
is prepared to receive the unit. Cross-talk 


between forward and rear units becomes 
imperative as redeployment approaches. 
As the redeployment date draws closer, 
commanders must reassess their “at risk” 
Soldiers and determine those who may have 
readjustment problems whether domestic, 
financial, alcohol, drug or driving related. 
The rear detachment commander and first 
sergeant must all be conscious of “at risk” 
Soldiers and/or families and be prepared if 
a problem arises during reunion. 

Once a detailed plan is in place, forward 
leaders can facilitate its success by ensuring 
their Soldiers accomplish the in theater 
pre-deployment and reintegration tasks and 
training. In theater training will facilitate 
leader discussion with Soldiers and set 
realistic reintegration expectations at the 
individual level. For predictability, Soldiers 
and families should know the reintegration 
training plan from the seven half day 
directed schedule through unit events and 
block leave. This will set expectations and 
limit frustration when they arrive at home 
station. They will need to understand the 
purpose of unit reintegration events to 
prevent a “check the block” mentality. 

It is highly recommended that the rear 
detachment and family readiness group use 
Army Community Services and conduct 
redeployment and reunion training as well 
for family members also to set expectations. 
In addition, spouses should be informed 
on the unit’s post-redeployment training 
plan after redeployment and the purpose 

30 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 








of events. Without this approach, spouses 
may become frustrated and question why 
their Soldier must report to work after being 
deployed for 12 months. 

With reintegration training complete 
and expectations set, Soldiers and families 
are prepared for the reunion. Soldiers and 
families may experience a wide range of 
emotions before and during the reunion. 
According to the Deployment Guide for 
Families of Deploying Soldiers, there are 
five phases associated with reunion — pre¬ 
entry, reunion, disruption, communication 
and normal. (For more information on 
the emotional effects of deployment, see 
“The Emotional Cycle of Deployment,” 
by Kathleen Vestal Logan, in Proceedings 
and “Mission Readiness and Stress 
Management” by the United Nations 
Secretariat. For information on post¬ 
redeployment emotions, such as overcoming 
anger, sleeping better, spiritual fitness and 
handling stress, see www.afterdeployment, 
org andwww.militaryonesource.com. There 
is a vast array of resources a Soldier or family 
member can download or order to include a 
1-800 line for family members. Encourage 
Soldiers and families to understand the 
emotions tied to each phase. 

As Soldiers, leaders will experience their 
own emotions and must balance them with 
the care of their Soldiers. After reunion, 
success continues with leader emphasis on 
post-redeployment training. Components 
of reintegration training vary slightly by 
major command, but Battlemind Training 


I, “Transitioning from Combat to Home” 
and Battlemind Training II, “Continuing 
the Transition Home” is only helpful if 
taken seriously. During reintegration, the 
rear detachment maintains command and 
control to facilitate redeploying leaders 
also going through training and reunion. 
Ensure leader contact information and 
important numbers like the chaplain are 
updated and disseminated. To avoid alcohol- 
related incidents, leaders should address 
responsible drinking. The ubiquitous 
presence of alcohol may frustrate efforts, 
such as domestic incidents and driving 
under the influence, but ensuring Soldiers 
are reacquainted with responsible drinking 
will go a long way. Finally, be vigilant for 
warning signs such as serious financial 
difficulties, domestic challenges and a 
significant change in behavior. 

eyond reintegration — follow 
through. With formal reintegration 
training complete, complete reintegration 
is far from over. Deliberate preparation is 
conducted before anyone departs for block 
leave — risk assessments, counseling, 
refresher training for privately owned 
motorcycles, and license and insurance 
verification. 

Before block leave. Pre-block leave 
safety briefs from the commander and 
command sergeant major allow Soldiers to 
hear the importance firsthand, but alone, do 
little in regard to block leave success. Coach 
leaders to understand that risk management 
must be thorough, assessed throughout the 


planning process and continually updated 
as conditions change. Enforce the Travel 
Risk Planning System tool for those 
traveling. Identify hazards and implement 
controls to reduce risk associated with each 
Soldier travel plan. NCOs must talk with 
their Soldiers about the risks associated 
with drinking and driving, not wearing 
seatbelts and proper conduct of standards 
and discipline to prevent needless injury 
or loss of life. A system as simple as a 
safe ride program where members carry 
unit cards with chain of command contact 
information and local taxi numbers reduces 
risk of driving under the influence related 
incidents at home station. Keep money with 
the staff duty to help Soldiers get a safe taxi 
ride back on post. 

Continue the command theme and 
understanding among Soldiers that they 
serve something greater than themselves; 
they represent their unit and the Army by 
their actions. Reinforce the message at every 
opportunity as you conduct routine safety 
and discipline briefs. Talk with Soldiers 
about the absolute tragedy of completing a 
successful mission in theater only to lose a 
Soldier to an unsafe act at home station. It is 
naive to believe a leader can prevent every 
incident, but controls must be in place to 
reduce them. 

As part of block leave preparation, 
leaders again reassess those “at risk” 
Soldiers to determine if additional measures 
must be emplaced. It includes Soldiers and 
families “at risk” due to stress incurred 
from redeployment, domestic friction, 
post-traumatic stress disorder, alcohol/drug 
abuse, traumatic brain injury or simply 
problems with readjusting. Incidents during 
reunion may require reassessment. Include 
Army suicide refresher training and have 
candid counseling and discussions with 
Soldiers about this sensitive topic. Ensure 
they understand there is no shame in seeking 
help; there is no stigma. There may be “at 
risk” Soldiers identified that have suicide 
stress factors. Leaders must look them in the 
eyes, ask the hard questions and get help if 
necessary. Simply listening will go a long 
way. Finally, explain to those warrior leaders 
who excelled in a combat environment, that 
deliberate pre-combat inspections are just as 
necessary before block leave as they were 
before a combat operation. Then, Soldiers 
can enjoy well-earned leave safely. 

Post block leave. Once block leave is 
complete, commanders should reintegrate 
the unit thoroughly so they don’t have a 
combination of those that deployed, new 
Soldiers and rear detachment personnel. 
After a lengthy deployment and with key 
leader turnover, there may be a sense that 



According to the Deployment Guide for Families of Deploying Soldiers, there are five phases 
associated with reunion — pre-entry, reunion, disruption, communication and normal. Pictured 
is the homecoming ceremony for B Battery, 2nd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery at Fort Sill, Okla., 
Aug. 1 2, 2009. (Photo courtesy of the Cannoneer) 



31 January-February 2010 • 


Fires 




















it’s permissible to relax standards and 
discipline because “we accomplished our 
mission.” Although not spoken, this lax 
attitude can permeate a unit. With a clear 
chain of command in place, continue to 
enforce standards and discipline. 

Many reintegration tasks and Soldier/ 
family issues cross-over into Army Force 
Generation reset; follow-through to ensure 
successful completion. Too often, continuity 
is lost with leader changes. When leaders 
change, include a green-tab discussion on 
Soldiers into a deliberate transition timeline. 
For changes of command, leaders must 
ensure there is a thorough transition of 
critical information. “Essential elements 
of information include Soldier issues; high 
risk individuals; Soldier’s medical issues 
(such as exposure to concussive events), 
known family issues, expectations regarding 
assignments and schooling, unit wounded 
warriors and gold star family members 
associated with the unit.” (See General 
Peter Chiarelli, Memorandum for Senior 
Leaders dated 22 December 2009.) 

Remember, the Army trend is a spike in 
incidents on or about redeployment plus 60 
days. Do not assume drugs do 
not exist in your organization. 

Conduct aggressive, 
unpredictable urinalysis 
testing early and schedule 
military dogs for barracks 
inspections. Enforce leader 
presence in the barracks on 
weekends and holidays. Soldiers must 
reside in a safe, healthy living environment. 
Continue to follow those “at risk” who 
may need assistance and ensure plans are 
adequate to manage their stress effectively, 
such as counseling with a unit chaplain or 
brigade family life counselors. 

Provide the unit an updated vision 
and goals. Establish a predictable battle 
rhythm and balance immediately after 
block leave. Soldiers and family members 
are sensitive to predictability especially 
after a long deployment. Publish a battle 
rhythm and training calendar so Soldiers 
and families have it. With block leave over, 
conduct family oriented events during the 
duty day; plan unit events where families 
are welcome. Families need to recover 
just as deliberately as your Soldiers and 
equipment. 

Plan a redeployment event such as a 
dinner and make a big deal out of it for 
families. Recognize the many great people 
who made the unit mission a success such as 
family readiness group leaders and the rear 
detachment command team. Plan, resource 
and promote opportunities for married 
couples to strengthen their relationships and 


single Soldiers to become reacquainted into 
healthy social activities. The Strong Bonds 
Program for single and married Soldiers is an 
excellent tool. Finally, restart and resource 
programs, such as Better Opportunities 
for Single Soldiers, community volunteer 
initiatives and informal unit socials or team 
building events. 

The Army exists to preserve peace and 
security, to implement national objectives, 
to serve and provide for the defense of the 
American people. These objectives have 
been accomplished for more than 234 
years by the Army, during more than 183 
campaigns. Our military forces are involved 
in Iraq and Afghanistan, conducting counter¬ 
terrorism and security operations. Defense 
Base Closure and Realignment Commission 
decisions are being implemented through 
transformation, transitioning from a Cold 
War to expeditionary force and supporting 
homeland security. As it executes these vital 
tasks, it also must restore balance among 
an all volunteer force in an era of persistent 
conflict. 

The next few years are critical as 
these programs come to fruition and 

“Adaptable and resilient 
Soldiers and families do 
not happen by chance.” 

troop adjustments are made with Iraq and 
Afghanistan. Army leaders, beginning 
with first-line supervisor, appreciate the 
expeditionary nature of the Army and 
are eager to accomplish their missions. 

Inherent in the missions however, leaders 
must understand and address the human 
dimension — our Soldiers and families. 

Failure to appreciate a holistic approach 
to reintegration ultimately will diminish 
combat capability one Soldier, one family 
at a time. Adaptable and resilient Soldiers 
and families do not happen by chance. It 
requires Soldier commitment and continued 
earnest leader involvement throughout the 
deployment cycle. 

According to a survey conducted by 
the University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, “Army assistance with the deployment 
and reunion process can be helpful, but at 
this time, this assistance is not rated very 
highly by spouses. Similarly, unit support 
for families can be helpful in the reunion 
process, but this support is not considered 
to be very strong. It is clear from the data 
that significant gains in reunion adjustment 
can be fostered but more attention must 
be given to strengthening family, unit 


and service systems support if these gains 
are to be realized.” (Dennis K. Orthner, 
Ph.D. and Roderick Rose, M.S., “Reunion 
Adjustment among Army Civilian Spouses 
with Returned Soldiers,” Army Family 
Reunion Report Orthner & Rose, 2005, 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, December 2005. Although dated by 
four years, the findings are still relevant.) 
Reintegration must be done deliberately and 
with the same planning detail and execution 
focus as combat or stability operations. 

This article does not contain any 
revelations. It simply highlights the 
significance of reintegration against 
a backdrop of an Army in flux. To 
underestimate the importance of a holistic 
approach to reintegration is to misjudge the 
challenge presently facing the Army in an 
era of persistent conflict. To simply wait 
until redeployment to address reintegration 
is shortsighted. The symptoms cannot be 
dismissed: suicide, substance abuse, divorce 
and increased behavioral health issues. 

Inaddition to themany serviceprograms in 
place, approaching reintegration holistically 
is a method at the tactical level to address 
these symptoms, and it begins 
upon unit notification of a 
deployment. Reintegration 
is not a panacea; it must 
be part of a comprehensive 
strategy. It requires critical 
thinking. Success involves 
implementation by the 
world’s best NCO Corps. Success includes 
the same heightened sense of purpose, 
determination and proud tradition displayed 
throughout the Army’s history. Ultimately, 
the spirit and strength of the Army Family 
will prevail. Leaders foster this strength, 
a faith in camaraderie, by demonstrating 
commitment in actions to Soldier and 
families. 


Lieutenant Colonel Michael T. Morrissey, air 
defense artillery, is the commander of 5th 
Battalion, 5th Air Defense Artillery, 31st Air 
Defense Artillery Brigade, Fort Lewis, Wash. 
He served as a congressional appropriations 
liaison, Washington, D.C.; a congressional fel¬ 
low on the staff of a U.S. senator, Washington, 
D.C; executive officer for Task Force 1-18 
Infantry, 1st Infantry Division in Tikrit, Iraq; 
and deputy G3,1 st Infantry Division, in support 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom II. He also served 
as chief of plans, 1 st Infantry Division, initially 
for Operation Joint Guardian, Kosovo Force 
then Army Force-Turkey as part of Operation 
Iraqi Freedom I; and battery commander of A 
Battery, 4th Battalion, 3rd Air Defense Artillery, 
1st Infantry Division, Kitzingen, Germany, in 
support of Operation Joint Endeavor/Joint 
Guard, Stabilization Force. 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 32 




mteM 


A crew from the Singapore army fires a rocket from a High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS) on 
Fort Sill, Okla., Nov 9, 2009. The live fire was conducted during operation Forging Sabre which was a joint 
operation between the U.S. Army and the Singapore army. Members of the Singapore military were trained 
on the HIMARS system by members of 1st Battalion, 158th Field Artillery, Oklahoma Army National Guard. 
Training culminated in a joint exercise utilizing multiple combat systems. (Photo by ssg Matthew Lima, u.s. Army) 




33 January-February 2010 


f ' 1 

f \ ] 





IK39J 

i \ J 









































"This exercise is a culminating point for us, 

BECAUSE IT SHOWS [WHAT] THE WORLD-CLASS JOINT 

Fires center fort Sill represents not only to our 

NATION BUT ALSO GLOBALLY. FOR THE SINGAPOREANS TO 
COME HERE IS A GREAT TESTIMONY TO THE CAPABILITIES 
AND THE TRAINING RANGES WE HAVE HERE." 

MG David D. Halverson 
Commanding General of Fort Sill and 
the Fires Center of Excellence 


By LTC Charles D. Kirby, 
Chief, G-35 Future Operations, 
Fires Center of Excellence 
and Fort Sill 


E xercise Forging Sabre 2009, an inte¬ 
grated strike exercise, conducted by 
the Singapore Armed Forces was held 
at Fort Sill, Okla., from Oct. 12 through 
Nov. 24, 2009. 

This exercise was a historical first in that 
it boasted a wide range of assets deployed 
as compared to its predecessor in 2005, 
making it the biggest and most complex live 
firing and air-land integrated strike exercise 
to date, according to the Singapore Armed 
Forces. 

Forging Sabre is held bi-annually at 
locations throughout the world. Singapore, 
an island nation slightly smaller than New 
York City, because of urbanization doesn’t 
have enough room to conduct an exercise 
of this magnitude on their home soil, so in 
recent years, Singapore has held the exercise 
in Australia, Africa and Twenty-nine Palms, 
Calif. 

It was an opportunity to execute a 
strategic combined arms operation from 
Oct. 12 through Nov. 30 culminating in a 
combined arms live fire exercise Nov. 15- 
17 and was designed to validate Singapore 
Armed Forces’ provisional integration and 
tactical doctrine. Singapore’s military might 
is made up of army, navy, and air force 
assets and personnel, and is collectively 
known as the Singapore Armed Forces. 

The Singapore Armed Forces recently 
purchased the High-Mobility Artillery 
Rocket System (Ml42) for one of its 
artillery battalions. Because Fort Sill is 
the home of the Fires Center of Excellence 
and the Field Artillery School, a Singapore 

35 January-February 2010 


Armed Force contingent, made up of more 
than 540 soldiers and airmen from the 
Singapore Armed Forces, which included 
an AH-64D Apache helicopter detachment, 
an F-16C/D fighter detachment and a CH-47 
Chinook helicopter detachment, traveled 
to Fort Sill to validate their training with a 
live-fire exercise which incorporated both 
U.S. and Singaporean forces. 

Support was provided by the Fires Center 
of Excellence, the 75 th Fires Brigade, 214th 
Fires Brigade, 428th Field Artillery Brigade 
and 479th Field Artillery Brigade, all from 
Fort Sill, and the 1st Battalion, 158th 
Field Artillery from the Oklahoma Army 
National Guard. In addition, other agencies 
of the Fort Sill Garrison provided support 
for the exercise, including the Henry Post 
Army Airfield, the Fort Sill Range Control 
Division, Fort Sill Directorate of Logistics 
and the Directorate of Plans, Training and 
Mobilization. 

The exercise gave U.S. Soldiers and 
members of the Singapore Armed Forces 
valuable experience in working together 
in a combined operation. Fort Sill also 
has 29,000 square miles of joint military- 
controlled airspace and 47,000 acres of 
maneuver space to rehearse joint fight 
tactics, a luxury that Singapore doesn’t 
have. 

It made sense for the new HIMARS 
soldiers to validate their training with the 
U.S. Army’s fires experts because Fort 
Sill has the best Joint and Combined Fires 
training capabilities available. It also gives 
U.S. Soldiers valuable experience training 
in a combined environment. It was win-win 
for both countries. 

This was the Republic of Singapore’s 
largest combined military strike which 
brought more than 600 Singaporean airmen 
and soldiers to Fort Sill. The exercise 


involved transport helicopters, F-16 fighters 
and unmanned aerial vehicles. 

Future wars will almost certainly involve 
joint and combined operations. We can 
see this in Afghanistan today where the 
U.S. Army is not fighting alone. The Fires 
Center of Excellence looks for opportunities 
to bring joint and combined training here 
because it exposes our Soldiers, and the 
leaders we are developing, to the operational 
environment they will be exposed to in the 
real fight. 

“This is a hallmark event for a great 
coalition partner to demonstrate the joint 
and combined capabilities that we see here,” 
said Maj. Gen. David Halverson, Fort Sill 
and Fires Center of Excellence commander. 
“I believe this is a great venue to plan and 
rehearse Forging Sabre; it’s important to 
do this because it really does forge this one 
team approach.” 

essons learned. It took more than 1,000 
pieces of equipment from radios, com¬ 
puters to unmanned aerial vehicles to make 
this exercise come to fruition. One of the 
biggest challenges of hosting an exercise of 
this caliber was making sure all the equip¬ 
ment, despite the myriads of frequencies 
used by the U. S. Army and Singapore Armed 
Forces were able to communicate with each 
other. Despite preparing for this exercise for 
well over a year, equipment was still being 
certified by the Federal Communications 
Commission right up until the last minute. 
But now that we’ve gone through an exer¬ 
cise of this magnitude, standard operating 
procedures have been solidified and we now 
know what it takes to get all the different 
frequencies and equipment cleared by the 
FCC and synchronized. 

uccesses sustained. After five days 
of live-firing there were no accidents, 
injuries or safety issues. It was an efficient 
joint operation between the Fires Force and 
Singapore Armed Forces which enabled 
the Singapore Armed Forces to walk away 
with solid doctrine and improved capa¬ 
bilities. Working with the Singaporeans 
will translate to future coalition training 
opportunities. 

“It’s exactly what we want to see here 
in the future as we bring in more coalition 
partners,” Halverson said. 

Discussions are underway with European 
and Asian countries to conduct more joint 
training exercises in the Fort Sill area. 



Fires 





(CLOCKWISE) Exercise Forging Sabre participants gather with the High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System launcher as a backdrop to mark the 
completion of the exercise at Thompson Hill, Fort Sill, Okla., Nov. 17, 2009. (Photo courtesy of the Cannoneer) A Republic of Singapore air force pilot wears 
his unit patch on his flight suit during a gathering at Henry Post Army Airfield, Fort Sill, Nov. 14. (Photo by Jeff Crawley, the Cannoneer) BG Roger Mathews, 
commandant of the Air Defense Artillery School, talks with Singaporean airmen in a hangar at Henry Post Army Airfield, Nov. 14. (Photo by Jeff Crawley, 
the Cannoneer) A Singaporean AH-64 Apache helicopter fires rockets above Falcon Range at Fort Sill, Nov. 17. (Photo by James Brabenec, the Cannoneer) 





























Billowing clouds of smoke rear up from the impact area near Thompson Hill 
as F-16 pilots deliver their munitions on target during the live-fire portion of 
Exercise Forging Sabre at Fort Sill, Okla. (Photo courtesy of the Cannoneer) 



* a 


■ » 

r u 


■ ' 




J J ' 




















Eg transform 




Full -spectrum artillery 



By MAJ Richard L. Scott 


W ith the emergence of irregular 
warfare as the dominant operating 
environment for the foreseeable 
future, the U.S. military’s judicious use of 
force is central to the challenge of operating 
in these unconventional environments. The 
incorrect application of force at the tacti¬ 
cal level may have strategic implications. 
Scientific advances in nonlethal weapons 
may serve to reduce the level of violence 
our service members receive and dispense, 
while performing operations character¬ 
ized by asymmetric threats, complex or 
congested terrain and belligerents inter¬ 
mingled with noncombatants. This article 
introduces the term full-spectrum artillery 
as a subcomponent of nonlethal weapons 
and presents the case for the expanded use 
of nonlethal weapons by the field artillery 
community in irregular warfare. 

he road to purgatory. If the road to 
hell is paved with good intentions, 
then the road to purgatory must be paved 
with indifference. The difference between 
the two, in field artillery’s case, is that hell 
represents the demise of a great branch and 
purgatory represents marginalization. To be 
sure, the field artillery is not dead. There are 
hundreds of field artillerymen performing 
core missions in the contemporary 
operating environment, but the majority are 
performing nonstandard missions. This is 
due, in part, to the field artillery being slow 
to adapt to changing threats or the changing 
environment. While the Army deployed 
less frequently into conventional conflicts 
and more into stability operations and civil 
support operations, the field artillery did 
little to develop munitions appropriate for 
those operations. As a result, combatant 
commanders relied less upon the field 
artillery for fast and accurate indirect fires. 
They shifted priorities and resources and 
redirected thousands of field artillerymen 
into nonstandard missions, such as civil 
affairs, psychological operations and 
information operations, transporters and 
military police. 

In “The Return of the King,” MG Peter 
M. Vangjel states, “Nine out of 10 (artillery) 
units are not performing core missions.” 
This branch marginalization leads to core¬ 
skills degradation and skill set atrophy — 
both concerns pointed out by Vangj el in 
his plan. While there is little doubt that a 

39 January-February 2010 


nonlethal field artillery capability may have 
impacted operations in Iraq significantly 
during the initial invasion and subsequent 
Phase IV reconstruction efforts, there may 
be little demand for such a capability now. 
This does not mean that the capability is no 
longer needed; it just may not be needed 
in that area of operations. Field artillery 
leaders now have a window of opportunity to 
develop a nonlethal strategy as they prepare 
for future operations in other parts of the 
world. Without such a strategy, success will 
continue to be contingent upon the “flexible, 
adaptable and agile team players” cited in 
the campaign plan. 

In addition to deploying field artillerymen 
into nonstandard missions, the term 
nonlethal fires has been incorporated into 
the field artillery vernacular. LTC Morgan 
Mann points out in his article, Marketing 
Framework in Support of Non-Lethal 
Fires , “Recently published field manuals 
such as Stability Operations {FM 3-07), 
Counterinsurgency Operations {FM 3-24/ 
MCWP 3-33.5 ), and the Army’s new 
Operations {FM 3-0 ) manual reference 
nonlethal fires as critical components 
to planning and executing operations; 
however, there is little in way of prescriptive 
help. There are doctrinal publications 
pertaining to information operations (FM 
3-13 and JP 3-13) and nonlethal targeting, 
but these publications are focused on 
division and higher level units where there 
are dedicated staffs for nonlethal fires and 
effects. In addition to the lack of tools at 
the tactical level, we also lack much of the 
joint or service specific doctrinal language 
to communicate what ‘nonlethal’ or ‘non- 
kinetic ’ fires and targeting are, and how they 
are suppose to affect the battlespace.” 

The effort by senior field artillery leaders 
to establish nonlethal fires as a doctrinal term 
for its nonlethal activities is problematic. It 
is not enough to park the cannons and rocket 
launchers, deploy the Soldiers trained to 
operate those weapon systems into various 
nonstandard roles and call their efforts 
nonlethal fires. It is the lack of a nonlethal 
artillery arsenal, in part, that has led to the 
ad hoc force transformation that we observe 
today. Once the field artillery successfully 
reestablishes itself as the “King of Battle” 
and incorporates a more robust (lethal 
and nonlethal) arsenal into the scheme of 
fires, branch marginalization will cease 
and maintaining core proficiencies and 
preventing skill set atrophy will become 


little more than training objectives. 

he way ahead. Despite its reputation 
for being a casualty producer, the 
field artillery does have limited nonlethal 
capabilities with its illumination and smoke 
rounds. However, both types of rounds 
are seen more commonly in conventional 
conflict and usually precede high-explosive 
or improved-conventional munitions. What 
the field artillery lacks is an abundant staple 
of nonlethal options for use in irregular war¬ 
fare, and therein lies the point of entry for 
nonlethal weapons proponents. The paper 
“Joint Concept for Non-Lethal Weapons” 
by General R. Steele, U.S. Marine Corps, 
identifies dozens of nonlethal options either 
currently available or being developed. 

The nonlethal weapons fall into two large 
categories—counter-personneltechnologies 
and counter-materiel technologies. Counter¬ 
personnel technologies include agents 
for crowd and riot control, personnel 
debilitation, facility clearing and area 
denial for personnel. Counter-materiel 
technologies include agents for area 
denial to vehicles and vessels and facility 
obstructions. A third, smaller, category 
involves counter-capability assets that are 
designed to disable or neutralize buildings 
or other mechanical/electrical facilities. 
Murdoch University Electronic Journal of 
Law produces another very useful reference 
that describes most of the nonlethal weapons 
as well as the legalities associated with their 
use at www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/ 
v7n2/sautenet72_text.html. 

Field Manual 6-30 Tactics, Techniques 
and Procedures for Observed Fire states, 
“When it is necessary for the observer to 
adjust fire, he must select an adjusting point.” 
Full-spectrum artillery is that adjusting 
point. The field artillery lacks an arsenal that 
can be applied across the full spectrum of 
conflict adequately (See figure 1 on page 41). 
Full-spectrum artillery provides a graduated 
capability that currently is nonexistent. Full- 
spectrum artillery includes the development 
and application of all lethal and nonlethal 
munitions for use in cannons, rockets and/ 
or missile launchers across the full spectrum 
of conflict (See figure 2 on page 41). 

Imagine being able to deploy indirect 
fire assets in a way that still produces 
a desired outcome without causing 
irreversible damage. In Rwanda, electro¬ 
magnetic pulses fired from howitzers, 
rocket or missile launchers could have 
quashed radio broadcasts urging genocide. 


In Macedonia, the field artillery might have 
fired malodorants or dyed foam coupled with 
personnel-capturing nets to help ground 
troops capture those who attacked the U.S. 
embassy in 1999. Full-spectrum artillery 
might have made a difference if NATO 
targeted Serbian command and control 
centers and j ammed TV broadcasts and radio 
towers, similar to how the U.S. employed 
electro-magnetic pulses over Iraqi power 
stations during Operation Desert Storm. 
Field artillery assets could have delivered 
rapid hardening foams to deter assaults, and 
the subsequent looting, of the Iraqi National 
Museum in Baghdad in 2003. 

When combined with well trained and 
well placed ground troops, full-spectrum 
artillery could have a profound effect on 
how wars are fought. Miscommunications 
and misunderstandings might not yield 
more than a bruise or hurt ego, and mistakes 
will not result in death. Reestablishing 
structures and services would require 
minimal resources, communities would 
remain intact and coalition efforts could 
be directed toward investments and 
improvements, rather than rebuilding and 
damage control. 

Field artillery leaders now must 
determine how to integrate existing and 
developing technologies into the field 
artillery arsenal to provide combatant 
commanders an enhanced capability to 
defeat enemy actions. Fortunately, much 
of the work has already been done. The 
Joint Non-lethal Weapons Directorate, out 
of Alexandria, Va., has developed many of 
the technologies discussed in this article and 
has linkages into the Department of Defense 
bureaucracy. Department of Defense 
Directive 3000.3 Policy for Non-Lethal 
Weapons, mandates the establishment of a 
joint service organization responsible for the 
development and employment of nonlethal 
weapons, defines nonlethal weapons and 
designates the Commandant of the U.S. 
Marine Corps as the executive agent for 
the program. The Joint Non-lethal Weapons 
Directorate’s mission is to facilitate 
outfitting the warfighter with operationally 
effective nonlethal weapons. The field 
artillery community may choose either to 
establish a headquarters collocated with 
the Joint Non-lethal Weapons Directorate 
or to establish a satellite office, possibly 
at Fort Sill, Okla. The field artillery then 
would oversee development, evaluation and 
recommendation of nonlethal projectiles, 



Soldiers assigned to Bravo Company, 2nd Battalion, 77th Field 
Artillery Regiment, 4th Brigade Combat Team, 4th Infantry 
Division, prepare to fire an Ml 19 light-tow howitzer during live- 
fire training at Combat Outpost Monti in the Kunar province of 
Afghanistan, Dec. 2, 2009. (Photo by SGT Teddy Wade, U.S. Army) 


Fires 



















Figure 1: The spectrum of conflict 

Increasing violence 



Stable Unstable . 

Insurgency 

peace peace ** y 

War 


Figure 2: Full spectrum artillery 

Increasing violence 



Lethal field artillery options 
Nonlethal field artillery options 


systems and platforms for both the air 
defense and field artillery communities for 
use in full-spectrum operations. 

Any efforts to lobby further research into 
the full-spectrum artillery concept will not be 
easy, as current nonlethal weapons funding 
is historically negligible in comparison 
to the entire U.S. Department of Defense 
budget. According to the Department of 
Defense Office of Management and Budget, 
wartime spending continues to grow and has 
more than doubled from fiscal year 2001 
($316 billion) to fiscal year 2009 ($662 
billion). National Defense Magazine states 
that nonlethal weapons comprised only 
.010 percent (approximately $65 million) 
of the total 2009 budget. This is about the 
equivalent of one-twentieth of a B2 Bomber, 
half of a V-22 Osprey, about three AH-64D 
Apache helicopters or about a company of 
M-l tanks. 

As the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan 
approach the $1 trillion mark, one must 
accept that lobbying for funds will be 
difficult, and the program will be looked 
at with skepticism. Any added funds 
allocated for full-spectrum artillery either 
will contribute to an already mounting debt 
or come at the cost of other systems. 

uture fires. The future of the field artil¬ 
lery should not be a choice between two 
bleak options (demise and marginalization). 
There is another option, and with it, the 
possibilities are incredible. By choosing 
full-spectrum artillery, senior field artillery 
leaders will embark upon a journey into 
unexplored territory. Indirect fire nonlethal 
munitions will be an important step toward 

41 January-February 2010 • 


rethinking how armies deploy and fight 
wars. The 2004 Force Application Func¬ 
tional Concept states, “The shifting military 
environment is likely to see greater mixing 
of enemy combatants with noncombatants 
and there are likely to be situations where 
lethal force is undesirable. Increasing non¬ 
lethality widens the range of effect the 
joint force is able to achieve without using 
deadly force.” 

As the U.S. military becomes less 
engaged with conventional conflict and 
more with irregular warfare, a greater need 
will emerge for developing the appropriate 
skills and weapons. Tactical operations will 
become less about death and destruction and 
more about establishing security and rule 
of law and restoring government power. 

There remains little doubt that nonlethal 
weapons are an effective resource for those 
seeking to curb the effects of catastrophic 
damage associated with lethal munitions. 
Any weapon that reduces collateral damage 
to property or reduces the potential for 
killing noncombatants is beneficial in 
counterinsurgency. The difficulty lies in 
responding with just the right amount 
of force. Respond too lightly and risk 
unacceptable levels of military and civilian 
casualties and a loss of various forms of 
legitimacy associated with the mission. 
Respond with too much force and risk losing 
the moral high ground, public support and/ 
or support of the population. Full-spectrum 
artillery may provide some answers for these 
tactically and strategically complicated 
problems. 

This article concludes that full-spectrum 


artillery might prevent field artillery 
branch marginalization, curb catastrophic 
damage and potentially change the way 
the U.S. military approaches irregular 
warfare. Nonlethal fires can enhance the 
efforts of American forces in conflict and 
post-conflict environments and should be 
integrated into current military operations. 
If the U.S. integrates full-spectrum artillery 
into its operations, it is likely that our allies 
and other nations will follow. If the U.S. 
casts doubt on the efficacy of full-spectrum 
artillery in hostile operating environments, 
it is likely to impede the development and 
deployment of these weapons. To be sure, 
future fires should be as flexible, adaptable 
and agile as the Soldiers tasked with 
employing them. 


Major Richard L. Scott serves as the fire 
support officer for 21st Cavalry Brigade (Air 
Combat) at Fort Hood, Texas. His combat 
experience includes service as the chief 
engagement officer for the Multi-National 
Corps-lraq (III Corps) reconciliation and en¬ 
gagement cell; the Counter-Rocket, Artillery 
and Mortar task force integrator for XVIII 
Airborne Corps and Multi-National Corps- 
lraq; and as a current operations officer and 
battle captain for the Combined Joint Special 
Operations Task Force in Afghanistan. He 
commanded B Battery, 6th Battalion, 32nd 
Field Artillery (MLRS) at Fort Sill. He holds a 
master’s of arts in Security Studies (Stabili¬ 
zation and Reconstruction) from the Naval 
Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif. 


Fires 






















I e are always looking for photographs 
[that tell the stories of today’s 
field artillerymen and air defense 
artillerymen. Here are some guidelines you 
can follow to give us high enough resolution 
photographs in formats we can use. 

S hoot the picture at the highest 
resolution possible. Set your digital 
camera on the largest image size and the 
highest quality resolution the camera will 
allow. The highest resolution settings 
usually are called ‘high,’ ‘super fine’ or 
‘ultra-high.’ 

Cameras set at ‘standard’ or ‘basic quality’ 
can sometimes produce images only good 
enough for websites or Microsoft PowerPoint 
presentations, not publication in a magazine. 

Just because a photograph looks good on 
your computer screen does not mean it is 
printable in Fires. 

At Fires , we need high-resolution digital photographs. The 
photographs should be no smaller than 2 megapixels, which is 
approximately 4-by-6 inches at 300 pixels per inch or 16-by-24 
inches at 75 pixels per inch. For magazine covers and larger 
feature photographs, we prefer 6 megapixels or more, which is 
approximately 6.5-by-10 inches at 300 pixels per inch or 26-by-40 
inches at 75 pixels per inch. 

We can use tif, but we prefer photographs saved as a jpg. When 
saving a file as a jpg, choose a ‘quality’ setting of ‘maximum’ or 
‘10’ and the ‘format option’ of ‘baseline (standard).’ 

Depending on the compression ratio when the photograph is 
saved in jpg, the closed file size of the photograph will be 150 
kilobytes (KB) or more. 

To find out the closed file size, right click on the 
photograph file thumbnail, scroll to the bottom of the menu 
and select ‘properties.’ 

D o not manipulate the photograph. Images cannot be 
manipulated other than the industry standard for darkroom 
processing, such as dodge, bum, crop, etc., as per Department 
of Defense Directive 5040.5, “Alteration of DoD Imagery.” Do 
not crop, resize or try to edit the image in any way. This includes 
adjusting the brightness and contrast. We know what settings 
work best according to the specifications of our printer. We also 
have the latest professional digital image manipulation software. 
Let us take care of that. 

And, please, don’t try to increase the resolution of the small, 
low-resolution photograph you’ve shot. Shooting a one megapixel 
image and increasing the pixels per inch after you’ve shot it will 
not make the image clearer or more usable — it only will make 
the image larger. You are limited by the resolution setting at the 
time the photograph is taken. 

Do not place the photographs in Microsoft PowerPoint or Word 
and send them to us. They are unusable in those formats. 


SGT Jeremy D. Pitcher of the 145th Mobile Public Affairs Detachment captures images of Soldiers 
of 1 st Battalion, 37th Field Artillery, 3rd Striker Brigade Combat Team, 2nd Infantry Division, firing 
rounds to calibrate an M777 howitzer at Forward Operating Base Warhorse, Diyala province, Iraq, 
Dec. 8, 2009. (Photo courtesy of Joint Combat Camera Center Iraq) 


S end us the digital photograph. Following the first two steps 
may result in a large file for each photograph. 

Do not send more than 20 megabytes per email. You can send 
several photographs in multiple emails. Include caption information 
(when, where and who’s doing what—including each person’s rank, 
full name and unit) for each photograph attached and the title/name 
of the associated article/author. Also include the photographer’s 
full name, rank and unit for credit in the magazine. 

This information can be embedded in the photograph properties 
or sent as a separate text document. To embed information in the 
photograph properties, right click on the photograph’s icon; scroll 
down and select ‘properties;’ click on the ‘summary’ tab; type the 
information in the ‘summary’ window; click ‘apply’ and close the 
‘properties ’ window. Caution: unless you are using Adobe Photoshop 
software to embed information, only the information typed in the 
‘ summary ’ window that is visible when you first open the ‘ summary’ 
screen (without scrolling down) will be saved. 

You also can mail your photographs. We accept photographs saved 
on either a CD or DVD. 

All submissions become the property of the magazine and cannot 
be returned. 

I agazine information. If you have questions about shooting 
digital photographs, contact the Fires staff at DSN 639- 
5121/6806 or commercial 580-442-5121/6806. Our email is 
firesbulletin@conus.army.mil. 

Our mailing address is Fires, P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, Oklahoma 
73503-0311. If you want to overnight your photographs to us, the 
address is Building 758, Room 7, McNair Road, Fort Sill, Oklahoma 
73503-5600. 

F ires Bulletin photo contest. This edition contains the winners 
of the Fires Bulletin 2009 Photo Contest beginning on page 
49. Rules for the Fires Bulletin 2010 Photo Contest can be found 
on page 56 of this edition. 


M’ 


GUIDE 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 42 









□ 

□ 



By LTC John C. Hale 


“Fires brigades have become the Army s ‘utility in -fielders 'and 
force providers of choice for those missions because of their func¬ 
tional adaptability and multi-functional capability. ” 

Samuel R. White 


L ieutenant Colonel (Retired) John A. Nagl in his book Learning 
to Eat Soup with a Knife describes the complexity and difficulty 
in adapting a conventional army to combat an insurgency. A 
military also must not forget its fundamental capabilities and doc¬ 
trine. A historical assessment of how the U.S. Army is employing 
field artillery and Fires brigades in Iraq and Afghanistan is a study 
in how the Army has forgotten its fundamental doctrinal principles. 
Fighting our current wars based on limited counterinsurgency and 
stability doctrine and ignoring Army and joint operations doctrine, 
fails to use all tools available to combat our current threat. It also 
highlights that the Army is not applying a holistic approach to 
combat operations and bridging the gap between counterinsurgency 
operations and high intensity conflict. 

An evaluation of the employment of Fires brigades shows the 
potential for increases in field artillery competencies in 
both counterinsurgency operations and high intensity 
conflict, and increasing the lethal and nonlethal ef¬ 
fects in the current conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan. 

The Army may solve the conundrum of How to 
Eat Soup with a Knife by simply using the 


spoon. Through looking at Army and joint 
doctrine, the capabilities of Fires brigades 
and applying doctrine and capabilities to the conflict, 
the Army could increase its effectiveness throughout ti 
spectrum of conflict. 

Envision an Army unit capable of operating in a 
joint and combined environment, capable of synchro¬ 
nizing lethal and nonlethal fires, while conducting | 


full-spectrum operations, possessing the organic 
capability to support attached forces and with 
a span of control equivalent to that of XVIII 
Airborne Corps during Desert Storm (“The 
Fires Brigade — a critical capability in an era 
of persistent conflict,” awhite paper by Samuel 
R. White). The mission of a Fires brigade is 
to plan, synchronize, and employ joint and 
combined fires in support of a division, corps 
or combined joint task force. These missions 
previously were conducted by divisional ar¬ 
tillery and corps artillery and now fall to the 
Fires brigade {FieldManual3-09.23Modular 
Fires Battalions). A Fires brigade is a multi¬ 
functional headquarters capable of being a 
force Fires headquarters or combined arms 
headquarters (“Fires Brigade,” White). 

The Fires brigade can conduct full- 
spectrum operations with attached air 







Soldiers of 2nd Platoon, B Battery, 1-321st Airborne Field 
Artillery Regiment, fire a round during a calibration mission at 
Forward Operating Base Clark, Afghanistan, Nov. 28, 2009. 

(Photo courtesy of 1 -321 st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment) 


ties and then protect our forces.”’Caldwell’s statement is not di¬ 
rected at only high intensity conflict, but full-spectrum operations, 
including counterinsurgency operations. With an understanding 
of Fires brigades capabilities, senior leaders can realize how op¬ 
erations can be enhanced through their employment Army and 
joint doctrine form the foundation of employment for all military 
units. The emerging doctrine of Fires brigades’ employment is not 
well known, nor is their organization and capabilities. A comparison 
of doctrinal references shows where efficiencies can be gained by 
fully employing Fires brigades on the battlefield, as opposed to their 
current piecemeal employment throughout a theater of operation. 
The current practice of deploying only pieces and parts of a Fires 
brigade results in the loss of an entire brigade for 18 to 24 months 
without maximizing the capabilities of the entire brigade or fully 
using its true capabilities to integrate and synchronize Fires. (See 
Field Manual 1-02 Operational Terms and Graphics). The current 
cycle of deployments for many units is one year on and one year 
off. Deploying only one-third of a unit during this cycle means the 
entire unit is unavailable for deployment over a two year period. 
The employment of forces in accordance with doctrine may help 
commanders mitigate risk while maximizing the Fires brigades’ 
capabilities regarding Fires employment. 

Before assuming his duties as commanding general of Inter¬ 
national Security Assistance Force, GEN Stanley A. McChrystal 
stated an intention of his command in Afghanistan is to “reduce 
civilian casualties in Afghanistan.” The major cause of civilian 
casualties in Afghanistan is the delivery of munitions by aircraft 
(“NATO airstrike in Afghanistan kills up to 90” an Associated Press 
story by Frank Jordans). International Security Assistance Force 
is a multinational force operating at the combined joint task force 
level in Afghanistan, encompassing both the strategic and opera¬ 
tional levels of war, yet it has no dedicated Fire support echelon 
supporting operations across the country. International Security 
Assistance Force is not a standing corps or theater headquarters, 
adding to the difficulty of integrating fires into operations and the 
command and control of various Fire support assets in a multina¬ 
tional environment (“Integration of Lethal and Nonlethal Fires: the 
future of the joint fires cell,” monograph by Dewey A. Granger). 

The field artillery as a branch has been described as a “dead 
branch walking” and in search of its role for eight years (King 
and I, McFarland). A way ahead is for Fires brigades 
to educate the Army and joint force on their full- 
spectrum nature and on the capabilities they 
bring to any battlefield across the spectrum 


or ground maneuver forces. 
It can operate across the full 
spectrum of conflict, including 
stability operations, security 
force operations and foreign 
internal defense. The Fires bri¬ 
gade has several key elements 
that give it the flexibility to receive 
assigned or attached units, including 
an organic brigade support battalion and 
signal company. Transforming field artillery 
brigades to Fires brigades increased both the size 
and capability of the headquarters. Fires brigade headquarters are 
organized with lethal effects, fire control, information operations, 
air support, air defense airspace management and topographic sec¬ 
tions. These sections have the full suite of Army Battle Command 
Systems enabling the brigade to have a span of control that 
is limited only by the density of forces assigned or attached 
{Field Manual 3-09.23 Modular Fires Battalions). 

Fires brigades have seen their missions and core compe¬ 
tencies decay following Army transformation into a brigade¬ 
centric organization (“The King and I: the impending crisis 
in field artillery’s ability to provide fire support to maneuver 
commanders,” a white paper by Sean MacFarland, et al). This 
is due, in part, to the nature of counterinsurgency warfare and 
to Fires brigades’ use in a myriad of secondary missions. There 
is a belief in the military that artillery units are not suited to 
counterinsurgency warfare (See “Field Artillery in Military 
Operations Other Than War: An Overview of the U.S. Experi¬ 
ence,” a paper by Lawerence Yates). Fires brigades are being 
deployed piecemeal, without using their true full-spectrum 
capabilities (see “Fires Brigade,” White). This has resulted 
in the fragmentation of unit command and control and the 
atrophy of core field artillery skills and Fires brigade 
headquarters’ competency in full-spectrum operations. 

LTG William B. Caldwell stated, at the 2008 Fires 
Seminar at Fort Sill, Okla., “As former Army Chief 
of Staff General Shinseki once said, ‘Warfighting is 
about fires and maneuver — fires enable maneuver; 
maneuver enables fires. You can’t have a discussion 
on just one of those principles. Close supporting 
indirect fires destroy the 
enemy, suppress the 
a enemy’s capabili- 





























of conflict. The solution for increasing effectiveness of troops in 
the field, economical use of forces available and enhancement of 
effective unit employment is to deploy Fires brigades as complete 
units. This option brings to bear the counterinsurgency operations 
capabilities of a brigade and the lethal and nonlethal integration 
needed during any full-spectrum engagement. 

Fires in Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. 
The employment of Fires brigades and corps/division fire support 
operations in Iraq and Afghanistan highlight both the versatility 
of Fires brigades and identify the need for fire support augmen¬ 
tation at the corps and division levels. The employment of 18th 
Field Artillery Brigade, 41st Fires Brigade and 17th Fires Bri¬ 
gade in Iraq, highlight the Fires brigades’ capabilities to operate 
as a maneuver headquarters or conduct security operations in a 
counterinsurgency operations environment. No Fires brigade as 
a whole has deployed to Afghanistan; however the 25 th Infantry 
Division Artillery was employed as a maneuver headquarters in 
Afghanistan. The 18 th Fires Brigade currently has multiple units 
deployed to Afghanistan but without its brigade headquarters, 
brigade support battalion and signal company. Corps and division 
fire support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan show weaknesses in 
fire support structure specifically related to fire control. Case stud¬ 
ies of Fires brigade employment in Afghanistan and Iraq identify 
considerations for the employing Fires brigades and some best 
practices for the augmentation and support of corps and division 
operations (monograph by Dewey A. Granger). 

The deployment of 17th Fires Brigade and 41st Fires Brigade 
highlight several fundamental considerations when employing a 


Fires brigade for full-spectrum operations. First is the difference 
in structure between a Fires brigade and a brigade combat team. 
Fires brigades lack several key enablers organic to a brigade combat 
team, specifically the military intelligence and engineer companies. 
Second, the staff structure of a brigade combat team is more robust 
than a Fires brigade. Engineer and civil affairs sections are not 
authorized in a Fires brigade headquarters. Third, the deployment 
of a Fires brigade should include its signal company and brigade 
support battalion. Omitting these units leaves the Fires Brigade 
Headquarters unable to communicate or support assigned and at¬ 
tached units. Using the principals of war as evaluation criteria, the 
deployment of 17th Fires Brigade and 41st Fires Brigade meet the 
criteria of maneuver, unity of command and economy of force. The 
employment of field artillery units as maneuver forces integrates 
fires and maneuver within the brigade’s area of operations. The 
inclusion of attached and assigned units in the deployment meets 
the unity of command. Economy of force is met by maximizing the 
employment of all brigade units in its mission. All assigned brigade 
forces were committed in support of the brigade’s mission with no 
forces underutilized. 

The 18th Fires Brigade Headquarters deployed a small detach¬ 
ment from the brigade headquarters to support Multi-National 
Division-Baghdad, in addition to supporting Afghanistan with 
two batteries of 155-mm howitzer (3rd Battalion, 321st Field 
Artillery), a High-Mobility Artillery Rocket System battery (3-27 
Field Artillery) and a target acquisition battery (D Company, 26th 
Field Artillery), all splitting command and control of the brigade. 
The brigade headquarter detachment’s mission was ostensibly to 



Soldiers of 2nd Platoon, C Battery, 1-321st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, fire a round from their M777A2 howitzer in Afghanistan in 2009. (Photo 

courtesy of LTC John C. Hale) 


45 January-February 2010 • 


Fires 











“The irony of the need for Fires brigades is that 
they are not being utilized fully, yet commanders 
and leaders believe they are fully committed.” 


perform a force field artillery function. During a pre-deployment 
site survey, the mission became providing augmentees to various 
division staff sections. The largest element in the mission was to 
augment the division’s Iraqi security force cell. The headquarters 
(minus) mission was staff augmentation of seven division staff 
elements. The personnel deployed on this mission were under 
the command and control of their various sections and not linked 
together in any way. The deployment of 40 personnel from 18th 
Fires Brigade Headquarters, out of a deployable strength of 120 
personnel used 35 percent of the headquarters. The remaining 65 
percent was, therefore, combat ineffective and unable to deploy in 
support of other required missions. 

The employment of 18th Fires Brigade in Operation Enduring 
Freedom identifies a common problem of how Fires brigades are 
being deployed throughout the Central Command area of respon¬ 
sibility. It was deployed in piecemeal fashion and fails to meet the 
evaluation criteria for maneuver, economy of force and unity of 
command. Certain elements of the brigade were used to their maxi¬ 
mum capability (3-27 Field Artillery and D/26th Field Artillery), 
but the brigade as a whole was underutilized and did not maximize 
its ability to support maneuver through fires. The deployment of 
18th Fires Brigade fails maneuver by lacking an integration of 
maneuver and fire support in its area of operations. 

The employment of specific units within the brigade shows a 
lack of synergy in this synchronization, specifically having the bri¬ 
gade headquarters augmenting a division staff with no significant 
fire support functions and the lack of a synchronizing element for 
fires in Afghanistan theater of operations. Economy of force was 
not met through the lack of employment of all combat power avail¬ 
able. The brigade headquarters, brigade support battalion and signal 
company were not employed to maximize their capabilities and used 
during the deployment. Although several brigade elements were 
deployed, 60 percent of the brigade remained in the U.S., leaving 
its capabilities unused and unable to function fully as a unit. Unity 
of command was not met through the piecemeal employment of 
the brigade across two theaters with no central focus. The brigade’s 
units were dispersed to perform a myriad of tasks without a central 
focus for the brigade’s main effort. The units and individual Soldiers 
were used to augment deployed units, dispersing their effectiveness 
and lacking a common purpose and mission. The deployment did 
not engage the brigade’s combat power toward any common ob¬ 
jective and left the brigade working for many commanders across 
two theater of operations. 

The organization of division artillery and a modem F ires brigade 
is significantly different. The 25th Infantry Division’s division artil¬ 
lery performed a full-spectmm maneuver mission in Afghanistan 
despite these differences. The deployment of the division artillery 
as a full-spectmm force met the evaluation criteria of maneuver, 
economy of force and unity of command. It operated as a maneu¬ 
ver headquarters, integrating fires and maneuver across its area of 
operations, using its attached force while providing fire support 
functions and fire support augmentation to the division. 

The division artillery managed not only a maneuver mission, 
but fire support coordination across the division’s area of opera¬ 
tions. The deployment and mission met the definition of economy 
of force by maximizing the full spectmm capabilities of the head¬ 


quarters, using all headquarters assets to their full capabilities and 
highlighting the flexibility of field artillery headquarters to perform 
both maneuver and fire support tasks simultaneously. Unity of com¬ 
mand was met by the employment of the headquarters as the focus 
of development and security within the division area of operation, 
controlling all provincial reconstruction teams and synchronizing 
development activities in the division area. 

Colonel Dewey A. Granger suggested several solutions to 
the future of the joint fires cell and the coordination of lethal and 
nonlethal fires. Noticeably absent from his recommendations are 
the capabilities and employment of a Fires brigade to enhance the 
coordination of joint fires in an area of operation. The irony of the 
need for Fires brigades is that they are not being utilized fully, yet 
commanders and leaders believe they are fully committed. The de¬ 
mand for Fires brigades COL Granger referenced was in fact only 
fires augmentation cells, not complete Fires brigades (Integration, 
Granger). 

COL Granger identifies three case studies in his monograph re¬ 
garding corps and division fires and joint effects cells in Operations 
Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. His first is Combined-Joint 
Task Force-76 in 2004 to 2005. He highlights the need for the corps 
artillery headquarters to augment the joint fires and effects coordi¬ 
nation cell. He also identifies the nature of the joint fires and effects 
coordination cell as “an ad hoc organization designed to meet the 
requirements of the emerging environment because doctrinal fires 
cell manning did not support the current full-spectrum environ¬ 
ment.” His second is III Corps Headquarters in 2006 to 2008. One 
of the functions identified to be performed during this deployment 
was force field artillery headquarters, a function doctrinally to be 
performed by a Fires brigade. 

The creation of the III Corps joint fires cell for this deployment 
was possible through the use of subordinate and garrison units’ 
augmentation of the corps staff. The significance of this deploy¬ 
ment and the creation of the III Corps structure is “the necessity 
to relook the (III) Corps Headquarters design in support of future 
operations.” The third operational example was 10th Mountain 
Division serving as Combined-Joint Task Force-76 in Afghanistan. 
The organization and manning at the division level regarding fire 
support was very limited. Limitations on the division’s ability to 
conduct counter fire, targeting, fire planning and the management of 
fires assets required the use of augmentees. 10th Mountain Division 
identified the need for a Fires brigade to support its operations, but 
was unable to secure one for the Afghan theater due to the “high 
demand for Fires brigades in Iraq (Integration, Granger).” 

The Fires brigade and corps and division artillery case studies 
review the missions Fires brigades are conducting in Iraq and Af¬ 
ghanistan and could result in gaining additional efficiencies in both 
the Army’s employment of Fires brigades and the mitigation of the 
weakness in current corps and division fire support capabilities (In¬ 
tegration, Granger). The Fires brigade modular organization allows 
it to perform a myriad of tasks in addition to its primary mission of 
synchronizing lethal and nonlethal fires. Mission profiles suitable 
for a complete Fires brigade include a field artillery headquarters or 
a full spectrum maneuver headquarters. The organization of Fires 
brigades is virtually identical in command and control capability to 
that of a brigade combat team. Through their combat experience in 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 46 



Iraq and Afghanistan, field artillery Soldiers are far more capable of 
conducting full-spectrum operations than ever before (Fires Brigade, 
White). However, the combination of both technical fires skills and 
the practical counterinsurgency skills found in Fires brigades are be¬ 
ing underutilized and underemployed for both operational and tactical 
commanders. The conclusions drawn from the historical examples of 
the deployment of Fires brigades and corps and division headquarters 
highlight the positive and negative employment of Fires brigades and 
the requirement for augmentation of deployed corps and division 
headquarters. 

onclusions and recommendations. The Army underwent many 
significant changes in the past decade, including shifts in doc¬ 
trine, force structure and missions. Army doctrine in 2001 adopted 
full-spectrum operations as the primary concept of force employment. 
The transformation of Army forces from a division-centric force to 
a modular brigade-centric force occurred during just six years. The 
missions of many units in the Army have evolved due to the nature 
of the ongoing conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan. Units now fulfill 
nonstandard missions, performing tasks they were neither designed 
nor trained to accomplish. 

These three changes would be difficult to accomplish in peacetime, 
yet the Army adapted and accomplished all three during an era of 
persistent conflict. Despite the successes of doctrinal changes, trans¬ 
formation and evolving missions, several areas for improvement are 
clear after evaluating the employment of Fires brigades in Operations 
Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. These areas consist of Army 
and joint doctrine, field artillery doctrine, force structure for the Fires 

47 January-February 2010 • Fires 


brigades, best practices for employment of Fires brigades and 
future International Security Assistance Force operations in 
Afghanistan. 

The deployments of Fires brigades have not mitigated the 
weaknesses in the corps and division fire support structures to 
maximize the effectiveness of fires integration at the operational 
level. Weaknesses identified through multiple deployments of 
corps and division headquarters in both Operations Iraqi Free¬ 
dom and Enduring Freedom have been identified and require 
redress. An assessment of Fires brigade employment is not 
complete without a review of the employment of corps and di¬ 
vision headquarters in Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring 
Freedom — the headquarters Fires brigades were designed to 
support. 

Army and joint counterinsurgency operations and stability 
doctrine should be reevaluated with respect to fires integration 
and synchronization and the role of the Fires brigade at the tac¬ 
tical and operational levels. Specific disconnects between the 
Army’s concept of full-spectrum operations and the integration 
of fires exists. Counterinsurgency and stability doctrine do not 
nest with the concept of full-spectrum operations for the Army. 
Field Manual 3-24 Counterinsurgency fails to reference the 
importance of synchronization of lethal and nonlethal fires in 
counterinsurgency operations and highlights only lethal opera¬ 
tions for fires. Joint doctrine has a similar flaw. Although Joint 
Publication 3.0 Joint Operations highlights the integration of fires 
across the spectrum of conflict, fires is noticeably absent in joint 











doctrine for stability and foreign internal defense doctrine. Field 
Manual 3.09-24 The Fires Brigade states the Fires brigade is the 
provider of all functions previously held by the corps artillery and 
division artillery at both the tactical and operational levels. Yet these 
principles are not consistent across both Army and joint doctrine. 
Joint doctrine must address the role of Army Fires brigades at the 
operational level because it is the only organization that performs 
the fires function at the Joint Forces Command level. 

Fort Sill must educate the force on Fires brigade capabilities. 
The Field Artillery Campaign Plan must include an information 
operations component for Fires brigades. As the Fires brigade 
proponent, Fort Sill is positioned best to educate through the Army 
school system and to educate both field commanders and Army 
leaders that Fires brigades are capable of conducting full-spectrum 
operations. Field artillery tactical doctrine manuals must be final¬ 
ized following transformation as well. 

Many field artillery doctrinal publications are still in draft form 
on the Fires Knowledge Network through the Army Knowledge 
Network portal. These manuals span the entire spectrum of fires 
tactical units from battery operations to Fires brigade operations. 
This is also true for fire support doctrinal references at the division 
and corps level. 

The lack of updated doctrinal references creates a significant 
gap in knowledge for leaders and the force on the employment of 
fires while conducting full-spectrum operations. Doctrine is not 
a panacea or a single source of 
knowledge, but it does provide 
the foundation for education 
in the force regarding mission 
and capabilities with the Army. 

Doctrine also provides a point 
of departure for the application 
of forces in full-spectrum op¬ 
erations and counterinsurgency 
operations specifically. 

The force structure of Fires 
brigades should be enhanced for 
conducting full-spectrum opera¬ 
tions as defined in Field Manual 3.0 Operations. The authorization 
of several additional positions in the brigade headquarters would 
benefit full-spectrum operations and enhance the core missions 
of Fires brigades in the synchronization of lethal and nonlethal 
fires. Military intelligence capability should be increased to allow 
enhanced targeting for both lethal and nonlethal fires. Adding a 
civil affairs officer and engineer officer would enhance a brigade’s 
ability to synchronize fires, both lethal and nonlethal. These minor 
force structure changes would enhance a Fires brigade’s ability to 
perform full-spectrum operations and enhance the brigade’s capa¬ 
bility to perform both traditional emerging role as a full-spectrum 
force. 

The 41st Fires Brigade and 17th Fires Brigade deployments 
provide models for employing Fires brigades. Fires brigades are 
capable of full-spectrum operations, yet are being used as force 
providers, while not using their full capabilities. Business rules 
for employing Fires brigades should be established to maximize 
their employment in any environment. A recommendation for these 
rules would be to evaluate Fires brigades holistically, bringing all 
their forces to bear versus the deployment on only certain units 
while leaving other units in the U.S. The major consideration for 
deploying a Fires brigade for full-spectrum operations is the lack 
of several key elements/units present in a brigade combat team. 
Deploying modular Fires brigades supports current operations 
and the sustainment of full-spectrum capability for Fires brigades 


through the use of all combat power elements. Deployment of 
complete Fires brigades allows the full spectrum of by functions 
to be performed at the brigade. The sustainment and command 
and control competencies are as important to Fires brigades as the 
delivery of fires. 

International Security Assistance Force is standing up an op¬ 
erational-level headquarters, the International Security Assistance 
Force Joint Command. This command should consider the em¬ 
ployment of a Fires brigade at either its operational level or at the 
division tactical level. Both levels of command could benefit from 
a Fires brigade’s capabilities. Expansion of International Security 
Assistance Force operations — including forming an International 
Security Assistance Force Joint Command—and a possible increase 
in forces for Afghanistan show an emerging opportunity for Fires 
brigades to be employed in a manner similar to Iraq, conducting 
full-spectrum operations; allowing commanders to ‘Eat soup with 
a spoon.’ 

GEN McChrystal may determine that a Fires brigade is neces¬ 
sary to coordinate and deconflict the increasingly complex operat¬ 
ing environment of Afghanistan. A Fires brigade is an option for 
an increase in forces for International Security Assistance Force, 
putting increased combat capability into the theater and increasing 
coalition forces’ capabilities to command and control these forces. 
Deploying a Fires brigade would give International Security Assis¬ 
tance Force a dedicated command to coordinate, synchronize and 

deconflict fires at the operational 
level. 

Implementing these recom¬ 
mendations will increase the 
effective employment of Fires 
brigades in full-spectrum op¬ 
erations. Revising Army and 
joint doctrine related to fires in 
counterinsurgency and stability 
operations would nest with fires 
employment articulated in Field 
Manual 3-0 and Joint Publica¬ 
tion 3-0. Field artillery doctrine 
must be published to aid commanders on the employment of fires 
units, specifically Fires brigades. 

Force structure for the Fires brigades should be enhanced to in¬ 
crease their capabilities to integrate lethal and nonlethal fires. Best 
practices for deployment of Fires brigades should be established to 
maximize their employment and capabilities. International Security 
Assistance Force should request a Fires brigade in Afghanistan to 
synchronize fires better in that complex environment. Adoption of 
these recommendations enhances both the full-spectrum capabili¬ 
ties of Fires brigades and the ability of commanders to accomplish 
their missions. 


Lieutenant Colonel John C. Hale, Field Artillery, is a fellow at the Ad¬ 
vanced Military Studies Program at Fort Leavenworth, Kan. His last 
assignment was brigade S-3,18th Fires Brigade, Fort Bragg, N.C. He 
has served as a field artillery and psychological operations officer at 
the platoon through brigade/group levels. He has deployed to both 
Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom, serving in plan¬ 
ning and leadership positions in Combined Joint Task Force-180, and 
Multi-National Corps-lraq. He also served in Operation Iraqi Freedom 
as battalion executive officer for 3rd Battalion, 321st Field Artillery 
at Forward Operating Base Abu Gharib. His next assignment is divi¬ 
sion G5, 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault), and he will deploy to 
Afghanistan in 2010. 


“Force structure for the 
Fires brigades should be 
enhanced to increase their 
capabilities to integrate 
lethal and nonlethal fires.” 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 48 



RTr*i [MMTr i fftWi HTTrmn rHTnrr^ft 1st Place Combat/Stability Operatians 



SPC Graylan Luchey of P Platoon, Headquarters and 
Headquarters Battery, 1st Battalion, 7th Field Artillery, 2/1 
Infantry Division, prepares to enter an apartment near Camp 
Victory, Iraq, Nov. 18, 2008. (Photo by CPT Mark Peek, U.s. Army) 







2nd Place Combat/Stability Operations 



Soldiers of 5th Section, A Battery, 2-8 Field Artillery, fire their M777A2 howitzer at Forward Operating 
Base Warhorse, Diyala, Iraq, Apr. 1 5, 2009. (Photo by MSG Troy J. Bouffard (Retired), U.S. Army) 








3rd Place Combat/Stability Operations 



Bravo Battery, 4-25 Field Artillery, 3/10 Brigade Combat Team, conducts an air assault mission out of 
Forward Operating Base Airborne, Wardak, Afghanistan, Feb. 2009. (Photo by maj Scott Ringwaid, u.s. Army) 







During a battalion field training exercise, SSG Daniel Carr of A Battery, 3rd Battalion, 6th Field Artillery, 10th 
Mountain Division, 1st Brigade Combat Team, collects his thoughts and sets his squad before conducting 
searches on a nearby building, June 3, 2009. (Photo by pfc Biair Neeiands, u.s. Army) 

























Outside of his conventional artillery training, SPC Carlos Garcia of A Battery, 
3rd Battalion, 6th Field Artillery, 10th Mountain Division, 1st Brigade Combat 
Team, peeks through a wall to pull security during the battalion’s field training 
exercise, June 3, 2009. (Photo by PFC Blair Neelands, U.S. Army) 




























SPC Carlos Garcia of A Battery, 3rd Battalion, 6th Field Artillery, 10th 
Mountain Division, 1 st Brigade Combat Team, prepares to install a fuse 
on an artillery round during a combined live-fire exercise at Fort Drum, 
N.Y., June 3. 2009 (Photo by SSG John P. Queen, U.S. Army) 























T his annual contest obtains high-quality photos that tell the story of 
today’s U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps field artillery and U.S. Army 
air defense artillery units and Soldiers conducting training or engaged 
in full-spectrum operations. These photos may appear as a cover or other 
shots for future editions of the magazine, as part of the Fires Center of 
Excellence poster series or in other esprit de corps or strategic communications 
projects. The competition is open to any military or civilian, amateur or professional 
photographer. 

T wo Prize Categories - Six prizes. A first place prize of $500, second place prize of $200 and third place 
prize of $75 will be awarded in each of two categories: (1) training for combat/stability operations and (2) 
actual combat/stability operations. Winning photos will be posted on the magazine’s website at sill-www.army.mil/ 
firesbulletin. 


Fires Bulletin 2010 
Photo Contest 


Rules. Photos not meeting the following rules will be disqualified: 

•Only photos taken between 1 July 2009 and 30 June 2010 are eligible. 

•A maximum of three photos per photographer can be submitted. 

•Photos can be entered only by the photographer who took them. 

•Each entry must meet the requirements of the specified category and be 
received by the magazine no later than 1 August 2010. 

•Each photo must be a color jpg or tif image with little or no 
compression. 

•Each photo must be taken with a camera with a resolution of five megapixels 
or better on its highest resolution setting (jpg image file size should be 
greater than two megabytes in most cases). Photos cannot be manipulated 
to increase resolution. 

•Images cannot be manipulated other than the industry standard for 
darkroom processing, such as dodge, burn, crop, etc., as per Department 
of Defense Directive 5040.5, “Alteration of DoD Imagery.” 

•Each submission must include the photographer’s name, unit/affiliation, 
email address, mailing address and phone number. Caption information 
must include who, from what unit, is doing what, where and when (date) 
in the photograph — for example: “SGT Joe B. Smith, C/2-20 Fires, 4th 
Fires Brigade, fires the M777A2 howitzer during unit qualification training 
at Fort Hood, Texas, Jan. 5,2010.” 

•Photos cannot be copyrighted or owned by an agency/publication; the image 
must be cleared for release and publishable in the magazine. 


Judging. A panel of editors, professional photographers and military 
personnel will select winners. The judges’ decisions will be final. Judging 
criteria is as follows. 

•Power and impact of the message that the image conveys 
•Composition, clarity, lighting, focus and exposure of the image 
•Creativity and originality 

Submissions. All submissions may be used at the discretion of the 
magazine staff. Photos can be sent by email or compact disk (CD). CDs will 
not be returned. 

•Email image files (one image per email) to Fires Bulletin atfiresbulletin@ 
conus.army.mil. Mark the subject line as “2010 Photo Contest/Photo #1 
(2 or 3), Entry Category - Your Last Name.” 

•Each entrant must email his or her rank, full name, mailing address 
(permanent preferred), phone number and a secondary email address 
for contact purposes. 

•Mail CDs to ATTN: Photo Contest at P.0. Box 3331 1; Fort Sill, OK 73503- 
0311. 

•FedEx or UPS submissions to Building 758, Room 7, McNair Road, Fort Sill, 
OK 73503-5600. 

Questions. Contactthe Fires staff by email atfiresbulletin@conus.army. 
mil or by phone at DSN 639-5121/6806 or 580-442-5121/6806. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 56 


Eg transform 




By Majors Jason D. Adams, 
Deric Holbrook and 
Seth Knazovich 


T oday’s special operations forces joint 
fires element program was born out 
of successful rotations of dedicated 
field artillery captains and sergeants 
first class to fill joint manning document 
positions. Early in Operation Enduring 
Freedom, special operations task forces 
recognized the need for resident expertise 
within their headquarters to coordinate 
and integrate fire support. Successes in 
Operation Enduring Freedom led planners 
for Operation Iraqi Freedom to take on a 
similar staffing approach in their operations 
for the combined joint special operations 
task forces in Iraq. 

In 2003, Combined Joint Special 
Operations TaskForces-Westhadresounding 
success integrating joint fires because of 
their joint fires element. These successes 
prompted coordination between the U.S. 
Army Forces Command, U.S. Army John 
F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and 
School, Fort Bragg, N.C., and the field 
artillery branch at Human Resources 
Command, Alexandria, Va. The result was 
a formal proof of concept that started the 
test bed at the 7th Special Forces Group 
(Airborne) in October 2004. 

election. In late 2004, the field artillery 
selected three captains and a major 
to help establish a new special operations 
forces joint fires element in the 7th Special 


Forces Group (Airborne). The addition of 
these four officers was the final complement 
of personnel to the three sergeants first 
class and a chief warrant officer three, who 
already had deployed as part of 7th Group’s 
inaugural rotation to Afghanistan and had 
gained invaluable experience that would 
shape the way the joint fires element would 
support special forces groups. 

To prepare them for their assignments 
to 7th Group, the field artillery required 
the officers to attend the Joint Firepower 
Course at Nellis Air Force Base, Nev., and 
the Joint Air Tasking Order Process Course 
at Hurlburt Field, Fla, in an effort to get the 
joint fires element started correctly. 

pedal operations forces joint fires 
element formal education. The Joint 
Firepower Course is a two-week course 
that teaches joint concepts, procedures 
and techniques for integrating air and 
surface weapons from all services. The 
course focuses on planning at the battalion 
through corps levels and coordinating 
joint air-ground operations within the 
Theater Air Control System and the Army 
Air-Ground System. The course places 
additional emphasis on joint combat 
airspace management and Army airspace 
command and control, which are crucial 
for special operations forces joint fires 
element operations. 

The Joint Air Tasking Order Process 
Course is a three-week course that 
focuses on specific battle management 
functions to integrate air and surface 
resources into joint combat operations. 


The course provides an understanding of 
coordination considerations performed 
primarily at the joint air operations center 
and associated joint and component 
facilities. Understanding the air tasking 
order process and how it supports the ground 
forces enables the fire support officer and 
NCO to use the system better to aid the 
commander and his staff during mission 
planning. 

The Special Operations Terminal Attack 
Controller Course is a three-week course 
at Yuma Proving Grounds, Ariz., and is 
taught by the U.S. Army John F. Kennedy 
Special Warfare Center and School. This 
course trains personnel in the tactical and 
technical skills, and operational procedures 
necessary to effectively utilize rotary-wing 
and fixed-wing close air support assets 
in support of special operations forces 
missions. Personnel train on the capabilities 
and limitations of U.S. aircraft, munitions, 
lasers and ground marking equipment, and 
night and urban close air support. Upon 
completion of all required training, that 
includes a minimum of 12 live aircraft 
controls, the student earns the designation 
of joint terminal attack controller. 

ire support mission. The mission 
of the special operations forces joint 
fires element is similar to a fire support 
element at the brigade and division levels. 
The special operations forces joint fires 
element coordinates primarily with all forms 
of joint fire support into special operations 
forces operations. This includes, but is 
not limited to, close air support; rotary- 




57 January-February 2010 • 


Fires 


Photo courtesy of U.S. Army John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School Public Affairs 



















wing attack aviation; U.S. and coalition 
forces conventional ground-based fires, 
radars, target acquisition and electronic 
warfare assets; nonstandard intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance; platform 
integration; naval surface fire support; and 
terminal guidance operations. In addition 
to coordinating and synchronizing fires, the 
special operations forces joint fires element 
is the primary agent for training fire support 
to Special Forces personnel. 

arrison training. Fire support 
training in garrison is another demand 
competing with all of the other tasks and 
missions that special forces battalions or 
companies have to address. It is essential 
that the joint fires element incorporates fire 
support training at whatever level possible to 
maximize exposure. Training opportunities 
for fire support range from classes on close 
air support, call for fire, and incorporating 
artillery and mortar live fire into company 
level direct action missions. 

Each of the battalion’s 18 Special 
Forces Operational Detachments-Alpha 
will require introductory and continuing 
training on fire support tasks. Since 18- 
series personnel come from a variety of 
backgrounds within the Army, the level of 
proficiency and familiarity with fire support 
can vary greatly between teams. 

The limiting factor in all training is time. 
It is the most valuable resource and should 
not be squandered. Fire support training 
must be incorporated for the battalion and 
group into operations as much as possible. 
Each battalion will have ongoing missions, 
both stateside and within the regionally 
aligned countries, for that specific group. 
Along with those missions are deployments 
to the two maj or theaters of Afghanistan and 
Iraq. 

outhern Command. 7th Special 
Forces Group (Airborne) has worked 
with the Colombian military for many years. 
The addition of the special operations forces 
joint fires element has not only benefited 
the special forces groups, but also has 
enhanced the long-standing relationships 
with regional partners. For instance, the 
1st Battalion Joint Fires Element worked 
closely with elements of a Colombian 
special forces brigade. The brigade 
commander wanted his mortar platoon to 


train on fire support planning and mortar live 
fire; the task fell upon the shoulders of the 
joint fires element. After coordinating with 
the partnered Special Forces Operational 
Detachment-Alpha and Colombian army 
leadership, a program of instruction was 
developed and executed. The program more 
closely integrated the mortar platoon into 
fires planning for the platoon’s assigned 
mission. A live-fire exercise served as the 
capstone event. 

Another example of integrated training 
between the Special Forces Operational 
Detachments-Alpha and the Colombian 
military was a joint fires training exercise 
that 3rd Battalion conducted by in July 
2005, and involved the first AC-130 live 
fire training in Colombia. 

ombat fire support execution. 
Counterinsurgency operations in 
Afghanistan or Iraq require U.S. special 
forces to array themselves in many small 
firebases with their host nation partners 
across a large operational area. This 
dispersion, coupled with the small unit 
formations, in which special operations 
forces operate, increases their requirements 
for joint fire support assets. The special 
operations forces joint fires element 
helps special operations task forces plan, 
coordinate, synchronize and integrate this 
fire support into the special operations 
forces’ scheme of maneuver. 

One example of this was the coordination 
and joint planning that resulted in two 
CanadianM777,155-mmhowitzer sections 
being placed in direct support of the special 
operations task forces operating in southern 
Afghanistan for more than 30 days. U.S. 
special forces and an Afghan battalion 
established a temporary operating base in 
northern Kandahar to conduct long-range 
patrols across an area with little to no 
Coalition presence. U.S. special forces and 
Afghan forces were to operate outside of the 
habitual footprint of coalition ground-based 
fire support systems. The joint fires element 
coordinated with the Canadian task force 
headquarters to deliver the necessary indirect 
fire support. These howitzers provided both 
lethal and nonlethal fires to Operational 
Detachments-Alpha and Afghan forces. 
Daily, these howitzers engaged targets for 
U.S special forces and Afghan patrols. As 


the operation progressed, the firebase began 
to receive frequent mortar attacks, possibly 
due to the effectiveness of the Canadian 
howitzers. In response, the Canadian task 
force provided a lightweight countermortar 
radar. The radar allowed the Canadian fire 
direction center to translate point of origin 
data into fire missions quickly, resulting in 
an effective counterfire system. 

U.S. special forces elements also 
conducted operations in United Kingdom 
controlled provinces. When these teams 
made contact with enemy forces, they 
received support from both United Kingdom 
light howitzers and Guided Multiple-Rocket 
Launch Systems. The responsibility to 
integrate these assets also fell on the joint 
fires element. Because of routine face-to- 
face and telephonic coordination by the joint 
fires elements with the United Kingdom task 
force, timely deconfliction of fires through 
layers of command and control was possible. 
This resulted in the rapid clearance of fires 
and fire mission approval for U.S. special 
forces elements. 

The Combined Joint Special Operations 
Task Forces-Afghanistan also has U.S. 
M119 howitzer systems in direct support of 
U.S. special forces at firebases in southern 
and eastern Afghanistan. These howitzers 
proved invaluable during troops-in-contact 
situations, providing counterfire, high 
explosive and illumination fires. This has 
become an enduring relationship, continuing 
for almost three years and multiple unit 
rotations. Howitzer sections in support of 
U.S. special forces often fired more rounds 
than all of their combined counterparts 
who were supporting conventional units in 
Operation Enduring Freedom. Also, Special 
Forces Operational Detachments-Alpha 
routinely use their own organic mortar 
systems (60-mm, 81-mm, 120-mm) in 
support of their own combat operations. 
In Operation Enduring Freedom, 120-mm 
mortars are located at many of the U.S. 
special forces firebases and used to extend 
the indirect fire range of an Operational 
Detachment-Alpha in excess of seven 
kilometers. They use these systems, not 
only as a part of base camp defense, but, 
also, as a part of their basic loads during 
mounted combat patrols. 

Each Special Forces Operational 





“The limiting factor in all training is time. It is the most 
valuable resource and should not be squandered. Fire 
support training must be incorporated for the battalion 
and group into operations as much as possible.” 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 58 


Detachment-Alpha has a joint terminal 
attack controller, and it is the joint fires 
element’s responsibility to receive and 
process all air support requests for close air 
support and electronic warfare assets from 
all joint terminal attack controllers within 
the special operations task force. The joint 
fires element tracks all air support requests 
from submission by the j oint terminal attack 
controller through the air tasking order 
process. If the request is supported, the 
j oint fires element informs the j oint terminal 
attack controller about mission-related 
data such as aircraft type, call signs and 
time on station. Close air support accounts 
for the vast majority of fire support assets 
provided to a Special Forces Operational 
Detachment-Alpha due to the distances 
required and the limited availability of the 
other fire support platforms. For example, 
one special operations task force was 
supported with more than 500 pre-planned, 
non-troops-in-contact close air support 
sorties during an eight-month tour in 
Afghanistan. 

Most of what has been described takes 
place within the operations center on the 
forward operating base. However, there 
are several missions that required the joint 
fires element to operate in the field, directly 
supporting Special Forces Operational 
Detachments-Alpha at their firebases. The 
following vignettes describe some of the 
events that took place in a j oint fires element 
during combat rotations. 

Two Special Forces Operational 
Detachments-Alpha were assigned to 
a firebase in one of Afghanistan’s most 
contested provinces and were engaged 


consistently by enemy forces whenever 
leaving the patrol base. The joint fires 
element proposed moving a 105-mm 
howitzer platoon from a relatively quiet 
firebase to this firebase to provide immediate 
fire support to the Special Forces Operational 
Detachments-Alpha. The fire support NCO 
assessed the firebase to determine whether 
or not the firing platoon could operate 
within the confines of the relatively small 
firebase and whether or not the Special 
Forces Operational Detachments-Alpha 
could support this addition. 

Once it was determined that the firebase 
could sustain the additional unit, the joint 
fires element submitted a request to move 
a firing platoon to the firebase, and it was 
approved by the j oint task force commander. 
The fire support officer conducted initial 
training and coordination between the firing 
platoon and the Special Forces Operational 
Detachments-Alpha at the firebase. The 
training included several live-fire missions 
while accompanying the Special Forces 
Operational Detachments-Alpha on combat 
patrols. The Special Forces Operational 
Detachments-Alpha became extremely 
proficient using their new fire support assets, 
and the lethality and overall effectiveness 
of that team significantly improved. 

As qualified joint terminal attack 
controllers, the fire support officer and fire 
support NCO sometimes were called upon 
to augment the Air Force joint terminal 
attack controllers. In one such instance, 
the fire support officer provided joint 
terminal attack controller coverage for a 
Special Forces Operational Detachment- 
Alpha for 30 days because there was a 


delay with the Air Force joint terminal 
attack controller’s replacement. During 
this time, the fire support officer conducted 
combat operations with the Special Forces 
Operational Detachments-Alpha and 
requested and employed fixed-wing close 
air support and rotary-wing close combat 
attack assets into several firefights. 

One other situation where having 
qualified joint terminal attack controllers 
within the special operations task force 
operations center proved invaluable was 
during the typical use of armed Predators 
to engage high-value individuals. This 
process involved watching the Predator 
video feed and communicating with the 
aircrew via My Internet Relay Chat while 
the special operations task force commander 
watched and provided constant feedback 
and guidance. 

Operational Detachments-Alphas and 
-Bravos often work directly with the U.S. 
embassies in the country where they operate 
or train. Also, the battalion fire support 
officer can serve in an effects coordinator 
role on an Operational Detachment-Bravo 
staff within an embassy. Effects coordination 
for an Operational Detachment-Bravo or 
special forces battalion is vastly different 
from any conventional battalion or brigade 
because it requires working closely with 
the Department of State and many other 
government agencies. This requires an in- 
depth knowledge of joint and interagency 
capabilities and limitations to ensure the 
commander’s desired effects are understood 
by all agencies involved in the region. 

A direct example of this type of work 
occurred during the summer of 2006 



An M119A2 crew from 3-319th Field Artillery Regiment (Airborne) puts rounds downrange in support of a Special Forces Operational Detachment- 
Alpha as a part of operations in southern Afghanistan in early 2005. (Photo courtesy of msg Daniel m. orr, u.s. Army) 


59 January-February 2010 • 


Fires 












A vehicle modified by the Afghan National Security Forces to fill the role of an indirect fire platform. (Photo by maj Deric Holbrook, u.s. Army) 


when the 2nd Battalion fire support officer 
served as the effects coordinator at the 
U.S. Embassy in Bogota, Colombia. 
During this deployment, the fire support 
officer worked with every agency in the 
embassy and gained approval from the U.S. 
ambassador to establish a joint interagency 
working group. This group was designed 
to facilitate intelligence and operations 
fusion for the embassy and the Operational 
Detachment-Bravo commander in support 
of the American hostage rescue in Colombia. 
Effect coordination was critical for this 
interagency and special operations specific 
mission. The special operations forces joint 
fires element fire support officer was integral 
to ensuring the commander achieved his 
desired effects. 

There is a higher level of responsibility 
and expectations of a captain or a sergeant 
first class assigned to a special operations 
forces joint fires element. The joint fires 
element must coordinate fire support 
operations for a division-sized area of 
operations. He has 18 subordinate elements 
with joint terminal attack controllers who 
depend on his ability to plan and coordinate 
fire support assets for each of them. The 
j oint fires element must have access to more 
intelligence and j oint fire support assets than 
a typical conventional battalion or brigade 
combat team; and he must be able to manage 
it all concurrently 24 hours a day. 


MajorSeth Knazovich, field artillery, is currently 
assigned to Headquarters, U.S. Army Special 


Operations Command at Fort Bragg, N.C. He 
was the first fire support officer assigned to 1 st 
Battalion, 7th Special Forces Group (Airborne), 
Fort Bragg. He also was a qualified joint ter¬ 
minal attack controller, and deployed with 1 st 
Battalion, 7th Special Forces Group (Airborne) 
in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. 
Previously, he served as a battalion fire support 
officer and headquarters and service battery 
commanderfor 1 st Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery 
at Fort Hood, Texas. He was a platoon leader, 
battery and battalion fire direction officer for 
1st Battalion, 6th Field Artillery, 1st Infantry 
Division, and a company fire support officer 
for 2nd Battalion, 2nd Infantry Regiment, 1st 
Infantry Division while stationed in Germany. 
He is a graduate of the Command and General 
Staff College and holds a master’s degree in In¬ 
ternational Relations from Webster University.. 

Major Deric J. Holbrook, field artillery, is current¬ 
ly serving as the battalion operations officer for 
2-12 Field Artillery, 4th Stryker Brigade Combat 
Team, 2nd Infantry Division forward deployed in 
support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. He recently 
served as a Stryker Brigade Combat Team fire 
support officer. Major Holbrook was the first fire 
support officer assigned to 2nd Battalion, 7th 
Special Forces Group (Airborne), Fort Bragg, 
N.C. He was a qualified joint terminal attack 
controller, and deployed with 2nd Battalion, 
7th Special Forces Group (Airborne) in support 
of Operation Enduring Freedom - Afghanistan 
and Operation Enduring Freedom - Caribbean 
and Central America. He also served as the 
battalion assistant S3 operations officer, bat¬ 
talion fire direction officer and as a battery/ 


maneuver commander for 1st Battalion, 7th 
Field Artillery (Schweinfurt, Germany) in support 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom. Major Holbrook 
began his Army career with the 25th Infantry 
Division (Light) Hawaii where he served as an 
aviation brigade fire support officer, battalion 
fire support officer, company fire support officer, 
platoon leader and platoon fire direction officer. 
He is a graduate of the Command and General 
Staff College and holds a master’s degree in 
I nternational Relations from Webster U niversity. 

Major Jason D. Adams, field artillery, is cur¬ 
rently the deputy fire support coordinator for 
2nd Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain 
Division (Light Infantry). He was the first fire 
support officer assigned to 3rd Battalion, 7th 
Special Forces Group (Airborne), Fort Bragg, 
N .C. He also was a qualified joint terminal attack 
controller and deployed with 3rd Battalion, 7th 
Special Forces Group (Airborne) in support of 
Operation Enduring Freedom. He served as the 
battalion fire direction officer for 1st Battalion 
(Airborne), 321 st Field Artillery and commander 
of C Battery, 1 st Battalion (Airborne), 321 st Field 
Artillery at Fort Bragg. He was a Stryker platoon 
leader, assistant brigade fire support officer for 
2nd Brigade, 2nd Infantry Division and counter 
fire liaison officer to the V Republic of Korea 
Corps, while stationed at Camp Hovey, Republic 
of Korea. Major Adams served as a company fire 
support officer with A Company, 1 st Battalion, 
501 st Parachute Infantry Regiment and the bat¬ 
tery fire direction officer and executive officer 
forC Battery (Airborne), 4th Battalion, 11th Field 
Artillery at Fort Richardson, Alaska. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 60 




































T ask Force 1-24 deployed from Fort Wainwright, Alaska, in 
September 2008. Like most other units, we inherited the 
previous unit’s operational tempo and products. During more 
than 15 months in theater, it developed numerous great products that 
suited its needs. For example, it combined the targeting decision brief 
with the operations and intelligence brief on a weekly basis. 

T he beginning. For several weeks, we used this format for those 
briefs until we decided to separate them due to our inability to 
digest the massive amount of data. We also incorporated a targeting 
work group that focused on nominating targets to the battalion 
commander for approval in a bottom-up-driven format. 

The battalion fire support officer chaired the targeting work 
group. The group involved key staff members, such as the battalion 
targeting officer, intel, civil-military operations, operations, a 
tactical psychological operations team and the company fire support 
officers. The company fire support officers were the company’s 
representatives to the targeting work group. They relayed the 
commander’s issues and nominated targets to be prioritized through 
the targeting work group. 

We followed the 4 decide, detect, deliver and assess ’ methodology 
for the targeting work group. It was important to have the company 
representatives at the targeting work group to get the bottom-driven 
intelligence and information that allowed the group to decide which 
targets were going to be prioritized and nominated to the battalion 
commander. We reviewed all of the ongoing projects, high-value 
individuals and current themes and talking points that existed for 
the problem sets within the battalion’s area of operations. We also 
identified quantifiable measures of effectiveness and performance 
to assess the battalion’s progress. These measures of effectiveness 
were based on the logical lines of operations — established in 
accordance with the commander’s priorities and vision, which we 
simply termed lines of operations. 

“Each [line of operations] represents a conceptual category 
along which the [host nation] government and [counterinsurgency] 
force commander intend to attack the insurgent strategy, and 
establish [host nation] government legitimacy” {FieldManual 3-24 
Counterinsurgency). These measures of performance reflected our 
quantified actions to achieve the measures of effectiveness. 

P roblems. Although we made great progress with our targeting 
method, we encountered several problems. The targeting work 
group did not integrate the desired effects we were trying to achieve 
within our problem sets. Although we reviewed a list of high-value 
individuals, projects, specific issues within the area of operations, 
information operations themes to stress and terrain denial targets/ 
kinetic strike packets, we did not tie them together. At times, we 
became overwhelmed by the shear amount of information and spent 
too much time trying to prioritize them. Furthermore, we had many 
projects and humanitarian assistance drops occurring sporadically 
throughout the area of operations that didn’t seem to be tied to 
a quantifiable effect — other than to help the Iraqi people. As a 
result, while we had a robust nonlethal system, its targeting was 
haphazard at best. It was apparent our projects and humanitarian 
assistance drops had to be tied to our desired effects. 

C omplications. Our targeting process and decision making was 
centered around high-value individuals and not on the root 
problems or target sets. The newly implemented Status of Forces 
Agreement and the employment of Iraqi jurisdiction (warrants, 
sworn statements, witnesses, etc.) further complicated our efforts 
to detain key enemy personnel. Tribal and political corruption 
(combined with infiltrated Iraqi Security Forces in many areas) 


resulted in significant difficulties in personality-based targeting. 
Regardless, we had to respect the Iraqi legal system and stress the 
legitimacy of the Government of Iraq while operating within the 
legal framework of the Status of Forces Agreement. 

Ideally, the targeting work group would produce a targeting 
fragmentary order that would be the driving force behind com¬ 
pany operations. However, this was not the case for us. Because 
we focused on everything, in turn, we focused on nothing. The 
products we pushed to the companies were useful; however, we 
overwhelmed them with too much information. 

A ssessments. Measures of effectiveness and performance were 
reviewed weekly in the targeting work group to assess our ef¬ 
forts. We stumbled upon one issue — the quantified data from the 
measures of effectiveness and performance. The targeting work 
group created the quantified data and adjusted it as we thought 
necessary to accommodate each company’s problem sets. For 
example, C Company was in an area where electricity was poor to 
nonexistent before the invasion of Iraq in 2003, while A Company 
was in an area where electricity was more prevalent before the 
invasion. We could not hold each area of operations to the same 
standard with respect to our sewage, water, electricity, academics, 
trash, medical, transportation and agriculture assessments. A speci¬ 
fied increase in the hours of electricity per week could be reasonably 
attained by A Company due to the existing infrastructure, but not 
by C Company. The same could be said about the circumstances 
surrounding the transition of the Sons of Iraq to the Iraqi army. 
Based on the battalion’s footprint, each company faced drastically 
different problems that were hard to tie up in neat and tidy measures 
of effectiveness. 

E nd state. First, we had to understand the logical lines of 
operations the battalion commander established to achieve his 
desired end state. In our case, we focused on three logical lines 
of operations — security, governance and essential services. We 
compared the logical lines of operations to legs that hold a stool 
together. The stool, as a whole, represents the desired end state, 
but if one of the legs or logical lines of operations becomes loose 
or, worse, falls off — the entire stool or end state would fail. From 
this point, we determined what information requirements were 
necessary to determine which information gaps needed to be filled 
to achieve the desired end state. 

The information requests would replace the measures of 
effectiveness and performance to alleviate any discrepancies with 
quantifying data that became apparent because of the diverse 
dynamics of each company’s areas of operations. For instance, C 
Company focused more on the essential services logical lines of 
operations because of the extreme lack of such services. Bravo 
Company focused on the security logical lines of operations due 
to significant weapons caches and weapons trafficking in its area 
of operations. The following outlines the solution to our problems, 
using the decide, detect, deliver and assess model. 

D ecide. What are the problems? This ultimate question has to be 
answered. How do we prioritize these problems based on the 
battalion commander’s priorities? To succeed, the targeting work 
group must identify problems in each battalion’s area of operations 
and prioritize them for the battalion commander. This thorough 
analysis allows him to make a timely decision. 

Once the problem sets were identified, we classified them as 
target sets. Examples include a specific town; tribal conflict or event; 
criminal organizations; or a particular aspect of sewage, water, 
electricity, academics, trash, medical, transportation and agriculture. 


SGT Nigel Wongsing, attached to Guardians Maneuver Detachment, 17th Fires Brigade, pulls security during a joint patrol at the Route 6 Bus Station 
in Basra, Iraq, Dec. 4, 2009. (Photo illustration by Jason Kelly, Fires Bulletin. Original photo by SPC Samantha Ciaramitaro, U.S. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 62 






Iraqi army soldiers prepare for a humanitarian assistance aid drop in a poor neighborhood that is tied to 
improvised explosive device/indirect fire activity in Alpha Company’s area of operations. The food was funded 
by the U.S.; however, it was distributed by the Iraqi army to stress the information operations theme of Iraqis 
in the lead. (Photo by CPT Mike Schwille, U.S. Army) 


Then, we determined the desired effect for the set. After the effect 
was determined, we identified specific targets — the first step in 
constructing the target synchronization matrix for each target set. 

For example, a target set of an enemy indirect fire cell within 
Sinjar, Iraq, continues to launch rockets into Forward Operating 
Base Legion. Sinjar falls within A Company’s area of operations. 
We wanted to achieve the following desired effect. ‘The indirect 
fire cell is defeated and there is a decrease in indirect fire attacks 
against Forward Operating Base Legion. High value individual 
targets RL 1211 and RL 1230 are killed/captured/neutralized. 
Weapons and ammunition caches are exploited and destroyed. The 
people of Sinjar report indirect fire activities to the Iraqi security 
forces or Coalition Forces and support the Government of Iraq.’ 
etect/deliver. We merged the detect and deliver aspects of the 
targeting cycle into one section. They involve actions to be 
taken by Coalition Forces to achieve the desired effect against the 
target set. Each applied asset must have a task and purpose for both 
lethal and nonlethal assets. This portion of the target synchronization 
matrix is the meat for the targeting fragmentary order and outlines 
the tasks to subordinate units that must be accomplished during the 
targeting cycle. The detect/deliver step also will alleviate numerous 
proj ects and humanitarian assistance drops that do not have a specific 
targeting effect. The bottom line is, ‘what do our actions do for us, 
and what do they do for the Government of Iraq? ’ Tying this together 
with the target sets allows us to focus on the problem sets. 

At times, target sets are not unique to just one company. The 
sets often bleed over into another company’s area of operations or 
even be a battalion-level problem set. In this case, we apply all of 
the maneuver elements that are affected. For example, the indirect 
fire cell in Sinjar receives its ammunition from the southern town of 
Ba’aj, which is in B Company’s area of responsibility. Therefore, 
B Company and all of its combat multipliers assets are used. 


A ssess. Now, examine how 
each asset applies to the 
target set individually. The 
indirect fire cell in A Company’s 
area of operations would be 
categorized under the security 
logical lines of operations. 
However, when we look at the 
assets used to meet the desired 
effect for the indirect fire cell, 
we affect the governance and 
essential services logical lines 
of operations, supporting the 
idea that each logical lines of 
operations is equally important 
to achieve the end state. The 
information requests listed 
in the target synchronization 
matrix reference the questions 
that each asset should answer 
to assess whether our efforts 
were beneficial or detrimental 
to the problem set. The remarks 
section under ‘assess’ should 
discuss the answers to some of 
the information requests or any 
other issues for that particular 
target. The battalion commander 
can make his assessments based 
on the targeting work group’s 
assessments and provide further guidance to the targeting work 
group during the targeting decision brief. 

This completes the target synchronization matrix for one target 
set. Each problem set within the area of operations is broken down 
by the companies for their specific problem sets and by the battalion 
fire support element for its specific problem sets that are bottom- 
up driven. This methodology results in a focus-driven targeting 
process for the battalion. Now, projects have a purpose and intent 
behind them. The same could be said for joint operations, key 
leader engagements and humanitarian assistance drops. They come 
together to meet the desired effect that is tied to the commander’s 
desired end state for the logical lines of operations. 

argeting cycle. We use a two-week targeting cycle based on 
the operational tempo. The problem sets are dynamic and could 
take months to achieve results. We found we could not achieve the 
desired effects by targeting on a weekly basis. The targeting work 
group is chaired by the battalion fire support officer and includes 
the battalion executive officer, battalion targeting officer, S2, S3 
plans, S9 (civil-military operations), SI (public affairs officer), 
medical officer, civil affairs team, tactical psychological operations 
team and company representatives. The targeting decision brief to 
the battalion commander occurs every other week, however, the 
targeting work group meets every week. 

During week ‘A,’ the targeting work group meets on Monday 
and reviews any updates that may influence the decision to prioritize 
new target sets for weeks ‘B/C ’ as a recommendation to the battalion 
commander. Once we establish a new priority list for the target 
sets, we dedicate assets to that particular set and develop the target 
synchronization matrix. On Thursday, we brief the commander 
on our assessments and our recommendations for weeks ‘B/C.’ 
Once the commander gives his guidance, we publish the targeting 
fragmentary order with the changes and the new two-week tasking 
on Friday. The company commanders receive the fragmentary 



63 January-February 2010 • 


Fires 












order and have the opportunity during Saturday’s operations and 
intelligence brief to present any issues or comments they have. 

During week 4 B,’ we assess weeks 4 Z/A.’ We review all of the 
tasks assigned to the target sets and determine whether or not we 
achieved the desired effects. Obviously, the time to achieve the 
desired effects does not take place within two weeks, so most of 
the target sets do not change. However, this is a good opportunity to 
review the assets applied and dedicate or remove additional assets 
to the target sets. The updates to the delivery assets are applied for 
the next two-week cycle (weeks 4 D/E’) and briefed to the battalion 
commander in the decision brief in week 4 C.’ 

During the decision brief, the battalion commander has an 
opportunity to assess recent progress from weeks Z and A. The format 
for the decision brief is to review the mission statement, commander’s 
intent, logical lines of operation, information requests, S2 brief (air 
interdiction, area of operation and situational template, changes to 
the information operations themes and talking points, target sets 
(targeting work group assessments), recommendations for the next 
two week cycle and the commander’s guidance. Each company’s 
representative is present at this brief to provide information to the 
commander and to support the value of their recommended target 
sets. 

ffects. Once we receive the commander’s guidance, we publish 
the targeting fragmentary order. It is structured in the five- 
paragraph format. Under the execution paragraph, we distribute 
changes to the information operations themes and talking points. 
We also insert each target set from the target synchronization 
matrix. Each company pulls the information from the targeting 
fragmentary order and the battalion staff coordinates for assets. 
Now, the targeting fragmentary order becomes the driving force 
behind the battalion’s combat operations. 


Our targeting methodology is not 4 the answer’ to all targeting 
scenarios, but it serves as a way for us to capture the complexity of 
our operational environment. It allowed us to focus on the problems 
in our area of operations and tie together our lethal and nonlethal 
operations to achieve the battalion commander’s end state. Target 
sets were determined by the targeting work group, and there were 
no limits to the assets you apply to the targets within the target set. 
Applying maneuver forces, unmanned aerial systems, civil affairs 
projects, humanitarian assistance drops, Q-36/Q-37/lightweight 
countermortar radar and human terrain teams to break down the 
human dynamics of the area of operations was easy to do. The 
key is to focus the assets on the desired effect and continually 
move forward on solving the problem sets encountered in a 
counterinsurgency environment. Our methodology was tailored 
to the battalion commander’s needs and end state. 


Captain Justino Lopez, Jr., field artillery, is the battery commander for 
C Battery, 8th Field Artillery Regiment, 1st Stryker Brigade Combat 
Team, 25th Infantry Division, Fort Wainwright, Alaska. He served as a 
battalion fire support officer for the 1st Battalion, 24th Infantry Regi¬ 
ment, Fort Wainwright, Alaska, a field artillery advisor for the border 
transition team, Sinjar, Iraq; battalion fire support officer for the 2nd 
Battalion, 10th Special Forces Group, Fort Carson, Colo.; assistant 
brigade fire support officer for the 3rd Brigade, 3rd Infantry Division, 
Fort Benning, Ga.; targeting officer for the 3rd Squadron, 7th Cavalry 
Regiment, 3rd Infantry Division, Hunter Army Airfield, Ga.; and a firing 
platoon leader for the 1st Battalion, 38th Field Artillery Regiment, 2nd 
Infantry Division, Camp Stanley, Korea. He deployed in support of 
Operation Iraqi Freedom I, III, VI, VII, MX and IX. 



Students at a girl’s school in a poor neighborhood that is tied improvised explosive device/indirect fire activity in Alpha Company’s area of operations 
wave their hands during a school supply drop. The Iraqi police conducted the drop to gain support of the local populance. (Photo by cpt Mike schwiiie, 

U.S. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 64 












Eg transform 




By MAJ David Haynes 


H istorical perspective. The discussion 
of why we are now fighting a world 
war with a transnational Islamist 
group can be traced as far back as those 
practicing Christianity, Judaism and Islam 
have recorded history. For the purposes 
of this paper, the discussion is confined to 
World War I and beyond with a specific 
focus on the Middle East. 

World War I. As the “Great War” came 
to a close, the end of colonialism began to 
draw near. The administration of colonies 
proved expensive in terms of personnel and 
money to the European and other powers that 
kept them. As an increasing number of Arab 
and Muslim lands gained independence in 
the interwar years, the European powers 
were reluctant to give up their influence in 
the region due to the economic impact of 
the trade routes and the discovery of oil. 
The Balfour Declaration and a host of med¬ 
dling in countries from Egypt to Iran and 
Yemen to Afghanistan by Western powers 
from 1917 onward created a pro Zionist 
and anti-Islamic perception of Westerners 
and their governments among many in the 
Muslim world (See Charles Messenger’s 
book The Century of Warfare: Worldwide 
Conflict from 1900 to the Present). 

65 January-February 2010 


Influences. The other catalysts for 
birthing extremism during this time were 
the close associations that rising Islamists 
were forging with fascists in Europe in the 
period between the first two World Wars. 
In the 1920s and 1930s, two influential 
leaders in the Muslim world sought favor 
from a likeminded force in the west, Adolph 
Hitler. 

Mohammad Amin al-Husayni, the Mufti of 
Jerusalem, was active in the protest against 
the British Mandate of Palestine and very 
anti-Semitic. Husayni was so enthralled 
with Nazism that he recruited, trained and 
commanded Muslims in the Balkans as 
part of the Waffen-SS during World War II 
(Messenger). He identified greatly with the 
tenets of fascism and, like Muslim Brother¬ 
hood founder Hassan al-Banna, began to 
create a fascist view of Islam’s existence 
juxtaposed Israel and the West. 

In his book The Anatomy of Fascism, 
Robert Paxton describes some of the 
distinguishing characteristics of a fascist 
movement. “Sense of overwhelming crisis 
beyond traditional solutions primacy of the 
group to which one’s duties are superior to 
every right, whether collective or individual 
and subordination of the individual to it. 
Belief that the group is a victim, or a sen¬ 
timent that justifies any action sans moral 
or legal, limits against its enemies internal 


and external. Dread of the group’s decline 
under the corrosive effects of individualistic 
liberalism, class conflict and alien influ¬ 
ence. The need for closer integration of a 
purer community by consent if possible 
or by exclusionary violence if necessary. 
The need for authority by natural chiefs 
culminating in a chieftain who is capable of 
incarnating the group’s destiny. The beauty 
of violence and the efficacy of will when 
they are devoted to the group’s success. 
The right of the chosen people to dominate 
others without restraint from any kind of 
human or divine law, right being decided 
by the sole criterion of the group’s prowess 
within a Darwinian struggle” (220). 

The linkage of the j ihadists with fascism 
is easily seen and heard from their own pro¬ 
paganda in films like Obsession where you 
see each one of the tenets listed by Paxton 
displayed in Muslim media and education, 
and the jihadist are intent on making this 
the mainstream version of Islam. This ad¬ 
aptation of fascist thought has galvanized 
jihadist with two opponents and scapegoats 
to blame their problems and target for at¬ 
tacks, Israel and the West. The evolution 
of Jihadist Islam gives an indicator into an 
avenue to defeat it, which will be discussed 
later. 

Muslim Brotherhood. The establishment 
of the Muslim Brotherhood was as a po- 


Fires 


Photo by TSgt. Efren Lopez (U.S. Air Force) 


















litical organization, which, at first, may 
have sounded like a labor union, but it was 
wrapped in the shroud of ultra conservative 
religious belief. Hassan al-Banna, founder, 
believed by returning to a life of true Islamic 
following circumstance would improve for 
Muslims. Pan-Arabism and Pan-Islamis 
rose in the early days of the brotherhood as 
well, but the underlying tenet was the dictum 
that all facets of life come from the Quran. 
The organization went operational in 1954 
with an attempt to assassinate Gamal Abdel 
Nasser, secularist President of Egypt (www. 
fas. org / irp/world/ para/ mb. htm). 

The Muslim Brotherhood continues to 
operate and can be tied directly to the for¬ 
mation of al-Qaeda. Sayyid Qutb is often 
spoken of as another founder of jihadist 
ideology. His influence was so strong that 
jihadism is often called Qutbism. Qutb 
succeeded al-Banna as the brain of the 
Muslim Brotherhood understudy of al- 
Banna. Qutb’s influence permeates much 
of the jihadist culture and is responsible 
for perhaps the two most dangerous men 
to study Qutbism. Ayman al-Zawahiri was 
so strongly influenced by the writings of 
Qutb that he j oined the Muslim Brotherhood 
and later formed the group known as the 
Egyptian Islamic Jihad, which assassinated 
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat in 1981 
(www. fas. org / irp/wor ld/para/mb. htm). 
Qutb’s influence was also present in the 
radicalization of Osama bin Laden, who 
studied under Sayyid’s brother Mohammed 
Qutb at a university in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 
Osama bin Laden left within a month of the 
Soviets invading Afghanistan to see if this 
was a front for jihad (See Marc Sageman’s 
Understanding Terror Networks , 26-29). 

Al-Qaeda. Bin Laden teamed up with 
Sheikh doctor Abdullah Azzam and they 
formed the Afghan Service Bureau, MAK, 
as a force provider of mujahedin. Azzam 
recruited many Muslim Brotherhood 
members for service in the jihad against 
the Soviets. Later, the two fought side by 
side and purportedly spoke often with Az¬ 
zam, providing the intial idea for forming 
al-Qaeda. Azzam and bin Laden forged the 
beginnings of al-Qaeda in 1987 and 1988. 
Lrom its inception, bin Laden thirsted for 
power over the MAK and al-Qaeda. Bin 
Laden eventually broke from Azzam and 
stood-up his own training camps. When Az¬ 
zam died, parts of MAK joined bin Laden, 
but the Azzam loyalists continued to quarrel 
with bin Laden (See Rohan Gunaratna’s 
Inside Al Qaeda, 22). 

Ayman al-Zawahiri met bin Laden for 
the first time not long after his acquittal from 
charges in the assassination of President 
Sadat in 1985. The meeting was in Peshawar, 


Pakistan, where Zawahiri looked to fund the 
jihad and care for wounded mujahedin. Bin 
Laden was quite impressed with Zawahiri. 
Zawahiri occupies the post as leader of the 
Egyptian Islamic Jihad and is Osama bin 
Laden’s deputy in al-Qaeda. 

Their nascent j ihadist organization had yet 
to declare war on America; they were busy 
with a war against the Soviets with indirect 
help from the U.S. In Lebruary 1989 when 
the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan, 
bin Laden returned to Saudi Arabia with 
much respect. He helped Saudi intelligence 
provoke unrest against the communist re¬ 
gime in Yemen and returned to his family’s 
construction business. But the warrior inside 
yearned for more fighting. 

War on the West. On Aug. 2,1990 when 
Iraqi forces invaded Kuwait, he offered his 
services to the Royal Saudi Lamily. Bin 
Laden was snubbed for a coalition of U.S., 
European and Arab troops. This act by the 
Royal Saudi Lamily turned his allegiance, 
and bin Laden began a campaign against the 
Saudi monarchy and espoused the removal 
of all Western leaning secular governments 
in Muslim lands and the expulsion of all 
infidels from the Holy Land. Al-Qaeda de¬ 
clared war on the West in 1991, but we did 
not listen for another 10 years (Gunaratna, 
22 ). 

n denial. Much like World War II where 
the indicators were present, govern¬ 
ments did not want to lend credence to the 
threat, but, rather, appease it. The West is 
in denial as to the gravity of the threat of 


radical Islam. The indicators are present; 
their desires are not secret. Indeed, the 
ideas have been proffered through media 
outlets. Yassin Musharbash, a staff writer 
for the German news publication “Spiegel 
Online” told how a Jordanian journalist 
talked about al-Qaeda’s strategic vision 
through conversations with Abu Musab 
Al-Zarqawi while they shared some time in 
prison. Musharbash recounts the following 
phases in Fouad Hussein’s book al-Zarqawi: 
al-Qaida s Second Generation. 

Predictions. The first phase - known as 
“the awakening” - has already been carried 
out and was supposed to have lasted from 
2000 to 2003, or more precisely from the 
terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001 to the 
fall of Baghdad in 2003. The aim of the 
September 11 attacks was to provoke the 
U.S. into declaring war on the Islamic world 
and, thereby, “awakening Muslims.” 

According to Hussein, the first phase 
was judged by the strategists and master¬ 
minds behind al-Qaida as very successful. 
He wrote, “The battlefield was opened up 
and the Americans and their allies became 
a closer and easier target.” The terrorist 
network also is reported as being satisfied its 
message can now be heard “everywhere.” 

The second phase - “opening eyes” - 
is, according to Hussein’s definition, the 
period between 2003 and 2006. Hussein 
says that the terrorists hope to make the 
Western conspiracy aware of the “Islamic 
community.” Hussein believes this is aphase 
in which al-Qaida wants an organization to 



According to Fouad Hussein’s book al-Zarqawi: al-Qaida’s Second Generation , the aim of the 
September 11 attacks was to provoke the U.S. into declaring war on the Islamic world and, 
thereby, “awakening Muslims.” Pictured is the exterior of the crash site following the attack on 
the Pentagon, Sept. 1 2, 2001. (Photo by Jocelyn Augustino, FEMA News Photo) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 66 




develop into a movement. The network banked 
on recruiting young men during this period. 
Iraq was to become the center for all global 
operations with an “army” set up there and 
bases established in other Arabic states. 

The third phase - “arising and standing- 
up” - is supposed to last from 2007 to 2010. 
“There will be a focus on Syria,” Hussein 
prophesies, based on what his sources told 
him. The fighting cadres are supposedly al¬ 
ready prepared and some are in Iraq. Attacks 
on Turkey and - even more explosive - in 
Israel are predicted. Al-Qaida’s masterminds 
hope attacks on Israel will help the terrorist 
group become a recognized organization. The 
author also believes countries neighboring 
Iraq - such as Jordan - are also in danger. 

The fourth phase is predicted between 2010 
and 2013. Hussein wrote al-Qaida will aim to 
bring about the collapse of the hated Arabic 
governments. The estimate is that “the creep¬ 
ing loss of the regimes’ power 
will lead to a steady growth in 
strength within al-Qaida.” At 
the same time, attacks will be 
carried out against oil suppliers, 
and the U.S. economy will be 
targeted using cyber terror¬ 
ism. 

The fifth phase will be the 
point at which an Islamic state, 
or caliphate, can be declared. 

According to the plan, between 
2013 and 2016, Western influ¬ 
ence in the Islamic world will be 
so reduced and Israel weakened 
so much, that resistance will not 
be feared. Al-Qaida hopes by 
then the Islamic state will be 
able to bring about a new world 
order. 

Hussein believes during the 
sixth phase from 2016 onwards 
there will a period of “total confrontation.” 
As soon as the caliphate has been declared, 
the “Islamic army” will instigate the “fight 
between the believers and the non-believers,” 
which has so often been predicted by Osama 
bin Laden. 

The seventh phase is described as “defini¬ 
tive victory.” Hussein wrote in the terrorists’ 
eyes, because the rest of the world will be so 
beaten down by the “ 1.5 billion Muslims,” the 
caliphate will undoubtedly succeed. Accord¬ 
ing to Hussein, this phase should be complete 
by 2020, and predicts the war won’t last longer 
than two years. 

Surreptitious creation. The West is a victim 
of its own success in “World War III,” by so 
fervently opposing the Soviets that we helped 
the mujahedin and surreptitiously turned our 
backs on them, creating a deadly group of 
warriors with a religious calling to fight. In 

67 January-February 2010 • 


search of an enemy, they found one when we 
ventured back into their lands at their request. 
While, from our perspective, we did not ask 
for “World War IV,” we are in it and the road 
to victory will be long. 

he fight. Seth Jones and Martin Libicki, 
terrorism specialists with The Rand Cor¬ 
poration , a non-profit think tank helping to 
improve policy and decision making through 
objective research and analysis, propose all 
terrorist groups end because they use violence 
to achieve a political goal and seek political 
change. Jones and Libicki say most terrorist 
groups have ceased to exist because they 
joined the political process or were ferreted 
out by local police and intelligence and were 
either arrested or killed. The essence of what 
defeats terrorist groups who do not normalize 
into the political process needs to incorporate 
all the elements of national power - diplo¬ 
matic, information, military and economic 


- with the addition of intelligence operations 
and police work. 

Policing and intelligence operations. A 
comprehensive strategy to combat al-Qaeda 
and its affiliates is necessary. This is a whole 
of government approach that must be linked 
and synergized from the international level 
down to the local level. Jones and Libicki 
offer a two-front strategy. The first front is 
the policing and intelligence operations - an 
interagency effort - that must be mounted 
to share the requisite intelligence here and 
abroad to identify and track key leaders and 
their networks, exploit the intelligence gained 
and arrest them as the situation develops 
and warrants action. This will necessitate a 
decreased focus on counterterrorism by the 
Department of Defense and directing more 
resources to the agencies that conduct security 
cooperation such as the Central Intelligence 
Agency, Department of Justice and Depart¬ 


ment of State. This is the long fight of 
the war because the intelligence network 
creation and intelligence gathering rely 
largely on human intelligence. These 
assets can take considerable time to 
develop (123). 

Military force. The second front 
consists of the employment of military 
forces where al-Qaeda is participating 
in or fomenting an insurgency. This 
does not necessarily mean that general 
purpose forces from the U. S. need be in¬ 
volved. Local forces can be augmented 
with Special Operations Forces and/or 
intelligence services to combat terrorist 
led insurgencies. 

The use of local forces is optimum 
to the cessation of an insurgency since 
the indigenous forces must eventually 
be capable of securing the country 
themselves. Local forces have the home 
field advantage in intelligence 
collection and knowledge of 
the terrain. Legitimacy with the 
population of the local security 
forces can be a consideration 
for/or against using the local 
forces. The situation will dic¬ 
tate; however, an indigenous 
force is best, (136-138). 

The U.S. government should 
consider the cost benefit of 
responding with regular forces 
against terrorist threats. They 
arguably lend credence to their 
claim we are on another crusade 
to conquer Muslim lands. It also 
gives a focal point for recruit¬ 
ment of jihadists. 

Information operations. The 
third front is the information 
operations. The West must 
counter the ideology of jihadism. Tacit 
approval by non-violent people is as 
bad or worse than complicit action. 
The West is easily 30 years behind in 
the propaganda campaign against the 
jihadists. They have had time to grow a 
generation that chants death to America, 
death to the United Kingdom and death 
to Israel ( Obsession ). But Westerners 
have no credibility in the Muslim world 
when issues of the Zionist conspiracy 
are discussed. 

We must identify groups and leaders 
who are moderate intone and supportive 
of peace and reconciliation. These can 
be tribal elders, respected journalists, 
clerics or anyone of influence. We must 
coopt these people and any organization 
to espouse our message through their 
words within the existing political, 
cultural, social and media outlets in the 


“The West is a victim of 
its own success in ‘World 
War III,’ by so fervently 
opposing the Soviets that 
we helped the mujahedin and 
surreptitiously turned our 
backs on them, creating a 
deadly group of warriors with 
a religious calling to fight.” 


Fires 


Muslim world (Jones and Libicki, 133-135). 
While this is a war we are engaged, perhaps 
the U.S. characterization of this conflict as 
the War on Terrorism has given too much 
credence and status as holy warriors to those 
who should be classified as criminals. 

Ending fascist ideology. The West can 
win “World War IV.” Al-Qaeda is unlikely to 
overthrow any existing governments in the 
near term. And their propaganda campaign 
against the governments who tolerate the 
infidels have made enemies of most of the 
governments in the world. But our efforts 
to date have served only to prevent repeat 
attacks on U.S. soil. A1 Qaeda has conducted 
more attacks and is present in more countries 
than prior to Sept. 11, 2001. 

Western governments, militaries, police 
and intelligence services must understand 
the historical evolution of terrorism and 
jihadism in terms of ideology, political 
action and tactic employment. Westerners 
must take the politically correct blinders off 
and see a foe filled with hatred that opposes 
us and has a well-developed plan to take 
over the world. The world must espouse 
the ideal of tolerance of other cultures and 
religions. This with perseverance, diligence 
and patience will allow us to counter the 
latest perversion of fascist ideology. 


Editor’s note: This article was originally written for 
the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. 


Major David Haynes, field artillery, is a divi¬ 
sion effects officer with the 101st Airborne 
Division (Air Assault), Fort Campbell, Ky. 
Previously, he was assigned to 1st Battalion, 
82nd Field Artillery, 1st Cavalry Division, Fort 
Hood, Texas, as the assistant brigade fire 
support officer, battalion S4 and alpha battery 
commander during Operation Iraqi Freedom 
II. Later, he was assigned to the 1st Unit of 
Action Experimental Element, Unit of Action 
Maneuver Battle Lab at Fort Knox, Ky., where 
he served as a combined arms battalion Fires 
officer and the combined arms battalion 
S3 conducting numerous simulations from 
platoon to brigade combat team. In 2008, he 
was assigned as battalion S3, 3rd Battalion, 
81 Armor, 194th Armored Brigade, also at 
Fort Knox, a 294 Soldier Initial Entry Training, 
armor battalion consisting of an HHC and 
three armor training companies. While there, 
he was responsible for training management 
and synchronization of resources which sup¬ 
port individual and collective task training for 
over 12,000 Soldiers in basic combat training, 
One Station Unit Training, Reserve Officers 
Training Corps and other tenant units. Lastly, 
support of the initial entry training mission 
of the 194th Armored Brigade, the U.S. Army 
Armor Center and Fort Knox. 






to 


Denary 


In preparation for the invasion of Normandy, France, artillery equipment is loaded aboard 
landing craft tanks at an English port, June 1, 1944. (Photo courtesy of the u.s. Army Center of 
Military History) 


These American troops are marching through the streets of a British port town on their 
way to the docks where they will be loaded into landing craft for the big assault at 
Normandy, France, June 1944. (Photo courtesy of the U.S. Army Center of Military History) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2010 68 

































Periodicals Postage 

PAID 

San Bernardino, CA 



PVT Jonathan Consford of 4th Battalion, 1st Field Artillery Regiment, 3rd Brigade, 1st Armored Division, tosses an ammo shell from the M119A2 howitzer during a 
live-fire exercise at Dona Ana Base Camp, N.M., Nov. 12, 2009. (Photo by maj Deanna Bague, u.s. Army) 


PIN 086040-000 
















