AD-A247 043 



PROCEEDINGS OF 



Technology Showcase 

7-9 AUGUST 1990 



Sponsored By 

THE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND 
ENGINEERING CENTER 



CLEARED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED 




91-17276 

t iim HMi — ^ 




I 

SMI FORM 1021, 1 AUQ 86 PREVIOUS EDITION IS OBSOLETE 


9i i 


0 (i 


i 

I 

























DESTRUCTION NOTICE 


F(« CLASSIFIED DOCOIIEHTS. FOLLOW THE PSOCEDURES IR 
DoO 5200.22-M, IHDOSTRIAL SECURITT MARHAL. SECTIOR 
11-19 (»t DoD 5200.1-E, IRFOEMATIOH SECURITT PROGRAM 
REGULATIOR, CHAPTER IX. FOR DECLASSIFIED» LIMITED 
DOCDMEHTS, DESTROT BT ART METHOD THAT HILL PREVERT 
DISCL080RB Ot COHTERTS (A RECOHSTRDCTIOH OF THE 
DOCDMERT. 


DISCLAIMER 

THE FIRDIRGS IR THIS REPORT AXE LOT TO EE CORSTRDED 
AS AR OFFICIAL DEPARTMERT OF THE ARMT POSITIOH 
OHUSS SO DESIGHATED HT OTHER AUTHORIZED DOCDMEHTS. 


TRADE NAMES 

USE OF TRADE RAMES OR MAROFACTDRERS IR THIS REPORT 
DOES ROT COHSTITDTE AH OFFICIAL ERDORSEMEHT OR 
APPROVAL OF THE USE OF SUCH COMMERCIAL HARDWARE OR 
SOFTWARE. 


U.S. ARMY MISSILE COMMAND 
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND ENCINEERINC CENTER 


) 


TECHNOLOGY SHOWCASE 

7-9 August 1990 

Tom Bevil Center 
Huntsville, Alabama 


I 








TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

SESSION I. RESEARCH 

Integrated Photonics for Signal Processing and Optical 
Computing. 1 

UV-IR and Focal Plane Array Material Evaluation Using Faraday 
Rotation. 17 

Hydrogen Fluoride Overtone Laser Technology. 31 

Mantest-Microcircuit Chip Thermal Screening System. 43 

Automated Hermetic Sealing of Microcircuit Packages Using 
Nd;YAG Laser Welding. 51 

SESSION II: SENSORS 

Combined Arms Multipurpose Missile. 63 

Synthetic Discriminant Functions for Use in Pattern 
Recognition. 79 

Monopulse Angular Error Reduction for Complex Targets Using 
High Range Resolution. 91 

Infrared Seeker Developments for Indirect Fire Applications... 113 

Laser Line of Sight Guidance. 129 

Measuring Radar Cross Section Using a CW Track-While-Scan 

Radar. 141 

SESSION III: GUIDANCE AND CONTROL 

The Development and Application of Automatic Target Cueing 
Technology for Man-in-the-Loop Fire Control System. 157 

Lock-On-After-Launch (LOAL) Testbed Facility. 169 

Winding and Environmental Testing of Polarization-Maintaining 
Fibers. 191 

Control Systems Development. 199 





















Page 


Microprocessor Technology Utilization Program. 219 

Real Time Executive for Missile Systems (RTEMS). 245 


SESSION IV: STRUCTURES 

Aerothermal and Materials Testing Using Hypervelocity 


Sleds. 269 

Evolution of High Performance Small Rocket Motors. 323 


Clustered High Performance Rocket Motor Flight Demonstration,. 341 


Development of Full Scale Hypersonic Kinetic Energy 
Missile/Penetrator Sled Testing Techniques. 359 

Metallurgical Failure Analyses of Managing Steel Missile 
Motorcases. 375 


SESSION V: SYSTEM SIMULATION AND AEROBALHSTICS 

Mission Augmented Airborne Platform Application of Artificial 


Intelligence to Air Defense Systems. 393 

Target and Scenario Signal Generation for Microwave and 
Millimeter Wave HWIL Missile Guidance Simulation. 409 

Dynamic Infrared Scene Projection Technology. 437 

SIMSTAR - Anatomy of a Modern Hybrid Computer. 445 

Simulation as a Tool in Assessing Millimeter-Wave Smart 
Weapon Systems. 455 

CFD in Tactical Missile Aero-Propulsion Technology. 481 


SESSION VI. PROPULSION 


Safe Disposal of Rocket Motors. 495 

Insensitive Munitions Solid Propellant Development. 505 
















Page 

Composite Motor Case Technology. 517 

Rocket Motor Testing at the Propulsion Directorate. 529 

An Overview of the Army Rocket Motor Service Life Program. 543 

Bipropellant Gels. 559 








- SESSION I - 


RESEARCH 




Integrated Phctonics for Signal Processing and Optical Computing 
Paul Ashley, Mark Bloemer. and Charles Bowden 


Research Directorate, AMSMI-RD-RE-OP 
Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
U.5. Army Missile Comm.and 
Redstone Arsenal, al 35895-5248 


ABSTRACT: We present theoretical predictions and experimental results and 
comparisons for spheroidal macroparticles of gold, silver, and platinum, in linear 
host materiels, such as Schott glass. Specifically, experimental results are 
analyzed with respect to our theoretical model for a four-wave-mixing configuration 
and the frequency dependence of the conjugate signal is examined. We show, among 
other characteristics, that frequency and optical depth dependence of the conjugate 
intensity can be used to determine average shape parameters for the particle. 

Conditions for intrinsic optical bistability and subpicosecond optical switching 
times are predicted for surface plasmon response of the particles embedded in the 
host and using effective medium theory to calculate the composite effective 
dielectric function, which is determined to be nonlinear. 

We show that materials of this type can be useful for ultrafast optical 
switches and limiters for intense laser radiation, as well as being relatively cost 
effective. Limiting action can apply to device protection as well as biological, and 
composites can be easily fabricated using sol gels. 


1 





1. INTRODUCTION 


Light scattering in inhcmcgeneous media has been an active research area v/ith 
a broad range of problems’. Recent work on nonlinear effects has established 
conditions of resonant enhancement of these nonimeanties and sought to use them 
to increase the magnitude of physical effects, such as optical phase conjugation,^-^ 
or to introduce new phenomena, such as intrinsic optical bistabilitj,.'’-^ Of course, 
this research has its roots in the studies of surface-enhanced Raman scattering^, 
where, for example, the Raman cross section observed fromi molecular monolayers 
upon a silver substrate was enhanced by several orders of magnitude. 

The enhancement of the Raman scattering cross section is due to the large 
increase of the local field, both inside and outside the metal particles near its 
surface, at the surface-plasmon resonance. Silver has a sharp resonance feature, 
but the resonance in gold and other metals can also lead to strong Raman scattering. 

We predict that intrinsic optical bistability should be observed in silver 
particle composites. This optically bistable phenomenon is a local condition in the 
material and occurs without optical feedback, as from a cavity. The bistable 
behavior is due to the local field effect associated with the particles emibedded in 
the dielectric host miatenal. For spherical particles, the switching intensities are 
expected to be ~ 20C nw/cm^; this magnitude is determiined by the magnitude of 
the imaginary part of the metal's dielectric constant^-^. The design of experiments 
with ellipsoidal particles and a nonlinear host medium for the particles can lead to 
a significant reduction of the switching Intensities. This is possible because the 
resonance frequency can now be chosen sc as to minimize the imaginary part of the 
dielectric constant. 


Degenerate four-wave mixing (DFWM) measurements in metal colloids reveal 
that a small silver or gold sphere has - 10“^ esu in the vicinity of the 

surface plasmon resonant with response times of the order of picoseconds.jt has 
been proposed that the for small metal particles results from an intrinsic 

(3) 

of the plasmon excitation. The conjugate signal is proportional to the local 


field factor to the eighth power. The local field factor's dependence on shape has 
been illustrated many times in surface-enhanced Raman scattering experiments. In 
addition, it is possible to shift the resonant energy of the surface plasmon by 
varying the shape of the particle.® We found that it was important to make a more 
detailed examination of these enhancement effects. We present results from, 
studies of the linear absorption as well as of the conjugate signal in DFwn 
experiments. Analysis of these experiments gives detailed information about the 
particle shapes. 


2 



Using results frcnr the effective-n'ediunr. theory"^, we evaluate the effects cf 
abscrpticn, both linear and nonlinear, and the particle shape on the DFWfl conjugate 
signal. 


2. RESULTS FROM ThE EFFECTIVE-MEDIUM THEOR'-' 

In a composite dielectric material that has m.etal particles dispersed in it, the 
medium behaves on the average as a homogeneous medium with an effective 
dielectric tensor e . To calculate the eiem^ents cf this tensor, statistical theories 
have been developed that exam.ine the effects of multiple scattering of the applied 
electromagnetic fields on linear media.More recently, these theories have 
been extended to cover nonlinear systems.^ We follow the results of Ref. 7, from 
which the effective dielectric tensor can be determined through the self- 
consistency condition 


0 


= <{l * [6(X) - e] ■ r} [f (x) - f]> 


(I) 


v/here I is the unit tensor, e (x) is the inhomogeneous dielectric tensor of the 
medium, and F is the depolarization tensor. The average in Eq. (1) contains uniform 
weighting of the particle positions, as is consistent with their random; positions, 
and also an average over the weighted orientations cf the particles. 

The dielectric constant in the inhomogeneous medium is that of either the host 

dielectric m.atrix, ^^^(EL). or the metallic particles, nonlinear 

functions of the electric field, but the field is not identical for each environment. 
Outside the conducting particles, the field is the applied field plus the induced 
dipole field. Inside the particles, the local field drives the optical noniinearities of 
that medium. For each material we assume a Kerr medium, which for degenerate 
fleld IS written as 


e. = e + Xk = 

n hL h h h 


(2a) 


for the host medium and 


6=6+ • E (oo) E (go) 

m ml ' m m m 


(2b) 


(3) 

for the embedded material. In general, the coefficients % ^ are fourth-rank 
tensors. 


3 




The linear dielectric tensers are denoted by a subscript L . Ve will irale the 
further assurrpticn belcw that these tensers have degenerate principal values, i.e., 
they are isctrcpic media. This does net imply that the effective-rrediurr dielectric 
functiens are isct’'epic; fer ellipsoidal particles the angular distributior cf the 
scattered light depends cn the particles' shape and crientaticr. 'w'her the particle 
crientaticns are correlated, this is manifest by pelarizaticr dependence in the 
scattered light. Fer geld particles cf dimensions < 5C nm the linear optical 
properties are dominated by absorption, with < of the total cross section being 
due to scattering. Spheroidal gold particles support tv^c dipole modes 'with a 
moment aligned along the minor axis of the particle. Therefore the frequency 
dependence of the absorption cross section for polarized light is sensitive to the 
spheroids’ orientation. The effective-medium theory can incorporate this 
polarization difference by an anisctrcpic dielectric tensor for the effective mediurr. 

The field inside the ellipsoidal-shaped particles is uniform but not necessarily 

in the same direction nor of the same magnitude as the applied field E,- . For the 
ellipsoids of metal particles embedded in an effective m>ediurr, we have the local 
field 


E^(oo) = 2^'^(oo) ■ E^(oo) 

and for ellipsoids of the host m.aterial vve have its local field 


(5a) 


E^(oa) = • E^(o3) 


(3b) 


The local fields m.ay be quite different from the applied field. Their value is 

determined by the tensors . where cx = m or cx = h; these are related to the 
depolarization tensor and the dielectric tensers^ 


and 




|[ - r((jO) 
|l - r(a)) 


(4a) 


(4D) 


Since they provide the magnitude of the enhancement effects cf the local field, we 
will denote these coefficients as eniiancement factors. These factors determine the 


4 





rescnance pcsilior in the denominator, which is controlled by the principal values cf 
the depolarization tensor. 

For random orientation of the spheroids, the enhancement factors in Eqs. (d), 
which refer to a coordinate system fixed to the spheroid, ncv,- have different 
contributions because the applied field is changing its direction relative to this 
coordinate system. The lack cf a single local field for particles with different 
orientations means that the self-ccnsistency condition. Eq. (1), incorporates a 
complicated angular dependence in the nonlinear coefficients. A simple expression 
for the effective-medium dielectric function is no longer possible; instead the 
effective medium is expanded as a power series in the applied field. 

A useful expression for the nonlinear coefficient is obtained when the 

host medium is linear. x[f^ = C. and for small concentrations the result is 



Here, A^ and A^. are depolarization factors, i.e.. = £ j., , A^ = £"2 r 22 • 

This expression has denom-inators with two surface-plasmon resonances. The 
strongest resonances occur when the enhancement factors in the numerator have 
their resonance at the same frequency as the denominator, as they are in the first 
and last terms of Eq. (5). However, because of the mixing of these resonant terms, 
enhancements of the susceptibility occur between the frequencies. At the surface- 
plasm^on resonances the effective nonlinearity can be enhanced by several orders of 

(3) 

magnitude over the value • The actual enhancement factor depends on the 

metal. In silver the resonance is sharp in the visible, and 8 to 10 orders of 
magnitude enhancement are possible. This is reduced by the volume fraction, f. 
which m^ultiplies these factors. 

The conjugate reflectivity is defined as 


5 







Ep(L) 


( 6 ) 


where 3= 3a)^ X ^^V(2 c"k) and c< = oj" Im ((j_)/(c^K) are the nonlinear coupling and 
absorption coefficients, respectively. Here Ep and Eg are the forward and backward 
pump field amplitudes, respectively, and E^(0) and EgCO) are the conjugate and probe 
f lelds of the input. 

A more accurate expression valid for large nonlinear coupling can be found in 
Ref. 13, but these expressions are not needed for the discussion that follows. 

Equation (6) contains jX | . which contains the enhancement factors to the 

eighth power. The absorption coefficient. c< . contains the first power of the 
enhancement factor: therefore the overall reflectivity has a sixth power of the 
enhancement for the multiplicative coefficient of the hyperbolic sine. 

3. THEORETICAL RESULTS 

The description of heterogeneous nonlinear-optical materials given in the previ¬ 
ous sections is useful for a wide range of materials: these include semiconductor 
colloids and glasses and. under certain restrictions on the size, heterogeneous 
polymer solutions. In nonconducting media, the transparency is usually large enough 
that high-volume fractions can be considered. 


(3) 9 

The pump fields are taken as equal and small, such that X^ |Eb(0)p = 0.01. 

In Fig. 1 the conjugate reflectivity for spheroidal particles is shown from Eq. (6). 
The length of the medium is caken as L = 2 nm; the maximum conjugate reflectivity 
occurs at a value cxL sc 1.5. At small concentrations only a single maximum is 

observed, but the high concentrations show the appearance of a second peak, which 
eventually dominates the reflectivity. Over a range of concentrations the 
reflectivity changes from a single peak to a broad double-peaked structure. A 
second peak at the second surface plasmon resonance eventually dominates the 
reflectivity. 

The second peak occurs because X^^^ is enhanced at this frequency owing to 
the second surface-plasmon resonance, and the absorption has not yet become the 
limiting factor in the maximum, of the conjugate reflectivity. The peak in Rc can 
switch from one resonance to another: this provides a sensitive test of the average 
particle shape. 


6 





EXPERinENTAL RESULTS 


We examined the linear- and nonlinear-optical properties of glass containing 
gold particles. The glasses are RG6 filters obtained from Schott. The volume 
fraction of gold in the RG6 is fixed: therefore we varied the sample thickness to 
investigate the effects of absorption on the DFWM signal. Three samples of 1-. 2-, 
and 3-mm thicknesses provided c<L = 1.6, 3.1, 4.7, respectively, at X = 0.545 pm. 
Recall that the maximum conjugate reflectivity occurs at o<L oc 1.5. Nearly all the 

loss in the RG6 glass is due to the gold particles, and little is due to the glass 
matrix. 

DFWn was performed at different frequencies using an excimer-pumped dye 
laser at a lO-Hz repetition rate. The pulse duration was 12 nsec for all 
frequencies. We do not have electron micrographs of the gold particles in the RG6 
glass, but it is not unreasonable to assume that the particles' shape may deviate 
from a perfect sphere. The particles would also be expected to have a range of 
shapes in the actual glass. 

Figure 2 shows the conjugate signal versus wavelength at a constant pump 
intensity of 8 MW/cm^. For the thinnest sample, L = 1 mm, one broad peak is 
observed. The thickness L = 2 mm shows an overall reduction of the reflectivity and 
two peaks in the spectrum, which is characteristic of the two surface-plasmon 
resonance frequencies supported by a nonspherical particle. For L = 3 mm, the 
dominant peak in the reflectivity has shifted to the longer wavelength, and the 
overall reflectivity has been reduced by a factor of ~ 3 compared with the 1-mm 
sample. A dip In the conjugate signal versus wavelength is predicted for spherical 
particles but only at values of cxL larger than those of the RG6 samples examined 
here. 


5. OPTICAL BISTABILITY 

Optical bistability without an optical cavity [called instrlnsic optical 
bistability (lOB)l has been observed in a number of materials'^ and theoretical 
descriptions have been given for this phenomenon'^. Recently, this lOB phenomenon 
has been predicted for a single-semiconductor microparticle'®. We extend these 
predictions by considering the effects of a composite consisting of a collection of 
conducting microparticles randomly distributed throughout a transparent host 
material. The particles are considered to possess a sharp size distribution. 

To be specific, we consider a material made up of small spherical metallic 
particles of radius a , with volume fraction f , and they are embedded in a 
dielectric host medium with coefficient . The metal grains are small enough 
that surface effects are important and are driven by a strong applied field so that 


7 







they will have a nonlinear response which turns cut to be of the Kerr type for gold 
and silver particles. 

A material composed of microscopic particles that are randomly and 
independently distributed throughout the medium, has a dielectric constant that 
varies from point to point in the me^wm eir). The medium is described by an 
effective dielectric function e" . vvhich accounts for the multiple-scattering 
effects of the heterogeneous medium, in an averaged manner. The expression 
relating r” to the microscopic properties of the medium, is determined by the self- 
consistency condition. In our case, this general expression involves the volum.e 
fraction f and the dielectric constants. However, the concentrations of metal 
spheres we will explore are low enough that the effective dielectric function for 
the n'edwrr car be approximated by linear terms in the concentration (flaxwell- 
Garnett apprcxim.aticn) 

T = c *' ■ 0 (7) 

The steady-state Maxwell equation for the applied, propagating electric field is 
[E(r,t) = E^Cr) e''^M 


V^E 


c 


( 


2 , 2 
Ob /C , 


e E 

c 


= 0 . 


( 8 ) 


To develop the theory further, first v^e introduce the slowly varying envelope 
approximation and use one-v/ay propagation of the electromagnetic field. To be 
specific we assume the electromagnetic field is propagating along the positive 2 
axis: 


E 

0 


E 


ikz 

e 


(9) 


The wave number k is chosen to eliminate the real, linear contribution to the 
dielectric function €“ in Eq. (7). 


-- Re b'} 


( 10 ) 


¥; 

where f= f* (El = 0). The transverse effects are neglected; their contribution can 

be important for small Fresnel numbers as we have found for the nonlinear 
oscillator model, but the results for the on-axis intensity were not affected in that 
study down to Fresnel numbers of unity, as the two problems are quite analogous, 


8 



we expect the same results for this model. The backward-propagating wave is 
negligible in the present case because we restrict our numerical results to small 
concentrations of metal spheres, f << 1. In this limit the nonlinear changes of the 
real part of dielectric function are sm.all. The Maxwell field equation ( 8 ). in a 
slowly varying envelope approximation (SVEA), is reduced to 


dE 

—^ - ixE = 0 . 
d2 ^ 

The coefficient appearing in Eq. (11) is 


( 11 ) 



Re 


(fj (o/2c Jrb (fj 


( 12 ) 


These equations provide the basis for studying propagation effects in composite 
media. 

In the following we take the spherical particles to be composed of silver and 
use the dielectric constant which was developed for small particles to include the 
quantum-mechanical confinement of the electrons. The linear dielectric constant in 
Eq. (5) IS given by 



(13) 


The coefficient = 4.66. The resonance frequency and the damping 
coefficient, f , are functions of the particle size^ 

Q = TF Vp/a . r = . (’4) 

where the Fermi velocity Vp = 1.29 X 10® cm/s and = 2.5 X s ' in 

silver.The plasma frequency is related to the density of the electrons in our case, 
2 

oOp = 4 TTne^\m^ ~ 4.0 X 10^’ s"^. The electric fields are scaled to the parameter 
X 3 , which we assume to be real and positive. 

The bistable behavior arises from the nonlinear relation between the local field 
inside the metal particle E^ and the propagating field Eq. The condition on tuning 

of the laser frequency to observe bistability is that 


9 


and 


Re (26, ^ < 0 


Re (26, " 6^J > 3 im(26, " 


( 15 ) 


The first inequality is based on the assumption that X 3 ^ 0- The second inequality 

IS violated near the resonance frequency Q and we do not find optical bistability 
for this regime. Furthermore, the bistable characteristics for a laser tuned near 
this frequency would be very sensitive to tiny fluctuations in size and shape of the 
particles. The curve of the local field intensity versus the propagating field 
intensity is shown in Fig. 3 for particles of size a = 5 nm at a wavelength of 500 
nm. At this wavelength the penetration de pth of the electric field is about eight 
times larger than the particle radius 27ra /ReTTTni) /X ~ 0.13 and our use of the 
quasistatic approximation is justified. 

Equation (11) is integrated using a forward-difference scheme. At each new 
point at which the propagating-electric field is found, we require that the local- 

field intensity 1 E^ | ^ be determined from Eq. (2) together with Eq. (3): the result 
IS a cubic equation. In the regions of propagating-field intensity where three real 
roots are found, the solution chosen depends on the intensity of the input 
electromagnetic field and Its previous history. If the input intensity is ramped up 
sufficiently slowly from zero, then the steady-state solution on the lower branch of 
the local-field intensity is chosen and it remains on this branch until the turning 
point marked A is reached in Fig. 3. Along the lower branch, the medium is highly 
dispersive and | Re (2e, * e^)( >> im (2e, ♦ The absorption of the propagating- 

electric field in the medium is small for solutions along this branch. Six solutions 
that exemplify this behavior are shown in Fig. 4. They are labeled 1-6 and curve 6 
is close to the turning point A in Fig. 3. 

For input fields ramped to higher values of the intensity than turning point A in 
Fig. 3, the local-field intensity in the metal becomes large. Now the medium is 
driven into resonance by the local field and the medium is highly absorbing. The 
local field in the particles remains on the high branch until it reaches the turning 
point marked B in Fig. 3. The local field jumps discontinuously, but the propagating 
field remains continuous in the medium. 

It should be noted that this switch in local fields occurs inside the medium, say 
at length L and that at L . the effective-medium dielectric function undergoes a 
discontinuity. This boundary separating the high and low local field branches would 


10 






scatter radiation in the backward direction, as does a similar boundary analyzed 
earlier for a different system'^, as well as for the nonlinear oscillator model'®. 

However, for the concentrations in this paper, f = the discontinuity in e** is 

quite small. 

The occurrence of the dielectric boundary is exhibited in Fig. 4 by curves 7-ic. 
The knee in the curve separates a high-absorption regime fromi a low-absorption 
regime. As the input field is increased, the knee in the propagating intensity curve 
moves to the right; and as it is decreased, the knee moves to the left unttj it 
continuously moves back to the input and the local field is then on the lower branch 
throughout the entire medium. 

We can study different effects of the internal boundary by observing the 
transmission characteristics for the silver composite cut to two different lengths, 
we show two examples in Figs. 5 and 6 . In Fig. 5. the medium is short enough that 
the boundary does not appear in the medium. The transmitted intensity decreases 
when the input intensity reaches point A, but the output intensity is greater than 
that at point B (Fig. 3). Increasing the output intensity does not significantly 
change the absorption in the medium, so the transmission is again linear with the 
input field. As the input field is decreased, a change in slope occurs in the 
transmitted intensity and the output intensity remains nearly constant. The 
absorption in the medium is no longer constant; the knee in the intensity curve 
discussed in Fig. 4 is inside the medium. A further lowering of the input intensity 
will result in the motion of the boundary out of the medium at the input face and 
eventually the transmitted intensity will smoothly join the low-intensity solutions. 

In Fig. 6 . the miedium has a length that is longer than can sustain the large local 
field, corresponding to the upper-branch solution, across the sample. The boundary 
now appears inside the medium. The contrast between high- and low-output 
intensities is greater and the nearly constant output intensity is sustained over a 
much larger range of input intensities. 


6 . CONCLUSIONS AND OBSERVATIONS 

We find that the metal composite glasses can exhibit optical bistability when 
driven by a strong laser. The bistability is intrinsic since it does not require the 
use of an external cavity or other forms of optical feedback, and its features are 
analogous to the nonlinear oscillator model'®. Our results are not restricted to 
photochromic glasses or metal colloids, but they could also be applicable to 
inhomogeneous polymer solutions that have a larger X 3 with metal particles 

dispersed in them to increase the effective nonlinearity. 

We find that further tuning of the laser frequency toward the blue can give a 
significant decrease of the input intensities and the results presented here are not 


11 





significantly altered for 20.% variations of the particle sizes. In our studies the 
backward propagating wave is entirely negligible, and in higher particle 
concentrations the absorption may be too large to allow a significant reflected 
intensity from occurring at a boundary inside the mediumi. 

The response time of these materials is determined by the relaxation time of 
the electrons excited by the applied field. According to Hache, Ricard, and 
Flytzanis^. X 3 can be enhanced in small particles by quantum size effects on the 
free electrons. This is due to a breakup of the continuum into a quasicontinuum;. 
Therefore, the response time is of order f’: this is less than 1 ps for silver. For 
silver, they also calculate X 3 (Ag) = 2.4 x 10"^ esu. With this value we estim^ate 

the intensity levels for the bistable switching to be around 100 llW/cm^ at a 
wavelength of 450 nm. 


REFERENCES 

1. J. C. Gardland and D. B. Turner, eds.. Electrical Transport and Optical Properties 
of Inhomogeneous Materials, AIR Conf. Proc. iQ. (1978); D. Richard, "Nonlinear 
optics at surfaces and in composite materials," in Nonlinear Optics^ Materials 
and Devices, C. Flytzanis and J. L. Oudar, eds. (Spnnger-Verlag, Berlin, 1986), p. 
154. 

2. D. Ricard. Ph. Roussignol, and Chr. Flytzanis, Opt. Lett. IQ., 51 1 (1985). 

3. F. Hache. D. Ricard. and C. Flytzanis. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 1647 (1986). 

4. K. M. Leung. Phys. Rev. A33. 2461 (1986); C. M. Bowden, R. Inguva, J. W. Haus. 
and N. Kalyaniwalla, Opt. News 13(9) . 1 16 (1987). 

5. J. W. Haus, N. Kalyaniwalla. R. inguva. and C. M. Bowden. J. appl. Phys., 1420 
(1989). 

6 . R. K. Chang and T. E. Furtak, Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (Plenum, New 
York. 1982). 

7. J. W. Haus, R. Inguva, and C. M. Bowden, "Effective medium theory of nonlinear 
ellipsoidal composites." submitted to Phys. Rev. AH. 1670 (1990). 

8 . M. J. Bloemer, h. C. Buncick, R. j. Warmack, and T. L. Ferrell, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 

2552 (1988). 

9. L, K. H. Van Beek, "Dielectric behavior of heterogeneous systems," in Progress in 
Dielectrics. J. B. Birks, ed. (CRC. Cleveland. OH. 1967 ). Vol. 7, p. 69. 

10. D. Stroud, Phys. Rev. BIZ, 3368 (1975). 


12 





11. G. 5. Agarwal and R. Inguva, Rhys. Rev. B30. 6108 (1984). 

12. D. Stroud and P. M. Hui, Rhys. Rev. B37. 8719 (1988). 

13. A. Yanv and P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Crystals. (Wiley, New York, 1984), p. 563. 

14. j. Hajto and 1. janossy, Philos. Mag. B47 . 346 (1983): M. Dagenais and W. F. 
Shark in, Appl. Rhys. Lett. 4^, 210 (1984); D. A. B. Miller, A. C. Gossard. and W. 
Wiegman, Opt. Lett. £, 162 (1984). 

15. C. M. Bowden and C. C. Sung. Rhys. Rev. Al9. 2393 (1979); F. A. Hopf and C. M. 

Bowden, Rhys. Rev. A32. 268 (1985); J. W. Haus, C. C. Sung, C. M. Bowden, and J. 

M. Cook, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B2. 1920 (1985). Y. Ben-Aryeh, C. M. Bowden, and J. 
C. Englund, Rhys. Rev. A34. 3917 (1986). 

16. D. S. Chemla and D. A. B. Miller, Opt. Lett. H, 522 (1986). 

17. Y. Ben-Aryeh. C. M. Bowden, and J. C. Englund, Opt. Comm. 147 (1987). 

18. J. W. Haus, S. Wang. M. Scalora, and C. M. Bowden, Rhys. Rev. A38.4043 (1988). 


13 




s» 


OOLD SPHBIOIDS 
A8PBCT RATlOslS 
■WnECnVITY WIN ABSORPIION 


A/'*" 


Figure 1. Conjugate reflectivity for spheroids plotted as the 

concentration and wavelength is varied: use Eq. (28),.8 



Figure 2. 


X Oitfn) 

Conjugate reflectivity 
data for the RG6 glasses. 
The curves are a spline 
fit to the data and are 
not from the theory. 


norAOA.'tiaa mt mih t ■ loo 


Figure 3. Local-field intensity vs 
propagating intensity 
from Eq. (8). The 
particle radius is 5 nm. 







OOrrDT INTINSITT *1M 


X (mieroaa) 


regularly spaced. 



Figure 5. Input vs output 

intensities for a 2-vim- 
thick sample. The 
particle radius is 5 nm. 



O K W II 


MFUT U lT M I l Tr ■ 100 

Figure 6. Same as in Figure 5 with 
a 4-ijm-thick sample. 


15/(16 Blank) 






UV-IR Detector and Focal Plane Array Material Evaluation Using Faraday Rotation 


Dr. Charles R. Christensen, Dr. George A. Tanton, Mr. John A. Grisham , 

and Dr. John Stensby ^ 

Research Directorate, Research, Development, and Engineering Center, U.S. Army Missile 

Command, Redstone Arsenal, AL 
35898-5248 

Introduction 

Our objective is to develop innovative noncontact methods that can be applied in ultraviolet 
(UV) and long wavelength infrared (LWIR) detector manufacturing to increase yield, reduce 
production costs, and to improve traceability throughout the manufacturing process. 

Conventional methods used to characterize semiconductor material do not quickly or 
efficiently identify areas of a wafer that will produce useful detectors or focal plane arrays. 

This results in lower production yields and higher unit cost. In the technique described 
here 2 the material of interest is positioned in an amplitude modulated magnetic field and 
scanned with a linearly polarized laser beam. As the laser beam passes through the material it 
undergoes Faraday Rotation (FR) proportional to the free carrier concentration in that particular 
pan of the wafer. Since detector device characteristics, such as effective resistance and 
capacitance, are functions of the free carrier concentration pans of a wafer that will not yield 
good detectors can be identified in the early stages of manufacturing using this technique. The 
yield would be significantly increased and the unit cost decreased by identifying and culling 
wafers or pans of wafers that do not meet specifications at the beginning of the fabrication 
process. It is expected that this FR technique can be utilized as a universal evaluation tool that 
will make manufacturing traceability possible by correlating device performance for any pan of 
a wafter with fundamental parameters. This technique is applicable to all major detector 
materials of Army interest, e.g. mercury cadmium telluride (HgCdTe), cadmium sulfide 
(CdS), indium antimonide (InSb), platinum silicide (PtSi), and gallium arsenide (GaAs). 

Major advantages of this technique are: a) no contacts need be alloyed with the wafer, 
hence no wafer material contamination, b) surface preparation is not required, c) it is a rapid 
CAM technique and does not require a skilled operator, and d) automat^ wafer mapping is 


t Permanent Address: Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Alabama in Huntsville 
Huntsville, AL 


17 





possible. An objective of the effort reported here was to demonstrate the applicability of FR 
for the measurement of electronic homogeneity of wafers in the UV to IR Spectral region. The 
first steps in accomplishing this goal appear to be successful. The method, apparatus, and 
measurement results to date are report^ here. Although these results are limited at present to 
only a few samples measured at ambient temperature, extensive measurements on the bulk 
material demonstrate the method for MCT and CdS. Future improvements now in the design 
phase include the addition of a cryogenic capability and a longer wavelength source to map 
wafers at 77 K. 


EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
The bench setup is shown schematically in Fig. 1. 



1. LASER, 2 WATTS CW @ 10.6 MICRONS 

2 ATTENTUATOR 

3. MIRROR 

4. CHOPPER 

5. FOCUSING LENS 

6. POLARIZER, ZnSe WIRE GRID 

7. SPLIT ELECTRO-MAGNET, Z4kG 

8. X/Y TRANSLATION STAGES 

9. IBM PC 

10. ANALYZER, ZnSe 

11. DETECTOR, HgCdTc @ 77 K 

12. RECORDER, STRIP CHART 

13. LOCK-IN, AMPLIFIER 

14. SINE WAVE GENERATOR 

15. MAGNET DRIVER POWER AMPLIFIER 

16. SAMPLE 


Fig. 1. Faraday Rotation, Mapper. 


18 




























The wafer was probed with a CO2 laser beam at a wavelength of 10.6 micrometers. The 
sample was positioned in a magnetic field by X/Y translation stages with a positioning 
precision of 0.005 mm. The free carrier concentration in a particular pan of the wafer was 
determined by the Faraday rotation as the laser beam passed through the material. The 
reference plane of polarization was established by two wire grid ^Se polarizers shown in 
Fig. 2 and an analyzer, rotated at a bias angle 0 was placed after the wafer. 



UMFER 


ANALVZf e 


POL I 


POL II 


Fig. 2 Faraday Rotation Optical Train 


A 25 mm focal length ZnSe lens in fiont of polarizer I focused the beam to 0.3 mm diameter at 
the wafer, resulting in a flux density of 10 • 50 W/cm^. The split magnet shown in Fig. 3 
produced a 10 Hz amplitude modulated magnetic field of ± 2. 4 KG. The magnetic field was 
directed parallel to the propagation axis of the probe beam. 


19 





The change in intensity of the probe beam caused by rotation of the plane of polarization 
(Faraday rotation) and propagation through the zinc selenide Brewster window analyzer was 
measur^ by a mercury cadmium telluride detector cooled to 77 K. All system components 
were located away form any stray magnetic fields that might have affected their performance. 

A high sensitivity lock-in amplifier, tuned to the modulating frequency of the magnetic field, 
amplified the detector output and fed it into an IBM PC. The computer was programmed to 
execute the sequences to control the scanning hardware and collect and reduce the data. Details 
of the software and theory of operation can be found in another report^. 

BACKGROUND THEORY 


According to classical theory at wavelengths long compared to the bandgap wavelength. 
FR due to free carriers is given by.^ 

S = X2 Be3NL/2Ttc'’nm"*2 (1) 



20 





a result that is well established for binary semiconductors. In Eq. (1) S is the Faraday rotation 
angle in radians, e = 4. 8 x 10 'l^esu, the free carrier effective mass m* was assumed to be 
0.015m for MCT and 0.2m for CdS at 300 K, m = 9.1x lO’^Sgm. n = index of refraction of 
the material, N [cm'3 ] is the free carrier concentration. B = 2400 Gauss, L and X are the 
thickness of the sample and wavelength in units of cm, respectively, and 7t has its usual 
meaning. The band gap energy. Eg, of CdS is 2.4 eV. It was calculated for MCT from an 
expression given by Hansen et al.^ 

Eg = - 0.302 + 1.93x - 0.81x2+ 0. 832x3+ 0.535 T (i-2x)/1000 (2) 

where x = percent concentration of Cd. The band gap at T = 300 K for long wavelength IR 
MCT with X = 0.200-0. 220 yields a cut-off wavelength = Eg [eV] / 1. 239 < 8 micrometers. 
Therefore the output from a CO 2 laser operating at 10.6 micrometers could be used for the 
probe beam for FR measurements of both MCT and CdS at ambient temperature. 

MCT RESULTS 


Sample MCT4 was reponed to be n-type bulk grown by the travelling heater method and it 
was investigated in the most detail. The remaining three were supplied as LPE samples. 
Faraday rotation was proportional to the magnetic field strength B as expected from Eq. 1, 

Fig. 4 shows the FR signal level plotted against B at an arbitrary position on MCT4. B was 
determined from the ac voltage across a 1 Ohm precision resistor in series with the magnet 
coils and from a direct measurement with a Gauss meter. 


F 

R 

S 

I 

c 

m 

U 



Fig. 4. Faraday Rotation Signal vs Magnetic Field Strength 


21 










Fig. 5 shows a comparison of normalized FR as a function of wafer position measured on 
different days and demonstrates that system repeatability was quite good. Laser fluctuations, 
although a potential source of scatter in the data, do not appear to be a problem. 


MCT-< 



♦ HK «E-ei 
« t1R52 «E-ei 


Fig. 5 Faraday Rotation in MCT4 (2) 300K. Repeatability Test. 

The magnitude of the Faraday rotation angle was measured directly by plotting the detector 
output as a function of 0, the angle through which the analyzer was rotated from parallel 

orientation to polarizer 11 (6 = 90° would be the fully crossed position), Fig. 2. A constant 
polarization reference plane was maintained for the radiation incident on a sample by rotating 
the analyzer and keeping the polarizers fixed. Fig. 6shows the optical train when no sample 
was in the beam. The beam was chopped at 10 Hz to provide a reference signal for the lock-in 
amplifier. Fig. 7 shows the resulting detector output as a function of analyzer angle. 

The chopper was turned off when a sample was in the modulated field and the amplitude 
modulated signal generated by Faraday rotation in the sample provided the ac signal necessary 
for the lock-in amplifier. With sample MCT4 in the modulated field, the detector output had a 
maximum near 87°, Fig. 8. The difference between the maximum in Fig. 7 corresponds to a 
FR of approximately 3 degrees. 


22 















Fig. 6. System Initialization Setup Without Sample 


28 mU = 18 (SIC) 



86 88 98 92 


DECREES 

Fig. 7. Detector Output vs Analyzer Angle - No Sample 













1 mU = 2 (SIC) 


MCT4 AP 


S 

I 

c 



Fig. 8. Faraday Rotation Signal vs Analyzer Angle for MCT4 at 300 K 


A more anayrical determination of the FR is obtained from the following analysis. From 
Beer's law and Malus' law the intensity I at the detector is given as 


I = Iq exp (-aL) cos^ (6 + 8) (3) 

where Iq = intensity of the laser beam at polarizer II, a = absorption coefficient; L, S and © are 
the water thickness, FR angle, and fixed angle between analyzer and polarizer, respectively. 

The percent change in I found from Eq. 3 leads to: 


dl/l = 28 (d5) tan (9 + 5) (4) 

A representative value for the magnitude of the FR in M(ZT4 was calculated from Eq. 1 
using the rotation angle determined as follows: A plot of the normalized Faraday rotation vs 

tan (6), at an arbitrary position on the sample very closely approximately a straight line for 9 
less than about 80°, as expected from the small 5 limit of Eq. 4. The departure from a straight 
line seen in Fig. 9 for 9 > 80° is due to the contribution of 5. 


24 
















Fig. 9. Faraday Rotation Signal vs Tangent of Analyzer Angle. 


The small 8 becomes a significant contributing factor as 6 approaches 90 degrees because 
then the system sensitivity to FR theoretically approaches infinity, Eq. 4. In our measurements 
the gain in sensitivity from setting 9 = 80° instead of 45° was determined experimentally to be 
equal to 4.5 for both CdS and MCT, compared to the theoretical value calculated from 4, 
i.e. tan (80)/tan (45) = 5.7. The difference between the experimentally determined curve and 

the extrapolated tan (0) function yields a value of -3 degrees for 8 as Fig. 10 shows in good 
agreement with the value estimat^ directly from the relatively course scale marked in two 
degree increments on the analyzer holder. 



Fig. 10 FR signal vs. Tan (0 - 3) 


Solving Eq. 1 for N, here determined at only one arbitrary spot on the wafer, yields N = 
6.7 (10*5 ) cm'3 using ^ n = 3.55. This value is somewhat lower than the calculated intrinsic 
free carrier concentration , n(i) = 2 *10*^ for x = 0.22 and T = 300 K, but is consistant with 


25 


























Hall and FR measurements on CdS at 300 K described later. No attempt was made to measure 
S at a position in the wafer corresponding to the calculated mean value of N, only to show that 
8 obtained as described above is a reasonable value. 

The relative free carrier densities were measured in the bulk grown sample MCT4 at room 
temperature using the automated equipment developed in this laboratory. 


% DEVIATION FROM MEAN ROTATION 
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 



Fig. 11. High Resoluarion Map of MCT4 (63 Data Points) 

Fig. 11 is a high resolution map of MCT4 generated from 63 data points. The acquisitiori 
time in both cases was approximately 20 sec/point. The analyzer angle 0 was 80°. The free 
carrier concentration was found to vary 50% or more in sample MCT4. Although it may be 
desirable to perform measurements on cooled samples Nemiorovsky and Finkman^ have 
pointed out that measurement of the intrinsic carrier concentration at room temperature can be 


26 






used to determine the composition and band gap of n-type wafers if the wafer is known to be 
intrinsic at room temperature. 

COMPARISONS WITH LPE RESULTS: 


The relative amplitudes of the FR signal in n and p type LPE samples at 300 K are 
compared in Table I with n-type bulk grown material. Table I also shows the free carrier 
concentrations at 77 K determined by Hall measurements. Although a direct comparison of FR 
with Hall results must be made at the same wafer temperature because of possible extrinsic 
effects. 


TABLE I. RELATIVE FARADAY ROTATION (FR) PER CM IN MCTT @ 300 K 


MCT# 

TYPE 

THICKNESS 

N@ 77 K 

FR (mV/cm)'*' x 




*10E14/cm3 


1 

p-LPE 

18 microns 

100 

55.5 0. 200-0. 220 

2 

n-LPE 

18 microns 

2 

30 0. 200-0. 220 

3 

p-LPE 

23 microns 

80 

40 0. 295 

4 

n-BULK 

864 microns'*' 

2 

31.8. 0.200-0.220 


Except where marked with +, samples and data in Table I were provided by Michael Grenn, 
CNVEO, U.S. Army, CECOM 



The significant features in this Table are: 

1. The Faraday rotation per unit length (FR/cm) increased with increased N as expected. 

2. For a given N the magnitude of FR/cm was very close to the same value for n-type LPE 
and n-type bulk MCT. The FR results were virtrally the same for both LPE and bulk grown 
material even though sample thicknesses differed by a factor of 48. This indicates that the 
method of growth made no significant difference in the Faraday rotation. Possible extrinsic 
effects and other factors limit the extent to which one can compare Hall measurements made at 
77 K to these FR results made at 300 K. However they appear to be in reasonable agreement. 

CdS RESULTS 

Faraday Rotation measurements combined with theory and Hall measurements at 300 K 
give a consistent description of the free carrier concentration over a very wide range of detector 
and focal plane array material parameters, and demonstrated the applicability of the FR 



27 


















Although a similar data base of Hall and Faraday rotation measurements has not yet been 
generated for MCT, Eq. 1 can be used to calculate N for MCT4 from Hall and FR 
measurements on CdS and known values for M* and n. 

Eq. 1 yields the following relationship 


N(MCT) = S(MCT) *[N(CdS) / ^(CdS)l *0-009 


(5) 


since 0.009 = (m*2n) / (m*2n) (c^s) 

Room Temperature Hall measurements on two CdS wafers, designated as #7 and 
#12B, gave free carrier concentrations N(CdS)= ^ 1-4 * lO^^ cm'^ and 2.7 * lO^^ cm'3, 
respectively. Using Eq. 5 with the maximum and minimum values of FR measured for CdS#7 
yields a calculated range of between 2*10l5 cm'^ and 6.5*101^ cm'^ . The maximum 

and minimum values of FR in CdS#12B yield a calculated range of 0.9*10l5 cm'^ to 6.7*101^ 
cm*3 for Nqi^ct). These values are consistent with the value of 6.7*1015 cm'3 calculated for 
MCT4 using 8 (mct) = measured at a single point as previously described. 

CONCLUSIONS 

Major conclusions from this effort are summarized as follows; 

a. The first high resolution mapping using the FR technique to determine free 
carrier concentraction uniformity of MCT as a function of position on a wafer was 
demonstrated. 


b. Qualitative results of FR are consistent with those reported for LPE and bulk 
grown n-type material. 

c. Quantitative consistency between results of Hall measurements, FR, and 
theory was demonstrated over a wide range of material parameters covering the spectral range 
from UV to IR. 

d. In the limited circumstances of this first MCT FR mapping demonstration, 
the FR method appears to be a viable technique applicable to semiconductors that operate 
anywhere between the UV and LWIR. FR measurements at cryogenic temperatures on 
additional samples are needed to demonstrate the full capability of this technique. 




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The cooperation extended by the Center for Night Vision and Electro-Optics (CNVEO), 
CECOM, by providing the MCT samples and Hall data used in Table I, taken by Michael 
Grenn (CNVEO), is acknowledged. The work reported here was made possible through the 
support of the Systems Engineering and Production Directorate and Research Directorate, 
MICOM. Technical assistance of Rachel Wright is gratefully acknowledged. 


REFERENCES 

1. M. Balkanski and E. Amzallag, phys. stat. sol. 30,407 (1968). 

2. G. A. Tanton, J A. Grisham, C. R. Christensen, and S. Razi, "Proc. Electronics and E-0 
Materials for Smart Munitions Workshop", p. 105-114,13-14 May 1987, Redstone Arsenal, 
AL, GACIAC PR-87-01. 

3. John Stensby, C. R. Christensen, G. A. Tanton, andJ. A. Grisham, "A Computer 
Controlled System for Measurement of Faraday Rotation in Semiconductors," U. S. Army 
Missile Command Technical Report TR-RD-RE-90-5,1990. 

4. M. J. Stephan and A. B. Lidard, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 9, 43 (1958). 

5. G. L. Hansen, J. L. Schmit, T. N. Casselman, J. Appl. Phys. (USA) vol. 53 #10 (1982) 
p. 7099-101. 

6. John Brice and Peter Capper, Properties of Mercury Cadmium Telluride, INSPEC, The 
Institution of Electrical Engineers, The Gresham Press, 1987. 

7. Y. Nemirovsky and E. Finkman, J. Appl. Phys. (USA) vol. 50 #12 Dec 79, p. 8107-11. 





HYDROGEN FLUORIDE OVERTONE CHEMICAL LASER TECHNOLOGY 


William A. Duncan, Barbara J. Rogers 
Miles E. Holloman, and Stanley P. Patterson 
U. S. Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898 

Abstract 


The Hydrogen Fluoride Overtone Chemical Laser Technology Program has 
exploited the technology base developed over the last two decades for hydro¬ 
gen fluoride lasers and successfully demonstrated a short wavelength chemical 
laser. This technology development centers on overtone lasing of the hydro¬ 
gen fluoride molecule to produce laser radiation at 1.33 micrometers rather 
than the conventional fundamental lasing at 2.8 micrometers. The overtone 
wavelength can lead to significant improvements in brightness potential as 
well as atmospheric propagation properties. The concept has matured from 
initial demonstrations at the ten watt scale to the currently demonstrated 
multi-kilowatt level. In the course of these test programs it was necessary 
to develop new highly reflective coatings that permitted short wavelength 
lasing while completely suppressing lasing on the fundamental. This paper 
briefly reviews the performance of both discharge driven and combustion 
driven chemical laser devices, and the optical configurations employed in 
the scalability steps. Appropriate diagnostics are discussed, including 
power, efficiency, spectra, and small signal gain. 

I. Introduction 

High power hydrogen fluoride (HF) chemical lasers have been the subject 
of research in the United States of America for approximately two decades. 

The basic principle of operation for continuous wave chemical lasers has been 
presented in several places. ^>2,3 During this period the technology advanced 
from the laboratory scale to major demonstration systems including Baseline 
Demonstration Laser (BDL), Navy-ARPA Chemical Laser (NACL), Mid-IR Advanced 
Chemical Laser (MIRACL) and ALPHA. Cylindrical as well as linear concepts 
have been investigated. Reference 4 presents a review of the High Power 
Laser programs. Emphasis during this period was placed on improvements in 
efficiency, scalability of concepts, and improvements in beam quality. For 
space-based applications size and weight considerations are critical. Plan¬ 
ned growth to include addressing responsive strategic threats requires sub¬ 
stantial increase in power as well as efficiency. An alternate approach to 
increasing the power requirements on the laser is to shorten the wavelength, 
thereby increasing brightness. Several efforts are ongoing to address this 
issue; however, success in the area is limited.^ Among the potential candi¬ 
dates for a shorter wavelength laser is the overtone chemical laser that 
builds directly on the hydrogen fluoride technology base. The overtone 
chemical laser uses the same chemical reaction and produces the same excited 
populations as does the conventional hydrogen fluoride laser. It differs in 
that the optics employed suppress lasing at 2.8 micrometers and allow lasing 
at 1.33 micrometers (see Fig. 1). 


31 







FUNDAMENTAL OVERTONE 


Fig. 1. Overtone Concept 


Subsonic Experiments 


Prior to this development under the Overtone Chemical Laser Program, 
overtone lasing had been observed at very low levels using techniques not 
scalable to the power levels necessary for the envisioned applications.^ 
Overtone lasing has been observed at low levels in other laboratories but 
no attempts were made to improve the modest performance.In 1984, a 
Helios CL-I chemical laser (Fig. 2) demonstrated approximately 10 watts of 
laser energy at approximately 1.33 micrometers. Significantly, this level 
represented approximately 20% of the corresponding lasing power on the funda¬ 
mental transition. Only the optics were changed to allow the overtone lasing. 
Transmissive optics designed for Nd-YAG applications were used in the demon¬ 
stration test. The device illustrated in Fig. 2 measures 15 centimeters in 
gain length. Improvements were made in the optics, eventually allowing the 
demonstration of 21%, of the fundamental power at the shorter wavelength.^ 
Limited scalability of the concept was achieved by increasing the gain length 
to 30, 45, and finally 75 centimeters by combining individual 15 centimeter 
modules (Fig. 3). The performance of these devices is summarized in Fig. 4. 
The data illustrated in Fig. 4 suggests an upper performance limit of approx¬ 
imately 30% of the fundamental. Suppression of the fundamental lasing in 
the longer gain length devices tended to be a problem. Techniques of mul¬ 
tiple mirror resonator designs prevented the fundamental wavelength from 
achieving lasing threshold by multiple reflections. Figure 5 illustrates 
the four mirror design used in the 75 centimeter device experiments. Rep¬ 
resentative spectra for these lasing tests are illustrated in Fig. 6. 


32 





Power(o)/Power(0 



Fig. 3. CL-IV Laser 


.60 • 

.50 • 

.40 ■ 

.30- A 


A A 



15 30 45 60 75 

Gain Length (cm) 


Fig. 4. Subsonic Device Performance Summary 


33 






Fig. 5. Four Mirror Configuration 



.60 

o 

.50 

$ 


0 

Q. 

.40 

75 

.30 


0 




.20 


.10 


2 3 4 5 6 

Rotational Line 

Fig. 6. CL-I Spectrum 

The multiple optical surfaces required to suppress the fundamental intro¬ 
duced an additional source of loss in the cavity design, which to the low 
gain overtone laser was significant. Subsonic performance was improved by 
the introduction of a new nozzle design of greater flow height, optics/opti¬ 
cal coatings specifically designed to suppress the fundamental and support 
overtone lasing, and hemispherical calorimeters designed to measure any 
radiation scattered from the highly reflective mirror surfaces. This im¬ 
proved design called the ZEB laser has demonstrated 557o of the fundamental 
performance at overtone power levels of approximately 200 watts or approxi¬ 
mately an order of magnitude power scalability with a doubling of the effic¬ 
iency. 


34 













Ill• Supersonic Experiments 


The subsonic designs do not lend themselves to being scalable to truly 
high power levels analogous to BDL, NACL, MIRACL, etc. The Overtone Chemical 
Laser Development Program transitioned into scalable supersonic chemical laser 
hardware in 1986. Tests performed at TRW demonstrated overtone performance 
at 24-357o of the fundamental using two chemical laser hardware configurations, 
the Hypersonic Wedge Nozzle (HYWN) and the Hypersonic Low Temperature (HYLTE) 
Nozzle conceptually illustrated in Figs. 7 and 8. A referenced paper describes 
these laser concepts in more detail.^ The reactants used were nominally deu¬ 
terium, flourine, hydrogen, and helium as a diluent. Mode lengths were found 
to be somewhat shorter than for the fundamental and the lasing spectra were as 
expected from the Helios experiments (Fig. 9). The resonator configuration con¬ 
sisted of transmissive Nd-YAG mirrors as in the initial Helios subsonic tests. 




Fig. 8. HYLTE Nozzle 


35 









Rotational Line 

Fig. 9. HYLTE Spectrum 

The success of these first supersonic experiments was somewhat misleading 
as to the true understanding of the overtone chemical laser concept. This 
fact was dramatically illustrated in the failure to demonstrate the scalabi¬ 
lity to higher power levels using larger nozzle hardware, ALPHA Verification 
Module (VM). To scale to higher power levels the more conventional closed 
cavity reflective optics were used. The gain length of the VM was such that 
the reflectivity suppression of the first generation optical coatings was 
inadequate to prevent fundamental lasing. The initial tests failed due to 
inadequate optical discrimination at the low fundamental rotational transi¬ 
tions. Improvements were made in coating design that achieved complete 
suppression of the fundamental transitions and allowed the demonstration of 
overtone performance at 25% of the fundamental at a total power level of 
approximately 4 kilowatts. However, these results were limited by repeated 
optical coating failure at flux levels greater than 30 kw/cm^. The follow¬ 
ing section will discuss the optical coating development in more detail. 

These VM tests did provide a much better understanding of the difficulties 
in the design of optical coatings highly reflective at one wavelength, 
totally absorbing in another, and having a characteristic damage threshold 
sufficiently high to support high power lasing. 

Differences in mode lengths between the overtone and fundamental lasing 
indicated that the optimum overtone nozzle design would not necessarily be 
identical to that for the fundamental laser. All supersonic lasing tests to 
this point had been run using existing hardware residual from previous chem¬ 
ical laser technology development programs that addressed fundamental lasing. 
The ZEBRA nozzle. Fig. 10, was designed, fabricated and tested to better 
understand the geometric influences of the HYWN nozzle on overtone lasing. 

This hardware, along with redesigned optics and resonator configuration demon¬ 
strated overtone lasing at 56% of the fundamental at a total power level in 
excess of 4 kilowatts. The overtone lasing spectrum is again simple as 
compared to the transition rich fundamental. Figure 11 provides a chronolo¬ 
gical summary of the overtone performance data. 


36 









Fig. 11. Overtone Lasing Performance Summary 


Previous calculations and experiments indicated a large difference be¬ 
tween the magnitude of the small signal gains (SSG) of the HF overtone transi¬ 
tions as compared to the HF fundamental, thereby creating a difficult gain 
competition to overcome. Experimental SSG data is vital to guide optical 
coating and resonator design requirements to achieve discrimination and 
efficient overtone operation. The ZEBRA device was used to make experimental 
SSG measurements. Figure 12 shows typical SSG traces in scanning from the 
centerline of a primary nozzle throat to the centerline of an intervening base 
region between nozzles. Figure 13 is a summary of the vibrational and rota¬ 
tional transitions included in the measurements. 


37 



















































































Fig, 12. Typical ZEBRA SSG Traces 



ZEBRA SMALL SIGNAL GAIN SUMMARY 


• HF Fundamental v=2-l Transitions 

Measured ssg of Pj(3). Pj(4). P^fS). Pj(6). Pj(8) Unes 

v= 1 -0 Transitions 

Measured ssg of P^(3). PJ4), P^fS). Pj(6), P^fS) Lines 

• HF Overtone v=2-0 Transitions 

Measured ssg of ^.gO), Pj.o(4). 1^ ,(5). Pj g(6) Unes 


• SSG Summary 

HF, Range 3-12 %/cm 

HFo Range 0.1-0.4%/cin 



38 







IV. Optics/Optical Coating Development 


The development of unique optical coatings has proven to be critical to 
the current success of the overtone chemical laser development and will likely 
continue to be a critical component. Initially the role of the optical coat¬ 
ing was not totally appreciated or understood. Several iterations in the 
development of successful coatings have been necessary to support overtone 
lasing at the current levels. It was understood that coatings must be 
developed that were highly reflective to the overtone transition and nearly 
totally absorbing to the fundamental. These coatings had to be such that the 
absorbed energy was transmitted efficiently to the cooled mirror substrate and 
also withstand relatively high power fluxes. What was not initially apprecia¬ 
ted was the wavelength band over which the fundamental lasing had to be sup¬ 
pressed. An error was made in the specification of the coating characteristics 
for the early Verification Module tests. Fundamental lasing typically occur¬ 
red at wavelengths from 2.7 to 2.9 micrometers in this hardware. The coatings 
developed adequately suppressed lasing in this band. However, this suppres¬ 
sion caused the lasing process to occur at shorter wavelengths, approximately 
2.6 micrometers on lasing transitions not normally observed. The optical 
coating developed and used in these early tests had sufficient reflectively 
in this region to allow inefficient fundamental lasing to occur. Subsequent 
developments in the optical coatings for the overtone chemical laser progres¬ 
sed to the point of approximately 0.3% reflectivity over the entire fundamen¬ 
tal lasing band and highly reflective in the overtone lasing band. Figure 14 
summarizes the development in optical coatings and illustrates performance 
of current designs. Typical designs are multi-layer stacks of approximately 
25 layers. Typical stack materials are ZnS, ThF 4 , and SiO. 



WavelengthCum) 


Fig. 14. Overtone Lasing Optics Summary 


39 




The coating designations on Fig. 14 are identified as follows: 


1986, 1987 

1987 ODC 

1988 PAC 

1988 NIC 

Details of 
at MICOM. 


- Multilayer Dielectric Coatings (MLDC) from Optical Coating 
Laboratory (OCLI) for tests on the Alpha Verification Module. 

- Optical Diagnostic Coating from Deposition Sciences, Inc. (DSI). 

- Partially Absorbing Coating from DSI for metal substrate, heat 
exchanger mirrors. 

- Normal Incidence Coating from DSI. 

the DSI coatings are available upon request from the authors 


VI. Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of the following 
individuals and organizations for their invaluable contributions to the rapid 
advance of this exciting technology: 

HF Overtone Laser Experiments: 

William Q. Jeffers 
Helios, Inc. 

Longmont, CO 

Jeffrey L. Sollee 

TRW Space & Technology Group 

Redondo Beach, CA 

Analytical Modeling & Data Evaluation 

Wilford Smith, Robert Acebal 

Science Applications International Group 

Marietta, GA 

Optical Coating Design and Analysis 

Gary F. Morr, Phillip Goede, William Hansen 
W. J. Schafer Associates, Inc. 

Woodland Hills, CA 

Optical Coating Production 

Dennis Kitchens 
Deposition Sciences, Inc. 

Santa Rosa, CA 


40 







References 


1. K. L. Kompa, Chemical Lasers, 37 (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1973). 

2. R. W. F. Gross and J. F. Bott, Handbook of Chemical Lasers (John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., New York, 1976). 

3. W. R. Warren, Jr., Astronautics & Aeronautics, 13, 4, 36, (1975). 

4. J. Miller, Proceedings of the International Conference on Lasers 87, 

Soc. for Optical & Quantum Electronics, p. 190, Dec. 7-11, 1987. 

5. C. R. Jones, Proceedings of the International Conference on Lasers, 87, 
Soc. for Optical & Quantum Electronics, p. 1139, Dec. 7-11, 1987. 

6. S. N. Suchard and G. C. Pimental, Applied Phys. Lett. 530 (1971). 

7. J. M. Walters, Proceedings of the International Conference on Lasers 88, 

Soc. for Optical & Quantum Electronics, Dec. 4-9, 1988. 

8. W. Q. Jeffers, "Scalable Overtone HF Chemical Laser," U.S. Patent 
Application 700,123, Filed Feb. 11, 1985. 

9. W. Q. Jeffers, AIAA Journal, January 1989, p. 64. 

10. J. F. Hon and J. R. Novak, "Chemically Pumped Hydrogen Fluoride Overtone 

Laser," IEEE J. Quantum Electronics, QE-11 , 698-699, (Aug. 1985). 

11. A. S. Bashkin, U. I. Ogoshin, Yu S. Leonov, A. N. Oraevskii, and 

O.E. Porodinkov, "An Investigation of a Chemical Laser Emitting Due to 
an Overtone of the HF Molecule," Sov. J. Quantum Electronics, 7, p. 626, 
(May 1977). 

12. G. W. Holleman and H. Injeyan, "Multi-Wavelength 2-5 Micrometer Laser," 
AFWAL-TR-80-1047, p. 14-22 (June 1980), Also: "CW DF Overtone Laser 
Demonstration," Topical Meeting on Infrared Lasers, Univ. of So. Cali¬ 
fornia (Dec. 3-5, 1980). 

13. W. Q. Jeffers, "Short Wavelength Chemical Laser Technology Development." 


41/(42 Blank) 






MANTEST - MICROCIRCUIT CHIP THERMAL SCREENING SYSTEM 

Daron C. Holderfield 
U.S. Army Missile Command 
AMSMI-RD-SE-MT 


I. INTRODUCTION 

Hybrid Microelectronic Assembly (HMA) manufacturers are 
faced with many producibility concerns as the complexity of 
military hardware continues to increase. These problems are 
componded by Government requirements for low volumes of complex 
HMA types. Custom HMAs are used extensively in missile systems 
as method of intergrating, or packaging, custom electronic 
functions such as missile guidance and control subsystems. 

Semiconductor chips are mounted into the HMA along with 
other discreet electronic devices, during a labor intensive, 
costly manufacturing process. The HMA package is then tested, 
at hot and cold temperature extremes, and hermetically sealed as 
an assembly. 

This paper provides the results of a research and 
development effort conducted by the Army Missile Command's 
Research, Development and Engineering Center, which addresses 
HMA producibility concerns. This effort focused on developing 
techniques for electrically probing the individual semiconductor 
chips under concurrent thermal stress prior to assembly into 
HMAs. 

The MANTEST - Microcircuit Chip Thermal Screening System, 
shown in figure 1, was designed and developed by the 
Manufacturing Technology Division. The system is semi-automatic, 
and provides a non-destructive method for probing individual 
chips at ambient and hot/cold tempr’-ature extremes. When coupled 
with a an electrical test system, MANTEST provides a unique 
capability for environmentally stress screening individual 
semiconductor chips. 

Of major importance is the system's ability to perform full 
dynamic screening with a single probe of each chip. 

This low-cost system provides a viable approach to improving 
HMA producibility while lowering production costs. MANTEST can 
be used to screen selected, critical chip types to validate 
electrical performance prior to HMA manufacturing. 






Figure 1. MANTEST - Microcircuit Chip Thermal Screening System 
II. ELECTRICAL/THERMAL PRESCREENING 

Military specifications require HMAs to be operated at 
ambient temperature, and at -55 and +125 degrees Celsius prior to 
acceptance. The conventional method for determining individual 
chip acceptability is wafer probing, where chips are static 
tested (DC capacitance test) at room temperature. This is 
followed by statistical sampling where only one to five percent 
of the wafer lot is electrically tested at the temperature 
extremes. During statistical sampling chips are mounted in 
custom test fixtures and are retained for future testing and 
validation purposes. The fixturing allows dynamic electrical 
testing at hot and cold temperature extremes. Using test results 
predictions are made concerning the remainder of the lot. 
Therefore, individual chip reliability is not verified until 
testing is performed on the HMA. Chip failures discovered at the 
HMA level result in costly troubleshooting, HMA rework, and 
repair, and lower the reliability of the HMA. 

The Manufacturing Technology Division identified the need 
for an Electrical/Thermal Prescreening (E/TP) process to pre-test 


44 






chips prior to HMA manufacturing. This led to the development of 
an E/TP process, and the design and development of a prototype 
system. 

The E/TP process consists of electrically probing a single 
chip at varying temperatures inside a temperature chamber. Hot 
and cold air is blown around the chip during test cycles. An 
electrical probe card, similar to a wafer probe card, is lowered 
to the chips surface. The probe card connects to a user provided 
electrical test system, and multiple dynamic tests may then be 
conducted at any temperature over the range from -55°C to +125°C. 
A thermocouple is positioned inside the thermal chamber to 
provide real-time temperature feedback. 

Chip handling, which is a major concern to HMA manufacturers 
is accomplished by an operator loading and unloading chips with a 
vacuum pencil. A rubber tip on the pencil prevents damage; all 
other E/TP processes have the chip in a fixed location held in 
place by a vacuum applied to the backside of the chip. The 
vacuum handling should minimize chip damage concerns. 

The MANTEST E/TP process, including electrical probing, is 
non-destructive and gives the HMA manufacturer a capability to 
screen chips at varying electrical parameters. MANTEST offers a 
viable process to increase yields of HMAs by screening select 
chip types suspected of hot/cold failures. MANTEST can also be 
used as a part of the chip design verification process to assess 
operability of new semiconductor designs over a broad range of 
temperatures. 

III. THE MANTEST PROTOTYPE 

Considerable engineering time was spent on the design of 
the prototype microcircuit chip thermal screening system. The 
thermal chamber is the center of all activities, yet chip input 
and output, alignment of electrical probes to the chip, and 
computerized process control were of equal concern and technical 
complexity. 

Manufacturing Technology Division personnel developed the 
MANTEST machine concept and prototype design with engineering 
support provided by contractors. The MANTEST design had to 
address the following needs: 

a) handle multiple types and sizes of chips; 

b) input and output to standard chip carriers; 

c) non-destructive electrical probing; 

d) thermal stress cycle over the range from -55 to +125°C; 


45 





e) interface to user-provided electrical test systeins; 

f) computer controlled processes with minimum operator 
training and intervention; and 

g) man-machine interfacing. 

The following paragraphs describe the various modules of the 
MANTEST prototype. 

A. Chip Table 

The chip table, shown in figure 2, is the holding mechanism 
for the individual semiconductor chips. The operator must load 
and unload chips into the cut-out on the table using a vacuum 
pencil. Gross alignment of the chip to the electrical probes is 
accomplished by placing the chip firmly into the cut-out. A hole 
is provided in the table through which a vacuum is applied to 
hold the chip in place during the E/TP process. 

The design of the table also provides good thermal transfer 
characteristics. Air flows under the copper table cap to provide 
thermal transfer to the backside of the chip. The housing is 
constructed from machinable Macor ceramic. 

A theta rotation mechanism is provided to allow the operator 
to adjust the chip's position with respect to the electrical 
probes as the entire table is rotated. However, the cut-out and 
loading process described above is used to align the chip so that 
electrical probing is possible with little or no manual theta 
adjustment. 



Figure 2. Chip Table 


46 





B. Rotary Transfer Arm 

The rotary transfer arm provides two chip tables which can 
be loaded and unloaded while the second is in the E/TP test 
position (inside the thermal chamber). This eliminates idle test 
time by allowing the operator to load/unload chips during 
concurrent E/TP on the second chip table. 

The transfer arm rotates exactly 180 degrees between the two 
positions and is restrained by magnetic stops. The operator 
manually rotates the table and a magnet locks the transfer arm 
into the test position while the electrical probes are down and 
in contact with the chips surface. Once testing is complete, the 
probes are raised to a safe location and the arm is unlocked. 

C. Thermal Chamber 

A thermal test chamber, shown in figure 3, was designed and 
developed to interface with a closed-loop thermal forcing unit. 
The chamber allows a positive air flow onto the chip under test 
and provides the integration point for the chip and electrical 
probes. 



Figure 3. MANTEST Thermal Chamber 


47 






The chamber has a total volume of approximately 1.5 cubic 
inches and was optimized for distributed air flow. Thermal 
forcing is accomplished by a commercial unit which uses 
compressed air or nitrogen to achieve a desired temperature at a 
controlled level of air flow. The unit is computer controlled 
and uses a thermocouple, mounted inside the thermal chamber, to 
maintain the desired temperature. With the present MANTEST 
prototype system configuration, a temperature cycle of ambient, 
-55 and +125*^C can be accomplished in less than one minute. 

Two exhaust ports are used for exit air flow from the 
thermal chamber. A quartz viewing window, located in the top of 
the chamber, is provided for the final chip alignment process. A 
closed circuit video camera, with an appropriate lens set, is 
used to view the chip and electrical probes. Display is 
accomplished via a 12 inch video monitor. 

An electrical mother board assembly is mounted inside the 
thermal chamber. An electrical probe card, which is chip 
specific, is then mounted to the mother board assembly. This 
capability allows rapid change-over from one card/chip type to 
another. An output electrical interface is provided by the 
mother board assembly for connecting to user provided electrical 
test systems. 

The thermal chamber, with electrical probe card is lowered 
to the chip table (Z axis alignment) during the E/TP process. 

The chamber is mounted on a vernier mechanism which is motor 
diven, and is raised and lowered to pretaught positions under 
computer control. A seal is provided on the chip table such that 
once the probes are lowered to the chips surface, the thermal 
chamber is closed to assure control of air flow. 

X and Y axis alignment is also accomplished through the 
thermal Chamber assembly. Micrometer driven sliding mechanisms 
allow the electrical probes, mounted to the chamber, to be 
acurately positioned by the operator. This is accomplished while 
viewing the chip and electrical probes on the video monitor. 

D. Video System 

The MANTEST video system consists of a video camera, 
appropriate lens, and a 12 inch display monitor that provides a 
magnified view of the chip urier test. The camera looks straight 
down through the temperature chamber window at the probes and 
chip. 


48 





The video camera is equipped with a zoom 6000 6.5 power 
lens. Illumination of the test area is achieved with a high- 
intensity fiber optic annular light source. Alignment of 
electrical probes to the chip under test is simplified by the 
video display and the manual, micrometer driven, X and Y axis 
mechanism described earlier. 

E. Computer Controller 

MANTEST E/TP processes are controlled by an IBM PC-XT 
compatible computer system. The standard XT has an IEEE-488 bus 
which links the MANTEST control software to the Z axis motor, 
rotary table locking mechanism, therinal forcing unit, and the 
user provided electrical test system. 

Process parameters are stored integral to the computer 
control software. This includes, Z axis location of the chip 
(electrical probes contact the chip surface), and hot and cold 
temperature settings. 

The software is user friendly, and provides detailed prompts 
and menus displayed on the computer screen, to lead the operator 
through the MANTEST E/TP process. All MANTEST options are listed 
and the operator can select the appropriate function. The 
software is structured to prevent operator keyboard entry errors, 
and escape sequences allow orderly system shutdown in the event 
of a software error. 

The software was written in compiled C code, and uses 
windowing techniques to provide the user with machine information 
and process parameters. 

IV. MANTEST E/TP PROCESS STEPS 

The following process steps are typical of a dynamic chip 
test. This assumes that the operator has setup temperature 
parameters using the MANTEST software schema, and has taught the 
Z axis location of the chip. 

a) operator loads a single chip onto the chip table; 

b) operator rotates the transfer arm 180 degrees; 

c) Z axis automatically lowers to a safe position with the 
probes just above the chips surface, transfer arm is 
locked into place; 

d) operator manually adjusts X, Y and theta alignment 

e) operator accepts alignment by keyboard response to the 
computer; 

f) Z axis automatically lowers to the chip surface; 


49 






g) computer initiates thermal cycle providing the desired 
temperatures; 

h) electrical tests are performed while operator loads the 
second chip table; 

i) operator accepts test results by keyboard response and 
the Z axis is raised to a safe position and the transfer 
arm is unlocked; and 

j) the process is repeated beginning at step b. 

While the process is semi-automatic and subject to operator 
error, it has been proven to be highly reliable and repeatable. 
The key process steps are operator handling of the chips, and 
alignment of the electrical probes to the chip. Therefore, 
operator performance is critical. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

The MANTEST system is currently available to the industrial 
base for implementation, and a demonstration model is set up at 
at Redstone Arsenal for user evaluations. Technical support is 
available to the industrial base to assist in the technology 
transfer of the MANTEST system and the thermal forcing concept. 

Test results, to date, have demonstrated the validity of 
thermal prescreening as a means to reduce HMA manufacturing cost. 
This technology can be applied to the manufacture of HMAs to 
improve yield at burn-in and reduce labor intensive rework. 


50 



AUTOMATED HERMETIC SEALING OF MICROCIRCUIT PACKAGES 
USING Nd:YAG LASER WELDING 

Daron C. Holderfield 
U.S. Army Missile Command 
AMSMI-RD-SE-MT 


I. INTRODUCTION 

An Automatic Hybrid Package Sealing System (AHPSS) was 
developed by the U.S. Army Missile Command under the DoD 
Manufacturing Technology (MANTECH) Program. 

The MANTECH Program provides a mechanism to improve the 
producibility of military hardware through research and 
development (R&D) appropriations. Focusing on manufacturing 
processes, equipment, materials, and other associated 
manufacturing elements, the MANTECH Program objective is to reduce 
military production costs through the development and 
implementation of generic manufacturing technologies. 

The AHPSS, shown in figure 1, is a fully-automated system for 
hermetically sealing microcircuit packages. A laser subsystem is 
used to weld lids on packages; robotic subsystems transport 
packages through the laser welding processes, and computer control 
provides complete system integration. 



Figure 1. AHPSS with front cover removed 


51 





















This paper will present a technical description of the AHPSS 
and discuss the parameters associated with quality Nd;YAG laser 
welding. The system is currently located in building 8972, 
Redstone Arsenal, AL. On site demonstrations and additional 
technical data are available to individuals and enterprises 
eligible under DODD 5230.5, through the RD&E Center's MANTECH 
Technology Transfer program. 

II. THE NEED FOR HERMETIC SEALING 

Hermetic sealing is required for hybrid microelectronic 
assemblies used in military weapon systems which must withstand 
extreme thermal stress, moisture, and long-term storage. Hybrid 
microcircuit packages, shown in figure 2, are used in missile 
systems due their relatively small size and weight, custom 
performance offerings, and overall electronic integration 
characteristics. 



Figure 2. Typical Hybrid Microcircuit Packages without Lids 

While conventional microcircuit package hermetic sealing 
methods have been adequate for most military applications, the 
processes are labor intensive, operator sensitive, and cannot 
accommodate some custom military package types due to 
non-conventional shapes and package/lid material combinations. 

The Manufacturing Technology Division, System Engineering and 
Production Directorate which is part of the Research, Development 
and Engineering Center, identified the need for improved and 
automated hermetic sealing processes in 1984. Detailed 
engineering concepts and baseline designs were developed which 
included robotic package handling to reduce manual, labor 
intensive, handling processes; laser welding to provide welding 
process flexibility; and computer control to reduce process 
parameter errors (operator mistakes) which are inherent in 
conventional sealing equipment. 


52 















MANTECH Task 1095, entitled "Automatic Sealing of Hybrid 
Microelectronic Packages" was initiated in 1985 with the following 
technical objectives: 

1) Develop a fully automated manufacturing system for 
hermetically sealing hybrid microcircuit packages 

2) Develop laser welding based sealing techniques 

3) Develop robotic material handling and computer 
control 

4) Transfer new hermetic sealing techniques to the 
industrial base 

The key thrust of the MANTECH Task was laser welding due to the 
need for greater flexibility to process non-conventional package 
shapes and material combinations. This was a major concern in 
1984 and continues to be a producibilty/manufacturing concern 
today. 

IV. THE AUTOMATIC HYBRID PACKAGE SEALING SYSTEM 

The AHPSS integrates Nd:YAG laser welding with moving optics, 
robotic package handling, and computer control to provide a unique 
capability for hermetic sealing of microcircuit packages. 

Automated processes include: 

1) moisture bake-out in a vacuum bake oven, 

2) package and lid alignment at the weld site, 

3) laser welding in a controlled inert atmosphere, 

4) robotic package loading and unloading, and 

5) fine leak detection. 

The following paragraphs describe each system module and 
peripheral tooling which are used in the automated hermetic 
sealing process. 

A. AHPSS TRAY 

An 18 inch by 18 inch tray was designed as a carrying fixture 
for AHPSS batch processing. The tray design accommodates twenty- 
five microcircuit packages, which are located on a carrying 
fixture called a pallet. Trays are moved through the AHPSS on a 
rail mechanism with motor driven push-pull arms. Tooling pins on 
the tray provide a known location and a hold-down mechanism for 
each of the twenty-five pallets. The tray is made of aluminum and 
is fabricated in a manner to minimize overall weight. 

B. AHPSS PALLET 

The pallet was designed as a carrying fixture for individual 
microcircuit packages during AHPSS processing. Four corner stops 
are provided to restrain the package and lid in the desired 
orientation. The pallet design also provides a constant distance, 
125 mm, from the lens. Both of these features are essential to 
AHPSS operations, and require a custom pallet design for each 


53 








configuration of package processed on the AHPSS. Currently, 
pallets are machined from aluminum stock and require approximately 
one hour to fabricate. Two holes are provided in the pallet for 
handling by the overhead gantry robot's grippers. 

C. MOBILE VACUUM BAKE OVEN 

The vacuum bake oven was designed as a mobile unit, 
independent of the AHPSS, to allow multiple units to support off¬ 
line vacuum bake-out. Any vacuum bake oven unit may be connected 
to and integrated with the AHPSS as required. The oven consists 
of a vacuum vessel, exterior frame with metal housing mounted on 
wheels for mobility, a vacuum pumping system, automatic 
temperature control, manual operated door for loading trays of 
packages, and an automatic door coupled to the environmental 
chamber for unloading trays. A vertical conveyor inside the oven 
allows stacking of 8 trays with each containing a maximum of 
twenty-five microcircuit packages/lids. The conveyor presents 
each tray to the automatic door for insertion into the AHPSS 
environmental chamber. 

D. GANTRY ROBOTS 

The pallets are handled through AHPSS processes by three 
overhead mounted gantry robots with integral grippers. These are 
called the load gantry, the shuttle gantry, and the unload gantry. 
Each gantry consists of a combination of single-axis, permanent 
magnet, synchronous linear reluctance stepper motors. The linear 
motors use a moving element called a forcer, which travels along a 
ferromagnetic track called a platen. The load gantry and unload 
gantry each have X and Y axis motion and use dual forcers and 
platens. The shuttle gantry only travels in the X axis and uses a 
single forcer and platen. The gantry robots run in an open-loop 
mode using micro-stepping techniques for high resolution and 
repeatability at 0.040 inch resolution and 0.002 inch 
repeatability. 

E. GANTRY ROBOT GRIPPER ASSEMBLIES 

A gripper end effector assembly, shown in figure 3, is 
attached to each of the three gantry robots. The gripper picks up 
and deposits a single pallet at various process points of the 
AHPSS. The grippers are air-solenoid driven, with spring return 
pivotal mechanisms (male tooling pins) which mate with bushed 
tooling holes on AHPSS pallets. When activated, the mechanism 
grips the pallet, raises vertically to a preset clearance, and 
then is positioned to the next desired location by the gantry 
robot. The gripper's tooling pins are retractable, meaning if an 
error in positioning occurs, the tooling pin prevents Z axis 
crashing and resultant damage. The load gantry gripper has a 
detection switch to identify if a lid accompanies the desired 
package, and serves as a lid hold-down mechanism while the pallet, 
package, and lid are transferred from the input tray to the rotary 
table where welding is accomplished. 


54 


Figure 3. Gantry Gripper with Pallet and Package 

F. ROTARY TABLE AND PACKAGE/LID ALIGNMENT MODULE 

A pallet with a package and lid, is transferred by the input 
gantry robot to a rotary table at the initiation of a welding 
sequence. The rotary table, with four pallet locations, steps in 
90 degree increments for pallet/package loading, welding, and 
unloading. The fourth location is not used unless the AHPSS is in 
the "fully-automatic” mode. 

An electro-mechanical centering mechanism, shown in figure 4, 
is used for package-to-lid alignment which also aligns the 
combinations both with respect to the position of laser beam. The 
centering mechanism consists of four spring-loaded fingers mounted 
on linear rack and pinion slides. The fingers are driven in pairs 
to push the package in the X and Y axis utilizing a slip-clutch 
concept. The continuous slip-clutches allow one pair of alignment 
fingers to continue moving after the other has made contact with 
the package. A second set of fingers, which work the same way, 
are used for lid alignment. 


55 




TOPV/EW 


SIDE VIEW 



UDAUGNMENT 


HMA PACKAGE 



• UDAUGNMENT FINGERS RETRACT 
AFTER TAC WELD IS COMPLETED. 


TYPICAL HMA 
PACKAGE & UD 


CENTERING 
RNGERS (4) 


Figure 4. Package and Lid Alignment Module 

G. NdrYAG LASER SUBSYSTEM 

Laser welding is accomplished with a pulsed NdrYAG laser 
which can produce up to 400 watts average power. Laser components 
include a laser optical assembly, power supply, programmable 
controller with multiple input/output ports, operator interface 
(console), and gas control system. A low-power helium-neon (HeNe) 
laser is integrated with the YAG for optics alignment and 
programming of weld paths/prograros. The laser optics assembly is 
rigid-mounted to the AHPSS frame, and is self-contained in a 
lockable laser casket. 

The NdrYAG (neodymium-doped yttrium-aluminium-garnet) laser 
rod measures 0.375 inches in diameter and 6.25 inches in length. 
The rod is mounted at the center focal point of a double ellipse 
cavity. A krypton flashlamp is at each of the two minor foci of 
the ellipse. The lamps and rod are mounted in a block called the 
laser head, which is cooled with three parallel water flows. 

Lasing is created by interaction between the laser head and 
mirrors when energy is pumped in through the flashlamps. The 
laser head and mirrors form an oscillator cavity approximately 16 
inches in total length (the cavity contains one fold to reduce 
size). A curved mirror with 100% reflectivity and a partially 
reflective flat output mirror produce intracavity feedback, 
inducing laser action. This produces a laser beam with 15 mrads 
divergence. 

Laser pulse characteristics are controlled by parameter 
settings in the programmable controller. Through front panel 
(operator console) settings or pre-taught software, laser pulses 
can be varied from 0 to 5 joules per millisecond, from 0 to 20 
milliseconds in length, at up to 200 pulses per second. The 
maximum average power is 400 watts, with 50 joules maximum energy 
per pulse. The beam is invisible infrared, with a wavelength of 


56 






1.06 um. Upon exiting the oscillator cavity, the laser beam 
passes through a collimator which doubles the beam diameter and 
reduces divergence to about 8 mrads. 

After exiting the laser casket, the beam is directed through 
a measurement cabinet which contains a pyrometer that can be moved 
into the beam-path when measurements to evaluate laser power are 
required. This is used to monitor the power performance of the 
laser system. 

H, MOVING OPTICS MODULE 

Beam positioning within the AHPSS work area is accomplished 
by a moving optics module. X and Y axis servo motors provide 
positioning of two orthogonal mirrors to precisely direct the beam 
to the AHPSS work area. The module is mounted to the AHPSS 
overhead frame and uses slide mechanisms with lead screws for high 
accuracy beam positioning. The optics module is controlled by the 
laser controller. This provides full electro-mechanical 
integration for process control. Final beam shaping in the Z axis 
is accomplished by a 125 mm focal length lens which places a beam 
of approximately 0.035 inches diameter on the target. The focus 
can be manually controlled by a motorized micrometer. 

A key feature of the moving optics module is the integration 
of a video camera, mounted behind the final mirror, which is used 
to view the laser beam path in the work area. Display is 
accomplished via a 9 inch video monitor with approximately 30 
power magnification. This capability provides the method for an 
operator to develop new weld beam paths using the HeNe beam. The 
display is also used to monitor YAG beam positioning during actual 
welding sequences. 

I. ENVIRONMENTAL CHAMBER 

The AHPSS environmental chamber encloses the system's frame 
along with robotic package handling and moving optics modules. 
Ante-chambers are prc'ided for interfacing the vacuum bake oven 
with the environmental chamber, shuttling welded packages on a 
pallet to the leak detection module, and output of empty trays. 
Therefore the chamber is quite large as compared to conventional 
sealing dry-boxes due to the automation elements. 

A front cover panel viewing port is provided with eye safe 
shielding to permit observation of YAG laser operations. This 
allows the AHPSS to operate as a Class I laser system. 

The AHPSS purification system is self-contained and provides 
a 40 cfm recirculation blower, moisture and oxygen removal to less 
than one part per million, pressure control system, and automatic 
regeneration. A parallel regeneration loop is provided with an 
additional 100 cfm filtration. This exhausts all by-products 
produced during laser welding. The environment is maintained at 
90% argon with 10% helium as a tracer (leak detection) gas. 


57 




J. LEAK DETECTION MODULE 


This module was developed as an AHPSS in-process hermetic 
evaluation and not to meet MIL-STD-883 specifications. This 
provides immediate feedback as to the quality of laser v/elding 
processes to the host computer. A standard commercial leak 
detection system was integrated with the AHPSS for remote 
programming and control. This helium mass spectrometer leak 
detection system detects leaking tracer gas from packages sealed 
in the AHPSS chamber. Packages are loaded into a leak detection 
chamber by the unload gantry robot. 

K. AHPSS HOST COMPUTER AND SOFTWARE 

The system is controlled by an IBM PC-AT compatible computer 
host system with RS-232 serial interfacing to individual system 
modules and subsystems. While the laser controller provides 
control of the laser, rotary table, and moving optics module, all 
other AHPSS functions are controlled by the host computer. The 
laser controller is fully integrated with the host computer which 
monitors each task. 

The AHPSS host computer is menu-driven with operator 
interface via a mouse-device and keyboard. The software is 
extremely efficient and modular. From the main menu the operator 
can select the desired option. Most options from the main menu 
call other menus. If run-one-part is selected at the main menu, 
a run-one-part menu is displayed. 

Any function of the AHPSS can be operated independent of 
other subsystem functions under host computer control using the 
’’single-step" mode. This was very useful during the development 
and debugging of each subsystem module. The ’’run-one-part’’ mode 
automatically sequences one package through all AHPSS processes. 
In the ’’fully-automatic" mode, the system will continuously run 
packages, without operator intervention, and allows the AHPSS to 
perform some tasks in parallel to increase system throughput. 

The host computer is hardware and software interfaced to 
numerous limit switches and sensors to monitor AHPSS operations 
and process errors. The host computer controller also interfaces 
with the leak detection module to allow desired leak detection 
parameters to be stored integral to the AHPSS. 

V. Nd:YAG LASER WELDING PROCESSES 

The following paragraphs describe the AHPSS hermetic sealing 
and leak detection processes, and the methodology for programming 
the system to operate under computer control. 

Parts flow through the AHPSS, shown in figure 5, in a batch 
mode. Process steps, after a tray of parts has been transferred 
from the mobile vacuum bake oven, are as follows; 


58 



1 ) 

2 ) 



4) 

5 ) 

6 ) 

7 ) 

8 ) 


Package and lid are transported to the rotary table; 
Rotary table moves 90 degrees to present the package 
to the weld station; 

Alignment module centers package and lid with respect 
to the laser beam; 

Laser fires to perform tack welds; 

Laser fires to perform hermetic seal; 

Sealed package is transported to leak detection 
chamber; 

Leak detection is performed; and 
Package is transported to output tray. 


The AHPSS is structured such that the operator must set up 
the hardware, software, and operating parameters, and monitor the 
Nd:YAG laser welding activities for safety purposes. All 
processes are fully-automatic and under computer control. 



Figure 5. AHPSS Plan View 
VI. LASER WELDING PARAMETERS 


Prior to running the AHPSS, the operator must develop a 
welding program on the laser controller (required for each 
different package type). The program defines the X and Y 
positioning of the laser beam on the hybrid package for tack and 
continuous welds, and laser firing parameters such as energy, 
pulse length, pulse width, speed of the moving optics, and the 
number of warm-up shots required. 


X and Y locations are taught by the AHPSS operator using the 
laser controller console, the video camera/monitor which displays 
a magnified view of the work area, and the low-power HeNe laser. 


59 






The HeNe beam, which is visible to the operator, and package are 
viewed simultaneously on the 9 inch video monitor. The operator 
will usually select a package corner as a starting point and 
simply select a beam path (X and Y coordinates) through visual 
alignment of the HeNe beam to the package. Coordinates are 
displayed on the laser controller console, and are incorporated 
into the laser welding program. X and Y coordinates are 
established for tack weld locations and for continuous welding 
start and stop locations. 

Laser parameters are defined as part of the laser welding 
program. This includes energy, pulse width and length, and the 
number of shots (pulses). 

A typical set of parameters for a nickel plated Kovar package 
is as follows: 

O WARMUP SHOTS 

- Energy = 0.6 joules 

- Pulse Rate = 30 shots per second 

- Length = 10 milliseconds 

- Number of Shots = 30 

o TACK WELD 

- Energy = 0.8 joules 

- Pulse Rate = 30 shots per second 

- Length = 10 milliseconds 

o CONTINUOUS WELD 

- Energy = 0.8 joules 

- Pulse Rate = 30 shots per second 

- Length = 10 milliseconds 

- Speed = 15 inches per minute 

Warm-up shots are used to excite and energize the laser flash 
lamps. This capability allows the laser to be "warmed" to 100% 
average power prior to actual welding, and insures that actual 
welding parameters are at the desired level. 

Parameters for tack and continuous welding must be evaluated 
and optimized for each packages type. The parameters vary as 
packages are made up of multiple types of materials such as nickel 
plated Kovar, gold plated Kovar, and other combinations. 

After completing a laser welding program, the operator must 
save the program to floppy disk. The program can then be executed 
stand-alone, or in an automated manner with the AHPSS. Programs 
can also be retrieved from floppy disk as required. 

VII. FUTURE AHPSS GOALS AND OBJECTIVES 

Manufacturing Technology Division personnel are currently 
concentrating on developing and optimizing laser welding process 


60 






parameters to support a wide range of package types and materials 
combinations. 

Additional AHPSS and hermetic sealing efforts are planned 
under the MANTECH Program. This work will focus on developing 
laser welding parameters and specific processes which are 
applicable to military microcircuit requirements. Our intent is 
to transition this technology from the laboratory to the 
production environment, thus enhancing the industrial base for 
microelectronics. Resultant data will be offered free to U.S. 
companies through our Technology Transfer Program. 

The AHPSS prototype is installed at the Manufacturing 
Technology Division's manufacturing research lab at Redstone 
Arsenal, Alabama. Additional information and on-site 
demonstrations are available upon request. 


61/(62 Blank) 









CmiBINED ASMS MULTIPURPOSE MISSILE 


Jimmy R. Duke 

Advanced Sensors Directorate 
Research, Development, and Engineering Center 


abstract 

Combined Arms Multipurpose Missile (CAMM) is a Missile Command research 
and development program being conducted inhouse with industry support to 
demonstrate an innovative missile guidance concept offering major perform¬ 
ance improvements for anti-air weapon system applications. 

A multiguidance concept is being developed to extend the use of terminal 
homing seekers against long range, low signature targets in clutter by com¬ 
bining the features of terminal homing and command guidance into a single, 
lightweight missile for multipurpose roles. Three modes of operation would 
be available to cover a wide variety of target and conditions; a lock-on- 
before- launch fire-and-forget mode always used when the target signature- 
to-clutter ratio permits, a line-of-sight command guidance mode used when 
this ratio is low and target lock-on is not possible or in severe counter¬ 
measure environments, and finally, a lock-on-after-launch mode that uses 
command guidance early to guide the missile and point the seeker towards 
the target to enable the earliest possible target lock-on-after-launch for 
moderate signature/clutter conditions. The flight demonstration of this 
third mode is the primary objective of this program. The other two modes 
separately are well within current technology capability. 

Begun in 1988 with the selection of the HELLFIRE missile as a test bed, 
the program is nearing the completion of hardware development. Static, 
captive, and missile environment testing is in progress. Flight tests are 
planned in 1991-92. Design details will be given. 

INTRODUCTION 

Combined Arms Multipurpose Missile (C/'iiM) is a MICOM 6.2 funded technology 
demonstration program that combines fire-and-forget terminal homing seeker 
guidance with command guidance on the same missile to achieve a major per¬ 
formance improvement in missile guidance capability. In this case sophisti¬ 
cated target acquisition and guidance hardware is carried on board the missile 
to achieve higher terminal accuracy at longer range than can be obtained with 
command or terminal homing guidance alone. 

The CAMM program is aimed at demonstrating the availability and maturity 
of technology to implement this dual guidance concept to allow missiles to 
operate more effectively at longer ranges. 


63 






OBJECTIVE 


Previously, the Army Missile Command has developed lock-on-before- 
launch (LOBL) seeker technology for its fire-and-forget capability, but 
with the missile operating range limited to the lock-on range capability 
of the seeker. Now, with technology advances, the missile range can be 
extended by flying part of the way with command guidance until the seeker 
and its processor can lock onto the target and complete the engagement in 
the terminal homing mode. Demonstration of this lock-on-after-launch (LOAL) 
capability required to implement a dual guidance concept is the key objec¬ 
tive of the CAMM program. 


APPLICATIONS 


The CAMM concept, as depicted in Figure 1, has application to a wide 
variety of lightweight launch platforms and targets, hence the term "multi¬ 
purpose." Included in the launch platforms are the future light helicopter 
(LHX) for the aviation role and a Pedestal Mounted Stinger type of light 
vehicle platform for the air defense role. The target set includes both 
air and ground targets. The most difficult target from a seeker lock-on 
standpoint is the long range helicopter hovering in clutter. The armored 
target is the most difficult from a warhead viewpoint. Both of these tend 
to increase missile diameter. The maneuvering fixed wing target drives the 
missile kinematics which leads to a larger length-of-diameter ratio or longer 
missile. 

The CAMM program is focusing on the first problem of engaging long range, 
low signature targets in clutter. To this end the innovative dual guidance 
concept based on the most advanced seeker and image processor technology is 
being developed. Its objective is to demonstrate a means to rapidly engage 
any line-of-sight target detected by the platform fire control sensor suite, 
even when the target signature to clutter ratio is too low to permit LOBL. 
Flight demonstrations of this technology and concept are planned using the 
HELLFIRE missile as a test bed. The issues of warhead sizing, airframe kine¬ 
matics and platform sensor suite development will be left for a future weapon 
system development program such as The Army Counter Air Weapon System (TACAWS). 

DUAL GUIDANCE 


Dual guidance extends the operating range and application of the host 
missile by adding the capabilities of the two guidance modes. The mid-course 
command guidance will be accomplished by C02 laser beamrider due to avail¬ 
ability of hardware. Millimeter wave command guidance is another candidate 
approach for this function. Terminal homing guidance will be implemented 
initially using TV seekers as surrogates for the more tactically suitable 
Imaging Infrared (IIR) seekers. Actual flights with HR seekers are planned 
for later after proving out the test bed missile with the lower cost TV 
seeker. 


64 














As illustrated in Figure 2, three distinct operating modes are available 
with the dual guidance concept. The classical lock-on-before-launch, true 
fire-and-forget mode is available and would always be used when the target 
signature, clutter and countermeasures environment allow. The lock-on range 
and use of this mode can be severely restricted by these conditions. 

The command guidance mode all the way to intercept is available for 
adverse conditions when signature, clutter or countermeasures does not allow 
target lock-on by the seeker. In this mode the missile is tethered to the 
platfo7-m for guidance and its long range accuracy is limited. 

By combining the two guidance modes on a single missile, as shown at 
the bottom of the figure, a third mode which extends the missile operating 
range and performance is possible. A target "filter" is obtained from the 
platform's computer library of target optical images and is loaded into the 
missile seeker before launch. This tells the missile seeker what target to 
look for within its narrow field-of-view. It is based on all of the informa¬ 
tion known about the target from the platform's sophisticated sensor suite or 
from external inputs. The seeker is pointed toward the target while the 
missile is flown by command guidance toward the target. When the Automatic 
Target Recognition (ATR) processor is able to establish a correlation be¬ 
tween the stored target filter and the seeeker provided video, which includes 
target and clutter, handover occurs to the seeker target tracker and the 
engagement is completed in the terminal homing mode. The target filter may 
also be used for terminal aimpoint selection to provide information to the 
tracker to obtain the most effective aimpoint for each target. 

It is this third mode of operation that is the technology challenge of 
the CAMMS program and for which hardware is being developed for proof-of- 
principal flight demonstrations. The first two modes are considered to be 
well within current capability. 

An additional capability is being investigated in which the seeker video 
also would be transmitted back to the platform to permit operator input and 
trajectory adjustment. Implementation of this could be by means of a modu¬ 
lated laser retro-reflector in the aft of the missile. 

The command guidance approach chosen for CAMMS is a C02 laser beamrider 
raster scan implementation, shown in Figure 3. The center of the scan is 
placed on the line-of-sight (LOS) to the target by virtue of its being bore- 
sighted to the TV or FLIR target tracking sensor. The time of arrival of 
the laser beam on the missile receiver is unique for each position within the 
raster. The missile is thus able to determine it position and maintain itself 
on the LOS to the target. 

A simplified version of the ATR processor is shown in Figure 4. The 
target filter consists of a 256 X 256 X 8 bit array of numbers representing 
the target image in the frequency domain for every 10 degrees of target 
aspect. Several target filters are required for target growth to cover band 
of range-to-go. A corresponding array is developed in real time during 


65 









flight from the seeker image using a two-dimensional FFT processor. The 
256 X 256 array and a 2.2 degree fieId-of-view produce an instantaneous 
field-of-view of 150 microradians. This results in 10 pixels within a 
3.0 meter dimension of a target at a range-to-go of 2.0 kilometers. This 
is the CAMM ATR baseline. 

A two-dimensional correlation surface, such as is shown in Figure 5, is 
produced by multiplying these two arrays element by element and taking the 
IFFT of the result row-by-row and then column-by-column. An analysis of 
this surface by a general purpose processor identifies the target coordinates 
corresponding to the best correlation. The target tracker is locked onto 
the target at these coordinates and hand-over is completed. The target is 
then tracked to intercept in the terminal homing mode. 

CAMMS HARDWARE 


The CAMMS test bed missile, shown in Figure 6, is divided into two parts; 
the CAMMS unique forward section with its seeker, processing electronics and 
telemetry package and the back section which is HELLFIRE except for the 
rearward looking CAMMS command guidance C02 laser receiver and associated 
hardware. 

The completion of the design and fabrication of the first prototype 
missile is expected this year. This missile will be used to validate the 
design and all electrical and mechanical interfaces. Subsequently, up to 
six flight missiles will be assembled with TV seekers for flight tests in 
FY91. 

Examples of CAMMS hardware in-hand are in Figures 7 through 10. The TV 
seekers were obtained from Boeing and are a variant of the FOG-M seeker. A 
gimbal mounted Sony XC-37/47 CCD camera/optics provides a 2.0 degree field- 
of-view with an RS170 format output. A low drift rate in the rate mode of 
less than 60 degrees per hour in the pitch plane (0.33 degrees, 1 sigma, 
during a 20 second flight) is obtained through the use of an improved 
Northrop 2-axis rate gyro. This helps insure that the target will remain 
in the seeker's field-of-view during the command guidance phase. 

The tripod mounted C02 laser beamrider beam projector was obtained 
through Ford Aerospace and is related to their AAWS-M effort. This pro¬ 
jector can provide command guidance to the maximum range of the HELLFIRE 
test bed missile if needed. The wing-mounted command guidance receiver 
includes a cryogenically cooled HgCdTe detector, filter, optics, and preamp. 
It provides a 4.0 mm diameter aperture with a 30 degree field-of-view. 

The biggest technical challenge of the program has been the packaging 
of the ATR and guidance electronics into the HELLFIRE test bed missile even 
though it is 7.0 inches in diameter and the warhead has been removed. Shown 
is one of eight PC boards that go into the front of the missile behind the 
seeker to do the CAMMS function. Four of them are associated with the ATR 
processor. Each of these boards is multilayer with one having eight layers. 


66 








Further downsizing of the electronics can be expected in the future with 
advancements in processing density and speed as would be required for a 4 to 
5-inch diameter tactical implementation. 

SUMMARY 


As a summary, the schedule of Figure 11 shows that hardware design and 
development has been essentially completed. Component testing and algorithm 
development are on schedule this year and should lead to TV seeker flights 
in FY91 at the Eglin AFB, FL HELLFIRE test range. If affordable HR seekers 
can be obtained, they could be integrated into the test bed missile and 
flown in FY92 to be ready for TACAWS, an Advanced Technology Transition 
Demonstration (ATTD) planned to start in FY93. 


67 








LIGHTWEIGHT MULTI-PURPOSE SYSTEM 






a DC 

oci? 

<Sp 

<6 C9 O 


Figure 1. 

















































73 














74 


Figure 7. CAM 

























f igure lU. 


































Synthetic Discriminant Functions 
for use in Pattern Recognition 


S. Richard F. Sims 
and 

Jonathan A. Mills 


U.S. Army Missile Command 
Research Development and Engineering Center 
AMSMI-RD-AS-SS 

Redstone Arsenal. Alabama 35898-5253 


ABSTRACT 

Synthetic Dlscrlmlnemt Functions have had several different names over the last ten 
years of their development from the earliest type called linear combinatorial filters to one of the 
latest versions called the minimum average correlation energy filter. The ten years of 
development produced many different variations and efforts toward significant advancement over 
two dimensional matched filters. Most of this filter development was oriented toward optical 
implementations, however, the test results presented here are selected from many filters tested 
digitally and £ire considered exemplary of the major types for use in both optical and digital 
implementations. 

2. SDF Development Stages 

We categorize three major stages In SDF development each of which Is considered an 
improvement over the previous one. The 
original or first SDF method Is a linearly 
combined reference set‘ using the technique 
outlined In Figure 1*. 

The limitation of this original 
approach is that the correlation surface Is 
not guaranteed to be anything specific or 
defined except at the registered position. In 
other words there Is no control over the 
output correlation surface except at one 
point. This result Is of course In general 
much different than a matched filter would 
produce and was not very useful until phase 
encoding schemes were introduced.® The 
phase only encoding, shown in Figure 2, and 
the binary phase encoding produce 
dramatically Improved results. 


standard 80F uaing N training Imagaa d alamanta long 
whara d » N. 

N 

h SDF filter 

i-1 ' ' 

rT- 

h X.* V. 

J J 

Zv:-X|-v,-Ia,R,|,i.,,2.3,---N 
R a • V 

__ -g ___ 

a ■ R V 

Tha vahiaa of • t Tha a | ara tha training Imagaa. 

Figure 1 


79 







1297-15 


The second category of SDF techniques Is 
called the Correlation SDF^ and has an 
Intuitive aspect which Is easily visualized.®. The 
Information used in building the SDF are the 
references themselves and noting the fact that 
the system of equations in Figure 1 is under 
determined the insertion of constants at 
desired places using a duplication of offset 
references creates control points on the 
correlation surface. This techiiique is used to 
create a distinctive correlation surface at and 
around the registered position. In addition this 
second method retains the limitation of the 
original SDF method in that it does not conLt}] 
the correlation aitywhere except at the defined 
control points and the surface can take on 
uncontroUed values at all other positions. This 
uncontroUablllly is not necessarily a problem if 
a subsequent correlation stage uses an ideal 
result cross correlation to extract the unique 
surface shape sculpted by the control points 
selected. This approach does however add that 
additional computation. For other than single 
pass cross correlation for near term digital Implementation this methodology, as shown in 
the Results Tables under the E2Z5TFAB100. S5E2TFAB1. and E2Z5TFAB1 performs better 
than the phase encoded methods and shows more potential detectability. 


PHASE ENCX^DING 

• Complex frequency domain pixel • x • ly 
•Rectangular to polar phase encoding 

PMA-qp. 

0 • tan*’ X 

AMPLnUDfe 

Amplitude Is set to a constant ■ 1 

• Polar to rectangular conversion 


Figure 2 


The third category looks at a more comprehensive way of developing the SDF filters 
in that they strive to minimize the variance® and then in another more easily computed 
method to minimize the average correlation energy (MACE)^. These methods vary 
significantly from the earlier techniques in that these approaches try to control the overall 
correlation surface by Implicitly minimizing a global feature. An outline of the development 
of the MACE filter Is shown In Figure 3 and Figure 4. 


g,(n) • x.(n)©h(n) 

Ei-^|gi(n)|*-(Vd)^|Gi(k)I* 

• (1/d) ^|H(lc)f IXjtk)!* 

k1 

bi wctor fonn can alao be written u 
E: • HD.H 

where 0|(k.k)* |X.(k)| 

arid the correlation peak ampfitude constraint is 
g.(0) • X.H • u. 

“i I I 


E^- (VNlJ^E, • (1 /N)£h*D,H 
w w 

N 

letting D •^ «|D| If all «|-1 

M 

then 

E^- {1/N)h'D H 

By minimizing subject to X*H^u using 
the method of Lagrange multipliers the 
solution for the MACE filter Is 

H • D'’x(X*d''x) ’u 


Figure 3 


Figure 4 












Figure 5 - Large Object Reference Set 


3. Filter Testing 

Filters were developed using two data sets shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6. 
Performance results of the major filter types are presented in Results Tables 1 and 2. 
Results Table 1 (RTl) was generated using the cross correlation of the specified filter 
with the input images that consisted of the reference object with its actual background 
as shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6. Results Table 2 (RT2) was generated using the cross 
correlation of the specified filter with each reference used to build the filter, hence 
RT2 shows the best possible performance achievable. The testing of the frequency domain 
SDF development methods which are the phase only, binary phase only and the minimum 
average correlation energy filters, involved several steps in the process common to all 
frequency domain methods as depicted in Figure 7. To define the zero offset position 
the images used to build the filter or the input image must be quadrant swapped to give 
a point of reference in the correlation surface. This swapping essentially places the 
center of the images in the upper left corner as shown in Figure 8. 

As shown in RTl the performance using the phase only encoding (PHASE ENCODED) 
produced generally poor results, but the insertion of a D.C. notch significantly enhanced 
the performance (see PHASE NOTCH). The optimum size of the frequency notch is clearly 
object dependent. 

The PHASE NOTCH technique results shown are a results of using the optimum notch 
size. The binary phase only encoded (BINARY PHASE in RT2) SDF has the inherent feature 
of on axis bleed through of the test reference® and consequently makes the probability 
for use with a digital implementation quite low, however, this does not of course impede 
its use optically. We did not chose to test the BINARY PHASE SDF with the background 
data set because of its relatively poor performance against its own reference set. 


81 




























































Figure 6 - S:n;il! Oliicet K-'lcrmc:' S-: 



Com,Tion Processes 

■ >,* l.r^e 

O'jail'a-' 


1 

S«ra: 

■ c; ■ 

npcf Ifn4g« 

Q'ji^nri’ 


2 

Sw«r 

■ FrT' 

Inu^ 

Ouadrint 

70 

3 


frr ■ I 


H 

Ou«a'a-’ 

Sera.c r * ' 


Figur<- 


• Filtei 
' tncodiTvg 
I yelTvod 


QUADRANT SWAP 

1 4 13 


1 2 


•4 t reel 


• « *4 lee «4 i7« «« 


1 «e «4 er, , eA CA we ee 


8fc "»■ wf es 1.*^ e« 66 

4 3 I 

e« wt *4.wB 

116 we 1 we 


e« «7B e« we 


e • •» WB 

•re ' i». 

rXlMAIN 


Figure H 


82 










1297-15 


In addition to Uie full reference set (every 10 degree object aspect) testing, several 
filters of each type were Implemented wlUi half of the reference set (every other object 
aspect) Incorporated. Tills half filter was a test to evaluate the distortion tolerance or 
sensitivity of each filter method. The result tables depict this performance under the Half 
References section. 

The background grayscale value used in all filler development was tlie target mean 
value and It should be'noted that performance was not as tractable using other values suUi 
as the image mean or any other experimental value. 

4. Summary of Results 


The statistics of the overall results are shown in Results Tables 1 and 2. The best and 
worst case MACE correlation surfaces are also shown with detailed statistics In Appendix A. 
The SDF file naming convention for use in Inteipretlng the results table Is described In 
Appendix A It is clear the MACE SDF produces the best single pass correlation results. 

The MACE SDF performs well when the background value used in the filter is the 
target mean. The resultant output can generally contains low frequency components which 
translate to slowly rolling hills In the correlation surface, however, these were removed using 
a nonlinear D.C. notch filter post process on the correlation surface Itself. This low 
frequency component was also removed using frequency notching in the frequency plane 
which generated less than optimum but useable results. 

Several additional fOter types which have been published such as the minimum variance 
SDF were undergoing testing, however, comprehensive results were not available for this 
paper but will be included at a later date. 


83 








Results Table 1 (RTl) 


BACKGROUND 

Number of 



Peak 

Within ■ 

— 

SET 

Exact Hits 

2 

5 

10 20 
Pixels 

30 

All References 

MACENOISE 

32 

32 

0 

0 

1 

0 

MACE 

31 

31 

1 

0 

1 

0 

E2Z5TFAB100 

17 

27 

1 

4 

3 

0 

S5E2TFAB1 

16 

27 

2 

2 

2 

2 

E2Z5TFAB1 

17 

26 

1 

4 

4 

0 

PHASE NOTCH 

19 

23 

2 

3 

4 

2 

S9E2TFAB1 

10 

22 

2 

6 

4 

1 

PHASE ENCODED 

11 

19 

1 

3 

6 

3 

S5TFAB1 

4 

13 

1 

6 

12 

3 

S9TFAB1 

8 

12 

6 

4 

11 

2 

Half References 

S5E2HTFAB1 

16 

24 

4 

5 

2 

0 

S9E2HTFAB1 

13 

24 

2 

4 

5 

0 

MACENOISEH 

17 

21 

0 

2 

. 5 

5 

MACE HALF 

17 

20 

0 

7 

5 

0 

S5HTFAB1 

10 

19 

1 

5 

6 

4 

S9HTFAB1 

9 

17 

5 

3 

8 

2 

Small References 

MACE SMALL 

19 

23 

0 

2 

0 

0 

MACE SMALL HALF 

13 

23 

1 

1 

0 

1 

S5E2TFAB1 SMALL 

0 

14 

5 

7 

2 

1 

E2Z5TFAB100 SMALL 

1 

13 

2 

7 

4 

1 


>30 


84 


(\g(\]OOO*HO00OO oocNjrooo ^roocsj 










Results Table 2 (RT2) 


REFERENCE 

Number of 


SET 

Exact Hits 

2 

All References 

MACENOISE 

35 

35 

MACE 

35 

35 

E225TFAB100 

32 

35 

E2Z5TFAB1 

32 

35 

S5E2TFAB1 

30 

35 

PHASE NOTCH 

33 

33 

S5TFAB1 

19 

30 

S9E2TFAB1 

24 

28 

S9TFAB1 

18 

28 

PHASE ENCODED 

25 

26 

BINARY PHASE 

21 

23 

Half References 

S9E2HTFAB1 

21 

29 

S5E2HTFAB1 

21 

27 

MACE HALF 

18 

25 

S5HTFAB1 

14 

21 

S9HTFAB1 

11 

17 

MACENOISEH 

18 

26 

Small References 

MACE SMALL 

29 

29 

S5E2TFAB1 SMALL 

12 

26 

E225TFAB100 SMALL 

10 

24 

MACE SMALL HALF 

16 

23 


- Peak Within - 

5 10 20 30 >30 

- Pixels - 


0 0 0 0 

0 0 0 0 

0 0 0 0 

0 0 0 0 

0 0 0 0 

0 10 1 

10 3 1 

7 0 0 0 

3 13 0 

0 15 3 

0 3 6 3 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 


3 3 0 

1 5 2 

3 6 1 

4 4 6 

5 3 10 

3 5 1 


0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 


0 

1 

2 

6 


0 0 0 0 

2 0 0 0 

3 0 0 0 

0 0 0 0 


85 







Appendix A 


The SDF naming convention for the file names has evolved where 

all filter names have the general form 'ppppTFsss' . The 'pppp' 

represents a series of prefixes, indicating whether enhancement, 
shifting, or other features were used in constructing the filter. 
The 'sss' represents a series of suffixes, which is more 
standardized, indicating whether or not the flat image was used, 
etc. The 'TF' stands for 'TestFilter', which is the name of the 
program which computes correlation surfaces. 

Prefix characters for SDF file names: 

E - Enhancement, Type 1 

E2 - Enhancement, Type 2 (Sobel) 

Sn - Shifting, n pixels in cross pattern 
H - Filter built from only half the 
reference set 

B - A typical background patch was used 
in the reference set 

X - The reference background mean was set 

to the mean of a typical background patch 
Zn - Shifting, n pixels in cross and diagonal pattern 

Suffix: 

ABl — The flat image was used to suppress DC shifts 
ABn — The flat image was used to suppress DC shifts 
with the value n 

NBl -- The flat image was not used. 

The 'Bl' part of the suffix refers to features which were 
not varied in this study. For example the filter S9TFAB1 uses the 
flat image for DC suppression, and was built using shifting, the 
shifting distance being 9 pixels. The filter S9E2TFAB1 is 
identical, except that enhancement filter 2 was used in addition 
to the shifting. In this naming scheme, filter TFNBl is the 

classical SDF filter, without any additional property. 

For the MACE SDF and phase encoded SDF the naming convention is 
as follows; 

HALF - The filter is built from only half the reference set 
(same as H) 

SMALL - The filter is built from objects one half the size 
of the large reference set 

NOISE - The filter is built using 5 samples of background 
plus the reference set 


86 










FILTKR SKT 
IMAGE NUMllEH 


M.A.C.i;. UI'.IEKENCE SET 
1 ( THE IDEAL COHRELATION SURFACE ) 


FEAK COL, FEAK ROW • 6-1 65 

MAXFEAK COL, MAXFEAK ROW = 64 65 

SIGNAL AT MIN POINT = 2.6019336E-I2 

SIGNAL WITHIN 3 PIXELS (USED FOR RATIOS) = l.OQOQOS 

MEAN - 0,1123E-02 VARIANCE - 0.6882E-04 SIGMA - 0.8296E-02 


.KNOWN.MAXIMUM. . 

SIGNAL AT PEAK - 1.000 1.000 

RMS NOISE - 0.294SE-02 0.2945E-02 

CONTRAST - 0.9941 0.9941 

SIGNAL/MEAN - 890.2 890.2 

SIGNAL/RMS NOISE = 339.2 339.2 

SIGNAL/MAX SIDE LOBE “ 15.39 15.39 


MISS DISTANCE ■= 0.00 

ON TARGET - YES EXACT HIT - YES 

WITHIN TWO PIXELS -= YES WITHIN TWENTY PIXELS - NO 

WITHIN FIVE PIXELS - NO WITHIN THIRTY PIXELS - NO 

WITHIN TEN PIXELS - NO OVER THIRTY PIXELS - NO 

% X.Y TO ONTARGET CENTER - 100.00 4 100.00 % 


PEAK WIDTH TO 1/2 (PEAK VAL-MEAN)+MEAN - 1.00 

PEAK WIDTH IN X DIRECTION - 1 

PEAK WIDTH IN Y DIRECTION = 1 

MAXPEAK WIDTH TO 1/2 (PEAK VAL-MEAN)+MEAN - 1.00 

MAXPEAK WIDTH IN X DIRECTION ■= 1 

MAXPEAK WIDTH IN Y DIRECTION - 1 


(IDTH IN Y DIRECTION - 1 _ 

M.A.C.E. REFERENCE 1 



87 

















FILTER SET - M.A.C.E. BACKGROUND SET 

IMAGE NUMBER - S ( THE BEST CORRELATION SURFACE I 


PEAK COL. PEAK ROM < 

HAXPEAK COL. MAXPEAK ROW - S9 

SIGNAL AT MIN POINT 

SIGNAL WITHIN 3 PIXELS (USED FOR RATIOS} 


6S 

CS 

1.84S21S2E-11 

0.S744SSS 


MEAN - 0.<434B-02 VARIANCE - 0.1439e-03 SIGMA - 0.12Q0E-01 


KNOWN.MAXIMUM 


SKMAL AT PEAK 

• 

0.S74S 

0.8745 

RMS NOISE 

- 

0.9866E-02 

0.9868B-02 

CONTRAST 

4- 

0.9777 

0.9777 

SI<aiAL/MBAM 

- 

135.9 

135.9 

SIGRAL/RMS NOISE 

- 

87.98 

87.98 

SICaiAL/MAX SIDE LOBE 

• 

4.022 

4.022 

MISS DISTANCE 

. 

0.00 



- YES 

- NO 
> NO 

- NO 


ON TARGET 


- YES 

EXACT HIT 


WITHIN 

TWO 

PIXELS 

- YES 

WITHIN 

TWENTY 

PIXELS 

WITHIN 

FIVE 

PIXELS 

- NO 

WITHIN 

THIRTY 

PIXELS 

WITHIN 

TEN 

PIXELS 

- NO 

OVER 

THIRTY 

PIXELS 


% X.Y TO ONTARGET CENTER - 100.00 % 100.00 % 

PEAK WIDTH TO 1/2(PEAK VAL-MEAN)FMEAN - 1.00 

PEAK WIDTH IN X DIRECTION - 1 

PEAK WIDTH IN Y DIRECTION - 1 


MAXPEAK WIDTH TO 1/2(PEAK VAL-MEAN)FMEAW • 1.00 

MAXPEAK WIDTH IN X DIRECTION • 1 


MAXPEAK WIDTH IN Y DIRECTION 

M.A.C.E. 


BACKGRND 





pMk Value s a.744 B-l 
Peak la at Colusaa 59 Rov 65 

Known Column 59 Row 69 


ore^T 

(Hfl o«ii5r 

BKB 1/3 
OTIXLAT 



I 


88 













FILTER SET 
IMAGE NUMBER 


PEAK COL. PEAK ROM - 61 
MAXPEAK COL, MAXPEAK ROW - 29 
SIGNAL AT MIN POINT 

SIGNAL WITHIN 3 PIXELS (USED FOR RATIOS) 


- 1.1746849E-13 

- S.9494Sa9E-02 


0.4063E-02 VARIANCE • 0.3S14E-04 SICHA - 0.S928E-02 


SIGNAL AT PEAK 
RMS NOISE 
CONTRAST 
SIGNAL/KEAN 
SIGHAL/RHS NOISE 
SIGNAL/HAX SIDE LOBE 


.. .KNOWN_ 

0.S949E-01 

O.S947E-02 

0.8183 

14.64 

9.322 

0.8429 


..MAXIMUM... 

0.70S8E-01 

0.S949E~02 

0.844S 

17.37 

11.18 

1.013 


MISS DISTANCE 


ON TARGET 


- NO 

EXACT HIT 


« NO 

WITHIN 

TWO 

PIXELS 

- NO 

WITHIN 

TWENTY 

PIXELS 

- NO 

WITHIN 

FIVE 

PIXELS 

- NO 

WITHIN 

THIRTY 

PIXELS 

- MO 

WITHIN 

TEN 

PIXELS 

- NO 

OVER 

THIRTY 

PIXELS 

- YES 


PERCENT X.y TO ONTARGET CENTER - N/A 

PEAK WIDTH TO 1/2 (PEAK VAL-MEAN)-fMEAN 
PEAK WIDTH IN X DIRECTION 
PEAK WIDTH IN Y DIRECTION 

MAXPEAK WIDTH TO 1/2 (PEAK VAL-KEAN)+MEAN 
MAXPEAK WIDTH IN X DIRECTION 
MAXPEAK WIDTH IN Y DIRECTION 


M.A.C.E. BACKGRND 20 




c u «« u 

I 


•i n M « •« 9 


Peak Velue s 7.0M E-2 
Peak la at Columo 29 
Known Column 61 
Miaa Dialance ^ 4.386 Cl 


1 

m 


Loir 1/3 I 

rzAt I 

MID 1/3 I 
PSAK I 

KIGN 1/3 I 
PCAC 


L07 1/3 

majcpcae 

MID t/3 
MArPCAC 

RICB t/3 
MAXPtAK 














1. C.F. Hester and D. Casasent. "MulUvarlant Technique for Multiclass Pattern 
Recognition," Appl. Opt. 19, 1758 (1980). 

2. B.V.K- Vijaya Kumar, "Optimality of Projection Sjmthetic Discriminant Functions," SPIE 
Vol. 579, Sept. (1985). 

3. Joseph L. Homer and Peter D. Glanlno. "Applying the phase only filter concept to the 
Synthetic Discriminant Function correlation fUter." SPIE Vol 519 Analog Optical Processing 
and Computing (1984). 

4. D. Casasent and Wen-Thong Chang. "Correlation syntheUc discriminant functions." Appl. 
Opt. 25. 2343 (1986). 

5. E. Jenkins. J. Morris. S.R-F. Sims. "Synthetic discriminant functions for target 
correlation," GOMAC Orlando.Florlda (1987). 

6. B.V.K.V. Kumar, "Minimum-variance S 5 mthetlc discriminant functions," J. Opt. Soc. Am,. 
Vol.3 No. 10. Oct. (1986). 

7. A. Mahalanobis. V. Kumar. D. Casasent. "Minimum average correlation energy filters." 
AppL Opt. 26. 3633 (1987). 

8. L. Kennedy. B. Powell, and D. Gregory. "Highly mulUplexed opUcal correlation filters." 
SPIE Vol. 938 Digital and Opt. Shape Representation and Pattern Recognition (1988). 


90 







ABSTRACT 


MONOPULSE ANGULAR ERROR REDUCTION 
FOR COMPLEX TARGETS 
USING HIGH RANGE RESOLUTION 

by 

Michael R. Christian 
J. Blake Winter 


Multipath causes unacceptable monopulse elevation angular 
errors when measuring a complex target's position. High 
range resolution can be used to measure angular position of 
individual scatterers on the target. Averaging high range 
resolution angle measurements of the scatterers provides a 
reduction of the standard deviation of the angular error. 
Scatterer heights can be derived from the complex angular 
measurements under specific circumstances. 


91 







I. ADKEM DESCRIPTION 


The Advanced Kinetic Energy Missile (ADKEM) is currently 
being developed by MICOM's RD&E Center to travel at 
hypervelocity speeds and deliver a kinetic energy kill 
against both ground and air targets. The missile will be 
inertially guided through the boost phase (or to short range 
targets) and command guided through the coast phase to the 
target. To ease the design burden for an inertial guidance 
unit, command guidance is also being considered for a portion 
of the boost phase. Since millimeter wave energy has been 
shown to propagate through various motor plumes with very 
little attenuation, millimeter wave radar was chosen as the 
primary approach in providing the command guidance for the 
missile with laser beamrider as an alternate approach. 
Subsequent error analysis has shown for either the ground 
target or air target scenerio, the primary error source for 
the millimeter guidance approach is multipath. This paper 
will describe multipath and its potential effects on tracking 
ground targets. This paper will also present various 
techniques that are being examined to reduce the target 
multipath effect. 


The baseline ADKEM millimeter guidance approach has a 
monopulse radar on the launch platform that transmits a 
guidance command encoded in a variable PRF coded pulse to a 
receiver on the missile. The monopulse radar then measures 
the angle of the missile's CW transmitted signal in one set 
of delta and sum channels and the angle of the pulse 
returning from the target in another set of channels. Some 
of the system's operating characteristics are anticipated to 
be the following: 


Center Frequency 94.5 
Bandwidth 1 

Frequency Steps 1024 
Antenna Diameter 24 

Antenna Height 3 

Polarization 
Missile Transceiver 
Frequency 93.5 

Missile Receive 

Antenna Aperture 1 
Missile Transmit 

Antenna Aperture 1 
Missile Diameter 2 

Missile Speed 2 

Missile Range 5 

Target Height .5-2.5 

Table 


GHz 

GHz 

steps 

inches 

meters AGL 

vertical 

GHz 

inch 

inch 

inches 

km/s 

km 

meters AGL 
1 


92 




II. MULTIPATH 


Multipath can be defined as being the propagation of 
energy from more than one path. For low angle radar 
applications, multipath is caused by the interference of the 
direct target energy with indirect target energy reflections 
from the terrain between the radar and the target. For 
smooth surfaces, the reflection from the terrain is termed 
specular and can be thought as emanating from a sinole spot 
on the ground between the target and the radar. For rough or 
irregular surfaces, the reflection from the terrain comes 
from multiple points and is termed diffuse reflection. For 
terrain surfaces which have a smooth mean contour but small 
scale irregularities, both specular and diffuse reflection 
will occur. Surface roughness not only induces diffuse 
scattering but it also attenuates the amount of specular 
scattering that will occur. A formula has been derived to 
describe this specular reflection coefficient attenuation 
factor and it is given in equation 1: 

rs= exp(-8 (jr*a*sin£/lambda)) (1) 

where a- standard deviation of the surface height, c=grazing 
angle, and lambda= wavelength. As can be seen in equation 1, 
the specular reflection coefficient becomes smaller for 
decreasing wavelength. Therefore the higher the frequency of 
operation, the less the specular multipath effect. 

As shown in Table 1, millimeter wave differential 
guidance has been chosen as the primary command guidance 
approach for the missile. The ADKEM operational scenario 
involves ground to ground target engagement, which will 
require accurate tracking of both the missile and the target 
in extreme low angle conditions. The frequency of operation 
for this approach was chosen to be 94 Ghz primarily because 
this is about the highest frequency attainable with relative 
component maturity. The high frequency of operation was 
desired in order to minimize antenna beamwidth thereby 
increasing the tracking accuracy resolution and to decrease 
possible multipath effects. An amplitude monopulse approach 
has been selected to achieve the angular displacement 
measurement. Multipath is a major source of error to low 
angle tracking systems and therefore one woulJ expect it to 
be a major source of guidance error for the ADKEM guidance 
radar system. The easiest method to reduce the multipath 
effect would be to narrow antenna beamwidth such that none of 
the propagated energy would be reflecting off the terrain. 
For a ground target scenerio with the range of 5000 meters, 
the antenna would have to have a beamwidth of 400 
microradians in order to achieve acceptable multipath 


93 




effects. The diameter of this antenna at 95 GHz operating 
frequency, would be approximately 8 meters. Clearly this 
would be impractical to implement on any ground weapon 
platforms. A 60 centimeter diameter antenna was chosen for 
the ADKEM radar since this size is probably the maximum size 
antenna that could be practically implemented on a launch 
platform. Since the antenna size is limited for our 
approach, other multipath reduction techniques must be 
investigated. Millimeter wave radar offers the opportunity 
to operate over a wide bandwidth of carrier frequency. 
Typical bandwidths of operation are 640 MHz (1 foot range 
resolution) while a bandwidth of 2 Ghz (4 inch range 
resolution) has recently been demonstrated in an 
instrumentation radar developed by MICOM (HIPCOR-95). This 
wide bandwidth capability will allow high range resolution to 
be used as a possible glint and multipath reduction 
technique. 

The antenna height, target height, and maximum range all 
cause the grazing angle to be small for the ADKEM ground 
target scenerio. Because of the small grazing angle, 

multipath reflections of the target from the ground are going 
to have a major impact on missile guidance, particularly on 
the elevation channel. The radar antenna beamwidth is 
approximately 6 milliradians, whereas the angular separation 
between the highest target scatterer and its specular 
reflection over flat smooth terrain is about 1 milliradian 
-much less than the beamwidth. This lack of resolution 
between the target scatterers and their images causes errors 
in the monopulse angular measurement of the radar. 

It is anticipated that the ground between the radar and 
the target will never be perfectly flat. Usually, the radar 
and the target will be slightly elevated above the reflecting 
surface. If the intervening ground between radar and target 
were concave, the target would be blocked and the radar would 
not detect the target. The target and multipath are still 
unresolved even if the target is as much as 15 meters above 
the reflecting surface. In addition, the radar and target 
heights are no longer known when the ground is not flat. 


III. COMPLEX ANGLE DERIVATION 

Multipath can be examined as a two — scatterer 
interference problem with the two scatterers being the target 
and its image displaced in angular position in the elevation 
plane as shown in Figure 1. Following the derivation of 
Sherman [11, an amplitude monopulse radar operating in the 
linear portion of its error sensitivity curve can be 





described by equation 2 where S is the elevation difference 
channel response, S is the sum channel response, k is the 
slope of the monopulse response curve versus angle, and 0 is 
the angle with respect to boresight of the target. 

5/S= k*e (2) 

or equivantly 0= 1*6 

k*S 

Let the target subscript be denoted by d and the image 
subscript by r, then 0d and 0r are the angular displacements 
of the target and its image respectively to the elevation 
boresight axis. Then 

6d=k*0d*Sd , 6r=k*0r*Sr 

and the resultant indicated angle is 

0= i. = 6d+6r = 0dfSdW0rrSr^ (3) 

k*S k*(Sd+Sr) Sd + Sr 

Now define 

Sd/Sr= p* exp(ja) (4) 

where p is the amplitude ratio of sum signal returns from the 
target and its image and a is the relative phase between the 
the target and image return. The amplitude ratio is equal to 
ratio of the sum pattern voltage gains (G) for the target and 
image mutiplied by the ratio of the backscatter coefficients 
(R) of the target multiplied by the reflection coefficient 
(T), that is p=r*G*R. Dividing equation 3 through by Sd and 
substituting in equation 4 we have: 

0c= 0d-KD*expM*al *0r) (5) 

l+(p*exp(j*a) 

Equation 5 reveals that the indicated angle is complex and 
the indicated angle will be either somewhere in between the 
target and its image (since p<l) or somewhere above the 
target, depending on the value of p and the value of a. Most 
monopulse radars measure only the real part of the complex 
quantity given in equation 4 and this is given in equation 6 
below: 


Re (0) = 0d+ (p*cosa* f0d+0r)) -Kp^ *0r) 
1 +(2p*cosa) + p' 


95 




( 6 ) 


or Re(e)-ed = (ed-9r)* f fp*cosa)+p^) 

l+2pcoso:+p^ 

The derivation above assumes the boresight was pointing at 
the target. A plot of equation 6 normalized to 0d-0r is 
shown in Figure 2. 


IV. MULTIPATH EFFECTS 

IV A. SINGLE SCATTERER AND MULTIPATH 

Another way of expressing Sherman's equation for a 
scatterer and its image is the following; 

0c = (G(e(i) *0d+r*Gf0r> *0r*expfi* f ) ) (7) 
(G(0d)+r*G(0r)*exp{j*(o+7r) ) ) 

a = 4*7r*Ha*Hs/(R*lambda) (8) 

0d = ATAN((Ha-Hs)/R)-0a (9) 

0r = ATAN((Ha+Hs)/R)-0a (10) 

where 0a is the radar antenna angle with respect to the 
reflecting surface. G is the radar antenna gain in the 
direction of either the direct or reflected path. Ha is the 
radar antenna height above the reflecting surface, Hs is the 
height of a target scatterer, R is the range to a target 

scatterer, and lambda is the wavelength. The radar cross 
section has been assumed to be the same for the direct and 
indirect paths and has been divided out of the numerator and 
denominator. At low grazing angles, the specular reflection 
coefficient has a phase shift of 180 degrees for vertical 
polarization, which is the reason for the n factor in the 
complex exponential term. At higher grazing angles the phase 
can have other values between 0 and 180 degrees. 

The real part of 0c in equation 7 is the measured 
indicated angle of the target after multiplying the voltage 
by a slope factor. In the absence of multipath, it is the 
actual angle of a single scatterer. When multipath is 
present. Real(0c) is the actual angle of the scatterer plus 
an error due to the multipath. 

When a single scatterer's height was randomly chosen 
uniformly from .5 to 2.5 meters at a range of 5000 meters in 
1000 Monte Carlo runs, the indicated angle varied 
non-uniformly. The probability density function of the 
indicated angle is shown in figure 3. The mean indicated 


96 



angle was 150 /xradians and the standard deviation was 357 
^radians. 

The missile transmitter acts as a single scatterer, and 
the radar's measurement of missile position suffers angular 
error because of multipath. 


IV B. MULTIPLE SCATTERERS 

A complex target can be thought of as consisting of 
multiple scatterers and their images, 5 for example, as shown 
in Figure 4. When more than one scatterer and its multipath 
is present, the linear superposition assumed in equation 7 
can be expanded to include the effects of other scatterers on 
the complex indicated angle. 

ec = S (Sdi*9di+Sri*eri*r*expM* fai+7r ))) 

S (Sdi+Sri*r*exp( j* (ai+TT))) 

( 11 ) 

where i is the scatterer summation index ranging from 1 to 
the number of scatterers . 

If no multipath were present, Real(ec) would still have 
an error because of the presence of the other scatterers. 
This error is due to glint caused by the interference of the 
scatterers with one another. 

When 5 scatterers' heights were randomly chosen 
uniformly from .5 to 2.5 meters at a range from 4999 to 5001 
meters in 1000 Monte Carlo runs (a representation of 1000 
different aspect angles), the indicated angle varied 
non-uniformly, but the probability density function was 
different from the single scatterer case. The probability 
density function of the indicated angle in this case is shown 
in figure 5. The mean indicated angle was 148 /xradians and 
the standard deviation was 463 ^radians. The simulation 
assumes a flat table top reflection surface with a specular 
reflection coefficient of .5 (from recent measurements over 
medium roughness asphault at 95 GHz) and no diffuse 
scattering. 

When the radar antenna is aimed at the center of the 
scatterers, the desired error for all aspects of the target 
is 0 /xradians mean error and 50 ^radians standard deviation. 
The total error budget for the ADKEM system is 100 /iradians 
for a target at 5 kilometers. If the root of the sum of the 
squares of the standard deviations of all the error sources 
(thermal noise, multipath, calibration error, servo error. 


97 





etc.)/ the largest any single error can be is 50 ^radians. 
When a target has multiple scatterers, the angular error 
exceeds the desired level. 


IV C. HIGH RANGE RESOLUTION ANGLE AVERAGING 

When high range resolution is used, the target is 
divided into many distinct scatterers. A complex indicated 
angle Sc can be derived for the scatterers in each range 
cell. Although the scatterers in each range cell are 
probably composed of several unresolved scatterers, for the 
purposes of this report it is assumed the scatterers in each 
range cell are composed of only a scatterer and its 
multipath. 

Averaging Real(ec) of the individual scatterers in each 
of 1000 Monte Carlo runs reduces the standard deviation to 
164 /xradians, and the mean is only 9 /xradians. The 
probability density function is shown in figure 6. 

When the radar antenna height was changed to 2 meters, 
the mean increased to 159 /iradians, but the standard 
deviation was only 13 /xradians. 

Neither of these cases meets the criteria of 0 /xradians 
mean and 50 /xradians standard deviation, but there is a 
definite improvement over the non high range resolution case. 


IV D. HIGH RANGE RESOLUTION COMBINATORIAL AVERAGING 

Another approach to reducing the angular error caused by 
multipath was to synthetically combine the complex high range 
resolution scatterers in different combinations: 

<Real(ec)> = Realf51/2H-g2/E2+fgl-t-g2) /fEl+E2^ ... •> 

2*Ns-l 

( 12 ) 

For 5 range cells there are 31 combinations of scatterers. 
This technique turned out to be slightly worse than the 
technique described in IV C. The mean was 110 /xradians and 
the standard deviation was 140 /xradians. The probability 
density function for 1000 Monte Carlo runs is shown in figure 
7. 


This technique does not meet the 0 /xradians mean and 50 
/xradians standard deviation criteria, either, but there is 
still improvement over the non high range resolution case. 


98 






V. DERIVATION OF SCATTERER HEIGHTS 


In equation 7, the fact that the reflection coefficient 
is only real can be exploited to solve for some of the other 
parameters of equation 7. Solving for F in equation 7; 

r = expf-i* ) *Gfed^ *fed-ec) (13) 

G(er) *(ec-er) 

but the imaginary part of r=0. If lmag(r)=0 then the 
following expression is true: 

0 = 2*Hs/R*0cq*cos(a)+sin(a)*(Oci^+0cq^+ 

2*0ci*0a+0a^-2*Ha/R*(0ci+0a)+ 

(Ha^ -Hs^ )/(RM ) 

(14) 

0ci is the in phase indicated angle obtained from 
measurement, 0cq is the quadrature indicated angle obtained 
from measurement, and the range gate provides the measurement 
of R. When the earth is flat, 0a and Ha can be measured, and 
Hs is the only unknown parameter in equation 14. Hs in 
equation 14 can be solved iteratively; however, equation 14 
is pseudo-periodic as a function of Hs, and there is more 
than one solution for Hs. High range resolution is used to 
solve the ambiguities. 

Assuming the multipath reflection coefficient T is the 
same for all the scatterers in the range cells, the ambiguous 
values of Hs can be used in equations 8,9, and 10 to solve 
for r in equation 13 (G in equation 13 can be found from a 
lookup table if 0d and 0r are estimated). Several values of 
r are found for each scatterer, but only one value of F is 
the same for all the scatterers. The Hs of each scatterer 
which provides the same F common to all the other scatterers 
is the correct Hs for that scatterer. 

In a more realistic scenario, 0a and Ha with respect to 
the reflecting surface are not the same as the angle and 
height of the radar antenna with respect to ground below the 
radar. It is hypothesized that when 0a and Ha are also 
stepped in small increments in equation 14, there is a 
particular set of values for 0a, Ha, and Hs for each 
scatterer which provides only one common value of F for all 
of the scatterers. 

A more direct approach to solving for 0a, Ha, and Hs is 
to perform a non linear least squares fit of some "measured" 

data. 


99 



VI. EXAMPLES 


A FORTRAN program was written to test the hypothesis. 
The following scenario was simulated. 


Number of scatterers= 

Ha 

Hs 

Rs 

RCS 

Ht 

Rt 

0a = 

Hae 

Hse = 

6ae = 

Frequency = 

Reflectivity = 

Antenna aperture = 
Angle noise = 


5 

3 meters 

.5 to 2.5 step .5 meters 
4999,5001 Step .5 meters 
7.7,7.9,8.0,7.8,7.6 
square meters 
1.5 meters 
5000 meters 
ATAN((Ha-Ht)/Rt) 

.1 to 5.0 step .05 meters 
.1 to 5.0 step .05 meters 
-500 to 500 uradians step 
10 uradians 
94 GHz 
.5 

.6096 meters 
0 


Table 2. 


In the program, Gc was found for each of the scatterers 
using equation 7. These are the "measured” complex indicated 
angles for each scatterer. Then the eae, the estimated 
antenna angle with respect to the reflecting surface; Hae, 
the estimated antenna with respect to the reflecting surface; 
and Hse, the estimated scatterer height above the reflecting 
surface, were all varied over the expected limits in 3 nested 
DO loops. For each new value of ©ae and Hae, the values of 
Hse were found which made lmag(r)=0 for each scatterer. 
These values of Hse were then used in equation 13 to find 
estimated values of F. The estimated values of r were then 
compared. 0ae and Hae were then incremented until the 
minimum difference between the values of F for each scatterer 
was found. Table 3 shows the results when the program was 
executed using the conditions listed in Table 2. 


ICO 



Estimated 


Actual 


Scatterer Scatterer 

Height Reflectivity Height Reflectivity 

0.55 .5000736 .5 .5 

1.05 .4770988 1 .5 

1.50 .4991278 1.5 .5 

2.00 .4984468 2 .5 

2.50 .4975847 2.5 .5 

Antenna Height 

3.05 3 

Antenna Angle 

309 uradians 300 uradians 

Target Angle 

-4.96 uradians 0 uradians 

Table 3. 

-4.96 ^radians of error is within the acceptable limits. 
The computation time to find the standard deviation of the 
error is prohibitive. 

If uniformly distributed angle noise of 50 microradians 
is added to the complex indicated angle, a rough 
approximation of thermal noise, the results change a little 
as shown in Table 4. 


Estimated 

Scatterer 

Height Reflectivity 

0.50 .5408928 

0.85 .5217696 

1.25 .5496593 

1.55 .5564616 

2.00 .5192856 

Antenna Height 
3.70 

Antenna Angle 
460 uradians 

Target Angle 
30.0 uradians 

Table 


Actual 

Scatterer 

Height Reflectivity 

.5 .5 

1 .5 

1.5 .5 

2 .5 

2.5 .5 


3 


300 uradians 


0 uradians 

4 . 


101 




30 ^xradians error is also within the acceptable limits. 

If the scatterers vary only from 1 to 2 meters in .25 
meter steps, the results are not as promising, as shown in 
Table 5. 


Estimated 

Actual 


Scatterer 

Scatterer 


Height Reflectivity 

Height 

Re 

0.95 .4996169 

1 

.5 

1.20 .5064491 

1.25 

.5 

1.40 .5067047 

1.5 

.5 

4.50 .5235484 

1.75 

. 5 

1.80 .5162083 

2 

. 5 

Antenna Height 

3.30 

3 


Antenna Angle 

380 uradians 

300 uradians 

Target Angle 

-265 uradians 

0 uradians 


Reflectivity 


Table 5. 


Table 5 shows that as the scatterers height difference 
lessens, the error of the estimated target angle increases. 
The error also increases as the increment size of Hae 
increases. The -265 /uradians error is unacceptable. 


VII. ASSUMPTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS 

Some significant assumptions and constraints were 
imposed on finding the solutions of the scatterer heights of 
a complex target. The most limiting constraint is that the 
reflections must be specular. Non-specular reflections 
(i.e., diffuse) cause the distance of a scatterer's image 
below the ground to be unknown deterministically. Also, the 
phase of the reflectivity from diffuse reflections is not 0 
or 180 degrees, so the assumption that the reflectivity is 
real is no longer valid. This assumption is the key to the 
whole technique described in section V. Conceivably, there 


102 




are terrains on the earth that cause negligible diffuse 
multipath returns. 

Another assumption is that the scatterers derived from 
high range resolution processing are composed only of a 
scatterer and its specular multipath. The effect of this 
assumption being false has not been tested. 

The assumption was made that the reflection coefficient 
is the same for all scatterers. This is a likely assumption, 
but it needs to be measured. 

It was assumed that Hs, Ha, and 8a varied over small 
limits. Larger limits may not result in only one minimum 
value of r. 

The scatterers must span at least 2 meters in height 
extent. It was shown that height differences less than 2 
meters cause appreciable errors in the results. 

The number of scatterers has to be more than one but the 
minimum number required is unknown. 

The complex indicated angles of the scatterers 
presumably derived from high range resolution were assumed to 
be exact. However, the limited bandwidth of the radar and 
the imperfection inherent in the FFT will cause small errors 
in the complex indicated angle derived for each range cell. 

The increment of Hae, Hse, and eae must be small, but 
how small the increment must be is unknown. The smaller the 
increment, the more run time required. The examples shown in 
Tables 3 through 5 each took approximately 30 minutes to run 
on a DEC PDF 11/70. Obviously, the processing time is 
prohibitive to real time operations. Using non linear least 
squares fitting is not expected to improve the computation 
time. Further math analysis of equations 6 and 7 may reveal 
some mapping or transformation which would reveal a more 
efficient way to find the scatterer heights. 


VIII. SUMMARY 

The millimeter guidance approach to the ADKEM scenario 
requires the development of multipath reduction techniques to 
insure accurate guidance of missile to the target. This 
paper has examined various techniques to reduce the multipath 
error associated with the target in idealized cases (flat 
earth, specular multipath only). The high range resolution 
average and the scatterer height derivation technique show 


103 



some promise with the latter technique's performance 
degrading as the target cases become less than ideal. It 
should be pointed out that a worst case specular reflection 
coefficient (.5) was used in the analysis and that the 
occurence of such a reflection coefficient in typical 
battlefield terrains should be rare. It is probable that 
both specular and diffuse multipath will exist to some extent 
and it is hoped that target movement will help to decorrelate 
the 'diffuse error. Further multipath reduction technique 
analysis will continue on this rather challenging problem and 
it is hoped that in the FY 91 timeframe data can be collected 
to both support and verify reduction technique performance. 


104 







'iTT? 



Figure 1. Generic specular multipath geometry. 



Figure 2. Angular error (normalized) as a FN. of phase 
difference and reflection coefficient. 





probability density function 
I SCATTERER. RANDOM HEIGHT 



0015 -.001 -.0005 0 .0005 .001 

Figure 3. Measure angle (radians). 







107 








PROBABILITY DENSITY FUNCTION 
HRR AVERAGE OF SCATTERERS 



108 


Figure 5. Angular error (radians). 






PROBABILITY DENSITY FUNCTION 
HRR AVERAGE OF SCATTERERS 



Figure 6. Angular error (radians). 






HRR}GAI1>.5;RCS-7.6-8)AUQ OF 3t (1*8*3.4*5)'S 
100 BINS)FT«ei<10 SIGjS SCATURER|RNGE-4999*S001 
FILE NAIIEt E310.13I1ULTHIST.DAT 



Figure 7. Angular error *yraciians*. 





REFERENCES 


S.M. Sherman, Monopulee Principles and Techniques, Artech 
House, 1974. 





INFRARED SEEKER DEVELOPMENTS 
FOR 

INDIRECT FIRE APPLICATIONS 
June 1990 

Emily H. Vandiver and Ronald C. Passmore 
Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
US Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 

ABSTRACT 

The U.S. Army has been developing an infrared seeker for 
application to the indirect fire role since the 1970’s. The early 
attempts, which were successfully demonstrated in the ASSAULT 
BREAKER Program, resulted in seekers which were quite simplistic and 
did not address the challenges of target aimpoint selection or system 
availability in European weather. Target aimpoint selection was one of 
the areas addressed under the Two Color Infrared Seeker (TCIRS) 
Program, which considered both missile and projectile applications. 
The seekers were G hardened to withstand approximately 11,000 Gs 
during this program. Current efforts, which are being conducted under 
the Army Tactical Missile System (TACMS) Infrared Terminally Guided 
Submunition (IRTGSM) Proof of Principle (POP) Program are 
addressing some remaining technical challenges for this technology. In 
particular, this POP program will demonstrate the following; feasibility of 
the horizontal glide concept, sufficient lethality to kill the threat target, 
ability to package into the required size, and adequate seeker 
performance to achieve the required system effectiveness. The Army 
is also initiating technical investigations of utilizing Infrared imaging 
seekers for the indirect fire engagement scenario. This paper 
compares the system requirements of the 1970’s and today and how 
those requirements are reflected in the seeker technology. The 
utilization of staring focal plane array technology for future Indirect fire 
systems will be discussed and the technical barriers which must be 
overcome will be delineated. Efforts to adapt the current technology to 
other applications will also be addressed. 


113 




1.0 THE ROLE OF ANTIARMOR INDIRECT FIRE FOR THE ARMY 


Traditionally, the indirect fire mission in the deep battle was to attack 
nonmoving, area targets which could be located precisely and which could be 
engaged with high explosive warheads or bomblets. The engagement of armor in 
the deep battle presents a completely different set of problems; the targets are 
moving and are heavily armored. The lethal mechanism for defeating armored 
vehicles must be delivered on target, at an aimpoint which produces a kill. Fort 
Sill’s Field Artillery School and Center has developed a draft Organization and 
Operation (O&O) Plan which describes how the recently developed Army Tactical 
Missile System (Army TACMS) will be utilized in the deep battle role. The plan 
outlines the roles of both the Army TACMS Block I (antimaterial/antipersonnel 
warhead) and the Block II (antiarmor smart submunition warhead). The stated 
purpose of the Block II is to disrupt and delay the enemy's course of action or 
prevent him from bringing up additional armor to the front. Obviously, killing the 
armored target delays that action indefinitely. Furthermore, the submunition must 
perform at the required effectiveness for a large percentage of the time in each 
season. It is important to note that the operations plan specifies that the TACMS 
missile will be fired into predefined firing zones which are selected based on many 
factors. It will not be fired at random targets but will be fired at pre-planned target 
arrays and therefore optimize the performance of the Infrared Terminally Guided 
Submunition (IRTGSM)(i.e. the Army TACMS is not likely to be fired at the threat 
target when it is in an urban area). The Block ll is not intended for the attack of 
single targets but is designed and optimized for the attack of specific large target 
formations which are moving to the front. The targets are located by a separate, 
but integrated, target location system which specifies target location, direction of 
movement, and target velocity. This information is fed into a fire control system 
which sends firing orders to individual launchers. Crossrange firing and the 
maneuver capability of the Army TACMS missile allows a great degree of flexibility 
in the attitude at which the target can be engaged and should improve the IRTGSM 
performance. It is obvious that the operations plan can influence the overall system 
effectiveness. The Army has planned its operations to maximize the disruptive 
effects of Block II Army TACMS on the enemy's plan of action. 

2.0 INFRARED TECHNOLOGY OF THE 1970’S 

The infrared seekers that were developed by the Army In the mid 1970's for 
autonomous target acquisition and track were based on a system concept which 
optimized the probability of successful seeker operation. The original concept, which 
later was demonstrated in the ASSAULT BREAKER Program, dispensed the 
IRTGSMs from the "mother missile" at 2-3 kilometers above ground level. The 
submissiles were decelerated and oriented vertically with a parachute. The search 
scan pattern was an inwardly collapsing spiral. If a target was not detected on the 
first scan, the process was repeated until a legitimate target was acquired. Upon 
the acquisition of a target, the parachute was released and the submissile homed on 
the target to impact. The concept is shown in figure 1. 


114 



FIGURE 1. VERTICAL DESCENT IRTGSM CONCEPT 

There were concerns that autonomous acquisition, indirect fire infrared 
seekers would suffer from high false alarm rates, would be easily countermeasured, 
and would not reliably acquire targets. Nearly a thousand hours of captive flight 
testing substantiated the performance capability of the seeker concept and all design 
goals were met or exceeded. The two color seekers utilize a relatively simplistic 
combination of spectral, spatial, and temporal processing to acquire v^id targets 
and reject hot countermeasures. Figure 2 illustrates, in simple fashion, the use of 
thresholds in the seeker. The lower threshold is adaptive, and is determined as a 
multiple of the RMS value of the background. In order to be processed, a 
potential target pulse must exceed the target threshold. If it exceeds this threshold, 
the signal is examined in both spectral bands (colors) for a fixed number of samples 
to determine if it is a valid target. Also a countermeasure (CM) threshold is set to 
correspond to an excessively intense target such as flares, fires, etc. If a pulse 
exceeds this CM threshold, it is discarded as an obvious false target. Objects 
which produce too wide a pulse are also rejected as invalid. Once a target is 
declared valid, the seeker tracks it and develops guidance signals for terminal 
homing. In the 1970’s seekers, there was no concerted attempt to investigate the 
possibility of Tine tuning" the aimpoint since any hit on the top interior profile of the 
target would produce a kill. 


115 







The two color seeker contractors were Raytheon Company and General 
DynamicsA/atiey Systems Division. The two seeker inboard profiles are shown in 
figures 3 and 4. The General Dynamics two color seeker and the vertical approach 
IRTGSM were selected for the long range, ASSAULT BREAKER missile 
demonstration firings at White Sands ^^ssile Range. The program culminated with 
an approximately 85 km shot in which five live IRTGSMs were dispensed 
successfully. They autonomously acquired five individual targets and guided to 
highly accurate hits on the hot area of the targets. 



FIGURE 3.0 GENERAL DYNAMICS ASSAULT BREAKER TWO COLOR IR SEEKER 


116 







FIGURE 4.0 RAYTHEON ASSAULT BREAKER TWO COLOR IR SEEKER 
3.0 TWO COLOR IR SEEKER (TCIRS) EFFORTS IN THE 1980’S 

After the successful completion of the ASSAULT BREAKER Program, two 
color IR seeker technology efforts were put on hold by the Army. The technology 
was proposed for the MULTIPLE LAUNCH ROCKET SYSTEM Terminally Guided 
Warhead (MLRS TGW) but milllimeter wave technology was selected for the 
submissile guidance. In the mid 1980’s the Army conducted a Smart Munitions 
study in an attempt to prioritize the development of smart weapon systems. As a 
result of that study the Armament Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
at Picatinny Arsenal, New Jersey was directed to Include common seeker 
requiremerrts for missiles and projectiles in the GUIDED ANTIARMOR MORTAR 
PROJECTILE (GAMP) Program. Because of a lack of a firm requirement, the 
GAMP Program was cancelled by the Army. However, the Army did fund TCIRS 
efforts to develop a seeker with maximum commonality of design for missiles and 
projectiles. The contracts to both General Dynamics and Raytheon were awarded 
by Picatinny Arsenal and transferred to the Army Smart Weapons Management 
Office (SWMO), located at MICOM. 

The "common seeker* requirements had major impacts on the ASSAULT 
BREAKER seekers in two areas, gimbal limits and hardening the seekers to 
withstand launch shocks of approximately 11,000 Gs. In order to meet the 
requirements. General Dynamics settled on a design which had been proposed for 
the Navy five inch projectile. It utilizes refractive optics for the objective telescope 


117 











and has fiber optics to transfer the IR energy from the focal plane to the body-fixed 
detectors. Raytheon developed a completely new design which utilizes reflective 
optics and a linear array of detectors mounted on the inner gimbal. The scene is 
scanned by precessing the inner gimbal back and forth in the yaw direction. Both 
General Dynamics and Raytheon utilized a restraint mechanism ("gotcha") to hold 
the inner gimbal during the launch shock. Due to the difficulty in hardening the 
seekers to the design requirement, most of the efforts in the TCIRS Program were 
for G hardening as opposed to improvements in signal processing algorithms. Both 
seekers were fired in a canister from a howizter at MICOM and survived 11,000 Gs. 
The seeker concepts are shown in figure 5. 


^AYTHEOjJ 

REFLECTIVE TELESCOPE 
24 DETECTORS 
RATE STABILIZED 
MID & LONG WAVE IR 


- PRIUART 

vMIRROfl 


- IMNCR OiMtAt 
SEMSOR HOUStNO 


-OUTER OIMBAL 
BEVEL OEAR 
DRIVE 


-SEEKER HEAD 
HOUStNO 


CORRECTOR 

PLATE 







-TWO COLOR K 
IR DETECTOR 
AND CRYOSTAT 
ASSEMBLY 





SECONDARY < 

MIRROR 


-DETECTOR 

PREAMP 

ASSEMBLY 


- DOME AND ADAPTOR 
ASSEMBLY 






TUNGSTEN CARBIDE 

journal bearing 
gimbal • typical 


•OUTER CIMBAI 
TORQUE MOTOR 



FIGURE 5.0 TCIRS SEEKERS 




















4.0 CURRENT INFRARED SEEKER TECHNOLOGY FOR INDIRECT FIRE 


There were several changes that occurred in the 1980’s that altered the way 
the two color seekers could be utilized in an indirect fire missile system. First, the 
threat was changed from a relatively circular array of targets to a linear array of 
targets that incorporated advanced armor on the top as well as on the sides and 
front of the vehicles. Secondly, the in-flight inertial up-date capability for the "mother 
missile" was eliminated, resulting in a larger projected miss distance for moving 
targets. Thirdly, the requirement was imposed for maintaining required submunition 
effectiveness for a large percentage of the time in each season of Central European 
weather. These changes forced a complete relook at the IRTGSM concept and how 
the two color seeker would be utilized. Basically, the changes forced the IRTGSM 
concept to a horizontal glide approach beneath the expected cloud ceilings of 
Central Europe and the addition of terminal aimpoint logic which produces the 
required lethality with a small diameter submunition. The threat target infrared 
signature also changed to present a much lower intensity target to the seeker, thus 
making it more difficult to acquire autonomously. The characteristics of the current 
IRTGSM concept are given in figure 6. It should be noted that there is a trade-off 
between system availability and search footprint. The means of trade-off is search 
altitude (i.e., the lower the search altitude, the greater the availability but narrower 
the search footprint). 


• INDIRECT FIRE WITH AUTONOMOUS TARGET ACQUISITION 

• MANY-ON-MANY SCENARIO 

• HORIZONTAL QUDE SEARCH TRAJECTORY WITH GUDE ALTITUDE 
UNDER SOFTWARE CONTROL AND LOADED BEFORE LAUNCH 

• LARGE SEARCH AREA TO ACCOMMODATE SYSTEM ERRORS (TARGET 
LOCATION, DELIVERY, TARGET MOTION, ETC.) 

• MODERATE REQUIRED 

• TARGET SELECTION LOGIC EMPLOYED TO AVOID TARGET OVERKILL 

• HIGHPh/3 

• LOW COST 


FIGURE 6.0 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CURRENT IRTGSM CONCEPT 

Although the current effort is a POP program, both Raytheon and General 
Dynamics, the competing prime submunition contractors, have studied the eventual 
tactical design which would meet all the system requirements. Figure 7 shows the 
inboard profiles of the tactical IRTGSM designs for both developers. The similarity 
In designs only indicates that certain non-tradable requirements force system design 
choices that are very limited. 


119 







RAYTHEON GENERAL DYNAMICS 



FIGURE 7.0 INBOARD PROFILES OF TACTICAL IRTGSMs 

The seekers that each contractor Is utilizing In the POP program is Illustrated 
in figure 8. The General Dynamics design is almost mechanically identical to their 
ASSAULT BREAKER seeker. The Raytheon seeker is quite different from their 
ASSAULT BREAKER design in that it now employs a two-axis, rate stabilized gimbal 
wKh gimbal mounted detectors to maintain focus at the extremes of horizontal 
search. The General Dynamics seeker utilizes fiber optics to couple the gimballed 
focal plane to the body-mounted detectors to maintain focus. Both seekers 
incorporate aimpoint selection logic to bias the terminal aimpoint from the hot spot to 
a more vulnerable interior location. The ability of the seeker/airframe to hit at the 


120 














correct selected aimpoint is critical to the success of the IRTGSM POP program. 
There is no requirement for these seekers to be G hardened so both contractors are 
pursuing seeker designs which do not include hardening features. However, SWMO 
is conducting a commonality study for missile and projectile applications with the 
POP submunitions, including the seekers, being considered in that study. 


RAYTHEON 


Piimary. 
MIfiot 


OPTICS 
# DETECTORS 
SEARCH FOV (deg) 
SPECTRAL BAND 

STABIUZATtON 


REFLECTIVE 


MID 

LONG 


RATE 


Sacondary 


Inner 
.Gitnbal 
12 Color 
/Sensor t 
I Housing/ 


- Outer Gimbal 
Bevel Gear 
Driva 




Seeker Head 
Housing 

,— Bulkhaad 


Two Color 
rTjjl IR Dataclor 
iTlfll-and Cryostat- 
Asaambly 
[^tactor 
'Pre-Amp 
Asaambly 


Sensor | 

Dome and Adaptor 


' tunoslen Carbide 
Journal Bearing 
Gimbal — Typical 


Outer Gimbal 
Torgua Motor 


GENERAL DYNAMICS 


DESICCANT 

CAVITY 


0OME-HOUSV4O 


OPTICS 
# DETECTORS 
SEARCH FOV (deg) 
SPECTRAL BAND ^ 


REFLECTIVE 

8 

*20 


PREAMP 

ELECTRONCS 

FIBER 

ASSEMBLY 

/^IBER EXIT 
DETECTOR 
I AREA 


STABILIZATION 


CRYOSTAT 


OVRO-OPTICS 


HEAD COO. 


FIGURE 8.0 PROOF OF PRINCIPLE SEEKERS 






The IRTGSM and the two color infrared seeker, in particular, are being 
considered for other indirect fire weapons systems applications. The IRTGSM can 
be packaged into the MLRS with a rocket load of five submunitions per MLRS with 
minor modification to the MLRS yvarhead. The Army Materiel Command’s Smart 
Weapons Management Office is conducting a commonality study that addresses the 
utilization of indirect fire technology (including the IRTGSM) for rockets, missiles, and 
gun-launched projectiles. The study is scheduled to be completed by 30 October 
1990. 


The current state-of-the-art, two color infrared seeker technology has a place 
in the Army’s indirect fire weapons family. It is mature, relatively low cost, reliable, 
and capable of being packaged into a 4 inch diameter by 26 inch long submunition. 

5.0 INFRARED IMAGING IR SEEKERS FOR THE FUTURE 

Although the two color seeker technology is a cost effective approach to 
destroying armor in the deep battle, it has shortcomings that cannot be overcome 
with the simplistic focal planes and algorithms that are characteristic of this class of 
seekers. Improvements are desired in counter-countermeasures, acquisition of low 
thermal contrast targets, aimpoint selection and hitpoint performance, and target 
selectivity (i.e., target recognition). One possible solution to solving the 
shortcomings of the present two color infrared seekers is to utilize imaging infrared 
seeker technology. To date, this alternative has not met with great favor by Army 
developers due to limitations in the technologies required to make imaging IR 
seekers feasible. However, advances in staring focal plane array sizes, 
development of high throughput processors, and refinement of autonomous 
acquisition algorithms now make the imaging infrared seeker for indirect fire quite 
attractive. Platinum Silicide Schottky Barrier focal planes are currently available in 
512 X 512 element arrays and efforts are underway to expand the arrays to 1024 X 
1024 elements. Indium Antimonide (InSb) and 3-5 pm Mercury Cadmium Telluride 
(HgCdTe) arrays are being made in larger sizes and should soon be available in 
sizes which are applicable for the indirect fire seeker concept. DARPA’s ALADDIN 
processor, VHSIC, and application specific integrated circuits (ASIC) are just part of 
the advances in small volume, high throughput devices that are becoming available 
to process the vast amount of information outputted from large focal plane arrays. 
Finally, the government and industry supported efforts in autonomous acquisition and 
target recognition algorithm developments are maturing to the point that their 
utilization in indirect fire seekers appears feasible. 

Figure 9 illustrates some of the benefits that might be expected from an 
imaging seeker as compared to the current two color seekers. 


122 





TWO COLOR SEEKER 



■ 

■ 

m 


n 

■ 

■■■■■ 




■P 







BBS! 



■ 

■ 




1 


■1 

■i 


• >1.0mrad RESOLUTION 

• LARGE TARGET At REQUIRED 

• NO SMALL SIZE DISCRIMINATION 


(HOT SPOT DETECTION) 

• COARSE AIMPOINT CALCULATION 


IMAGING SEEKER 
















mid 



L 



: C22 






IZ 










O- 

3 

















iTTTI 1 


• <0.25 mrad RESOLUTION 

• SMALL TARGET At REQUIRED 

• CAN DISCRIMINATE ON SIZE 


(AREA DETECTION) 

• FINE AIMPOINT CALCULATION 


FIGURE 9.0 IMAGING AND TWO COLOR SEEKER COMPARISON 

The transition to the imaging seeker concept for an IRTGSM is not a simple 
matter. There are still technologies which must be investigated and matured before 
the concept can be demonstrated. The focal plane arrays are one example of a 
technology which requires additional effort. The RSi arrays, which are the only 
arrays that can presently be fabricated in large sizes, have small quantum 
efficiencies over the wavelengths of interest. In order to gain sensitivity, the 
integration time is allowed to be the frame time (1/30th sec.). With this long 
integration time, the problem with image smear arises. This is shown in figure 10 
for a horizontal glide TGSM. The magnitude of the problem will be addressed in 
the ongoing exploratory development program. Obviously, one solution to the 
problem is to scene stabilize the seeker during the integration time so a pixel stares 
at a relatively constant area. This will add complexity (and therefore, cost) to the 
seeker. Another solution is to utilize a focal plane array which requires an 
extremely small integration time so the smear will be negligible during the integration 
time. Other FPAs (such as InSb which requires a very short integration time) are 
being investigated for use in the concept. 


123 







HORIZONTAL 


D = VmT 


M' INT 


FOR V = 150 M/sec AND T|nt= 1/30 sec 
D = 5 METERS. IF THE IFOV = 0.25 mrad, 
THIS REPRESENTS A MOVEMENT OF 6 

IFOVs DURING ONE FRAME TIME AT A 
NOMINAL RANGE OF 1 KM 


VERTICAL 



H = 5 X TANGENT 17 =1.52 Meters OR: 
5 * RESOLUTION ELEMENTS @ 1 km 


THERE WILL ALSO BE SMEAR FROM THE APPARENT MAGNIFICATION 
CHANGE DURING THE INTEGRATION TIME OF THE FPA 


FIGURE 10.0 A POTENTIAL PROBLEM WITH IMAGE SMEAR. 

The current exploratory development program being conducted In the Ml COM 
Research, Development, and Engineering Center is investigating the effects of the 
relative rnotlon between the seeker and the scene on contrast transfer function 
(CTF). Measurements will be made utilizing both RSi and InSb FPA sensors and 
the CTFs will be measured in both the horizontal and vertical directions.. The CTF 
of the InSb sensor will be determined as a function of the frame rate. Figure 11 is 
a diagram of the experimental setup. It is a modified optical bench which is 
normally used to measure the minimum resolvable temperature (MRT) and noise 
equivalent temperature (NET) of Imaging senors and seekers. The rotatable folding 
mirror has the capability of producing image angular rates of 0.5 to 5.0 degrees per 
second. 


124 








FIGURE 11.0 LABORATORY SETUP FOR CTF INVESTIGATIONS 

If the short integration time requirement forces the Army from RSi to a more 
exotic FPA material, the size (number of pixels In azimuth and elevation) may well 
become an issue. The FPA size relative to search field-of-view Is pictured in a 
simplistic manner in figure 12. Even the 256 X 512 array, which is supportable with 
current RSi technology, requires a three step-stare search scheme in order to cover 
the same search width as the present two color seekers. The step-stare technique 
has been demonstrated in the Army Non-Une-of-Sight (FOG-M) program but that 
system has a man-in-the-loop for detecting targets in clutter. Another approach 
might be to utilize smaller FPAs (i.e. 128 X 128 elements) as a one column (128 X 
1 elements) in a gimbal scan search pattern. Once a valid target is detected, the 
full 2-dimensional array can be used for the validation, recognition, and tracking of 
the target. The trades between high and low density arrays must be addressed by 
the Ml COM exploratory development program. 


125 






FOR 0.25 mrad RESOLUTION AND 1 km RANGE 


3.67° 




128 m 



257 m 


A STEP-STARE APPROACH 
TO ACHIEVING THE 
REQUIRED SEARCH WIDTH 
WILL BE NEEDED 




FIGURE 12.0 SEARCH FIELD OF VIEW COVERAGE 


The technical challenges facing the autonomous imaging infrared seeker 
development are considerable. Only a few have been discussed above. The 
capability of the acquisition algorithms to detect and acquire low contrast targets 
must be demonstrated, in addition, there is a desire to implement target recognition 
capability as a growth option of the seeker. Aside from technical issues, the 
eventual cost of the imaging seeker must be addressed since an imaging IRTGSM 
must be cost effective for use in Army systems. 


The Ml COM exploratory development program schedule is shown in figure 13. 
The conduct of captive flight tests (CFT) has not been decided and will require 
further study to determine if they are technically and financially feasible. Tower 
tests are definitely planned if real time signal processing algorithms are available. 
Industry is encouraged to establish a dialogue with the program manager to make 



126 



























the effort more meaningful. A Broad Agency Announcement (BAA) will be initiated 
that includes specific efforts that are of interest to this program. These include real 
time autonomous target acquisition signal processing, FPAs and FPA 
sensors/seekers, and real time automatic target recognizers. 



FIGURE 13.0 IMAGING IRTGSM EXPLORATORY DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE 

Given that no insurmountable technical barriers are uncovered and reasonable 
results are achieved In the exploratory development program, a follow-on, proof-of- 
princlple effort Is envisioned. The thrusts of the MICOM Imaging IRTGSM are given 
in figure 14. The concerns with cost and real time processing need to be reiterated. 
The program is specifically oriented to getting the technology out of the laboratory 
and into a real-time and real-world environment The cost issue is critical; every 
attempt will be made to select technological approaches which are affordable. 


127 




























• RELIABLE ACQUISITION FOR LOWAT TARGETS 

• STRESS SPATIAL PROCESSING 
- LESS RELIANCE ON TARGET INTENSITY 

• IMPROVED TARGET AIMPOINT SELECTION CAPABILITY 

• ENHANCED COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES CAPABILITY 

• REAL-TIME PROCESSING IN REAL-WORLD ENVIRONMENTS 

• SMALL PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS 

• COST CONSIOUS TECHNOLOGY SELECTION 


FIGURE 14.0 IMAGING IRTGSM THRUSTS. 

5.0 SUMMARY 

Two infrared seeker approaches applicable to the Army’s indirect fire, 
antiarmor, mission have been discussed. Ttie two color seeker technology is 
mature, reliable, relatively inexpensive, and effective against the threat target. The 
horizontal glide concept maintains high system availability and the attendant lower 
probability of target acquisition does not seriously affect overall effectiveness 
performance. The Imaging infrared seeker concept for indirect fire is being 
investigated under an exploratory development effort at MICOM. If the effort is 
successful, the seeker will have improved performance in several areas which are of 
interest to the Army. Emerging technologies are being exploited and a 
conscientious effort to utilize low cost approaches is being made. The Army will 
continue to monitor requirements, resources, and available technology to address 
the needs of Deep Fire Support. 




Laser Line of Sight Guidance 

Kevin S. Lindley and Walter E. Miller 
U.S. Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 


ABSTRACT 

This paper is intended to be an interesting and informative 
top level tutorial of advanced laser-based missile technologies 
and systems. It will explain basic guidance techniques, 
capabilities, limitations, and alternatives. It will describe 
laser beamrider (LBR) methods, semi-active laser guidance, and the 
newest of all, laser updated self-simulation guidance. 

Several different areas will be briefly discussed to give a 
concise understanding of laser guidance and its uses, including: 
performance advantages, such as accuracy/range, inherent 
countermeasure (CM) rejection, and simplicity and low cost; basic 
problem areas, such as the need to track the target and adverse 
effects of missile plumes and battlefield aerosols; laser 
technology alternatives, such as choice of laser, cooled or 
uncooled receivers, and various beam encoding methods; and 
developmental programs, such as LOS-F-H, LOSAT, ADKEM, CAMMS and 
several foreign systems. 


INTRODUCTION 

The concept of laser guided missile systems has been around 
for many years, and several different approaches and methods have 
been conceived, designed, and successfully demonstrated. These 
guidance approaches can be divided into three major categories: 
semi-active, laser beamrider, and laser updated guidance. Each 
will be briefly described, and systems using the specific guidance 
technology will be highlighted, with emphasis being placed on 
laser be^unrider guidance. 

LASER GUIDANCE DESCRIPTIONS 
SEMI-ACTIVE LASER GUIDANCE 

This method uses a laser for target designation, which in 
turn provides guidance information to the missile by way of a 
seeker in the nose of the missile. A gunner selects a target 
using a day or night sight and then fires a laser at the target, 
illuminating a select area of the target with a laser spot. A 
missile containing a gimbaled seeker in its nose cone is fired at 
the target; most of the laser energy is reflected off the target 
and detected by the seeker, which homes in on it (see Fig. 1). 

The missile electronics determines the origin of the detected 
laser energy and guides the missile to this point. 

This form of guidance is very accurate provided the laser is 
kept on the target until missile impact. Using more than one 
designator, such as a Ground/Vehicular Laser rangefinder Laser 
designator (6/VLLD) and helicopter based designators, multiple 
targets can be engaged as is Fig. 1. However, the technology 


129 


cannot yet be used on kinetic energy missiles (KEM) because of 
scan rate limitations of the seeker gimbal and the need for a 
transparent nose cone, which could not withstand the intense shock 
and friction of a KEM flight. It also requires constant target 
designation until missile impact, making the gunner more 
vulnerable to enemy response (not fire and forget). 

LASER BEAMRIDER GUIDANCE 

The guidance technique on which laser beamrider guidance is 
based is the Command to Line Of Sight or CLOS concept, the most 
widely known of which is the TOW system. With TOW, the missile 
and target are tracked by a common forward looking infrared (FLIR) 
system, and position information relative to the target is 
provided to the missile by means of a physical data link (thin 
wire). The TOW missile has been fielded successfully for over 
twenty years in various versions and was chosen as a testbed for 
beamrider because of its similarities to the b'>'iu:ider guidance 
concept. 

The TOW CLOS concept was modified to eliminate the need to 
track the missile and was provided a laser as the guidance link. 
The laser is aimed and fired at a selected line of sight target, 
and a missile is launched so as to enter the gunner-to-target line 
of sight and fly within the beam's guidance field (see Fig. 2). 

The missile has an aft looking receiver (ALR), which detects laser 
energy, and on-board electronics which decode position information 
provided by the laser. 

The guidance field may actually be several meters in size 
depending on how the laser is scanned or dispersed; a balance must 
be achieved between optimum beam size, laser signal-to-noise ratio 
at the missile, and scan size/data rate. Guidance information is 
provided to the missile by spatially encoding the laser, a 
technique in which the laser is uniquely pulsed, scanned, or 
somehow coded, and the missile uses the laser energy received to 
calculate its position relative to the center of the beam. The 
two methods for spatial encoding are scan generated codes and 
reticle generated codes. 

Scan Generated Codes. Three selected types of scan generated 
codes are shown in Fig. 3, all of which have been 
successfully flown. The four quadrant code uses four lasers 
modulated at different rates (pulse position modulation), 
each forming a quadrant of a circle as shown. This quadrant 
is moved in a nutation circle creating a guidance field, and 
the missile ALR detects the different laser frequencies as 
each quadrant passes over it. If the time spent in each 
quadrant is the same, the missile is in the center of the 
^am; as the missile flies off axis, one laser frequency (one 
quadrant) begins to dominate, and the missile makes 
adjustments to get back to center. 

The bar scan works basically the same, but uses two 
lasers to project an azimuth bar and an elevation bar forming 
an L-shape in space. The bars are nutated, but here time 
between Az and El crossings is used to guide the missile. 

The missile's on board electronics decodes at what time 


130 






relative to a synch clock each bar was scanned across the ALR 
and the time between the azimuth and elevation bars, 
correcting its path to keep these times the same and fly in 
the center of the nutation circle. 

With a raster scan, the missile clock is synchronized 
with a laser beam projector unit (BPU) clock before launch. 
The laser spot is scanned separately in azimuth and elevation 
by the BPU creating a guidance field, and pulses are received 
by the missile when the scans cross the missile's ALR. The 
missile uses time since launch, scan rate, and time between 
successxve pulses to determine where it is within the 
guidance field. The missile makes guidance commands to keep 
the time between Az and El pulses the same, which only occurs 
in the guidance field center. 

Reticle Generated Codes. The two main examples of reticle 
codes are the FM reticle and the Gray Code reticle, both 
shown in Fig. 4. 

The FM reticle method employs a reticle with alternating 
transparent and opaque segments, which when rotated on axis 
in front of the laser effectively creates a fixed modulation 
frequency on the receiver of the missile anywhere within the 
guidance field. However, the reticle is also nutated within 
the guidance field creating a frequency modulated signal at 
the missile with greater depth of FM laser modulation at the 
center of the guidance field, and the lowest depth at the 
edge. When the frequency is synchronously detected with 
respect to the nutation angle, missile position relative to 
the line of sight is obtained in polar coordinates. 

The Gray Code method encodes the laser beam using a 
series of reticles of diminishing width and spacing which are 
sequentially placed between the laser and the line of sight. 
Different areas of the beam are blocked as the reticles 
revolve, so the laser is intermittently received at the 
missile depending on missile position in the guidance field; 
the intermittent pulses are used on the missile to generate a 
code of ones and zeroes relating position in the guidance 
field. The missile electronics resolves position by 
comparing the pulse code to preprogrammed codes on the 
missile. This concept is being used to test multiple 
beeunrider missile guidance, because the reticles can produce 
separate missile codes over the entire guidance field, and 
maintain a high data rate. 

One of the best features of beamrider guidance is that the 
missile receiver looks back into friendly territory, providing 
excellent countermeasure rejection. It is also relatively 
simple technology (particularly on the missile), low cost, target 
signature independent (point and shoot), and highly accurate. 
However, it is not fire and forget and requires target 
illumination, making the gunner more vulnerable to detection and 
response by the enemy. These factors are minimized by the low 
energy levels associated with laser beeunrider transmitters and the 
short flight time of supersonic missiles. 


131 




LASER UPDATED GUIDANCE 


This method is the newest laser guidance technique and uses a 
self-simulating missile that flies a preprogrammed trajectory 
towards a target. Position updates are sent using a laser and are 
then compared to the nominal trajectory downloaded into the 
missile guidance computer before launch. 

The testbed for this form of guidance has been a Kinetic 
Energy Missile which has a very large, hot plume trackable in a 
FLIR. A target is first selected by the gunner and ranged on with 
a laser, and the weapon system computer on the launcher calculates 
a nominal trajectory for target intercept based on this range and 
the known missile characteristics (thrust profile, etc). A laser 
guidance field defining the limits of the update range in space is 
boresighted to the FLIR as in Fig. 5; the guidance field size can 
be varied, but not during flight. 

The nominal trajectory is downloaded to the missile and the 
missile is fired. The target and missile are differentially 
tracked by the FLIR during flight and a vertical and horizontal 
difference is calculated. The laser is positioned in the guidance 
field at the missile position provided by the FLIR tracker, and 
when commanded fires a pulse. The timing of the pulse provides 
true missile position relative to the target, based on time of 
flight and when the pulse was received. After comparing 
anticipated update time to actual pulse time of arrival, a change 
in the self-simulation states is made based on the difference (see 
Fig. 6). The missile then continues to be guided by this 
internal simulation which has now been updated. 

This concept is well-suited for kinetic energy missiles, 
where a large amount of obscurants from the missile motor would 
make direct line of sight guidance difficult. The missile flies 
an arched, command-to-intercept type trajectory; however, because 
of its self-simulation capability, some loss of missile track 
and/or guidance updates can be accommodated for portions of the 
flight. 


SELECTED LASER GUIDANCE PERFORMANCE FACTORS 


OPTICAL ACCURACY 

The accuracy associated with laser systems has been proven to 
be limited principally by optical diffraction, a small error that 
provides extreme overall accuracy for missile guidance. This has 
been proven in a number of flight tests over the years. For 
exeunple, in the late 1970's a series of approximately 15 laser 
beamrider guided flights yielded center hits each time through 
targets out to at least 3 Km; the average miss difference between 
missile impact and where the laser was aimed was less than six 
inches. 

WAVELENGTH COMPARISON 

There are obviously several alternatives to choose from as to 
t^ich laser to use for missile guidance. Three have been quite 


132 




well investigated, and their advantages and drawbacks are known. 

Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) is a very convenient laser. It is 
very small, lightweight, and low cost. It's ease of modulation 
and spat■nl array configuration make it a very versatile source. 

It is generally eyesafe in this use except at very short ranges. 
The principal disadvantage is lack of smoke penetration equal to 
the FLIR capability. 

Neodymium YAG (Nd;YAG) and similar glass and crystal lasers 
possess a high peak power, which can somewhat compensate for poor 
smoke penetration but not completely. The laser technology is 
also mature, but size and complexity are disadvantages. It is 
generally not eyesafe in this application. 

Carbon Dioxide (CO 2 ) is at present the laser of choice. It's 
size, weight, and complexity are between the above two, it is 
completely eye safe, and aerosol penetration exceeds the FLIR 
performance in all cases. The detectors must be cryogenically 
cooled, and while techniques are quite well developed this is a 
disadvantage. 

Millimeter wave (MMW) is being considered as an alternative 
to these lasers in order to achieve even better aerosol 
performance, and some weather capability. Disadvantages are 
resolution vs. antenna size, target acquisition and track 
capability and complexity, and technological maturity. MMW is the 
source of choice for the in-house ADKEM system, which will be 
further discussed in the system section below. 

AEROSOL EFFECTS 


Figure 7 shows attenuation curves for some tactical 
smokes at different laser wavelengths. Note the very large 
attenuation levels achievable. An attempt has been made to 
achieve full FLIR compatibility with a GaAs Laser Beamrider. 
This was achieved in the phosphor smokes (WP & PWP munitions) 
with an excess S/N of 25000:1 above minimum operational. 
However, as can be seen from these curves, a FLIR is 
essentially undisturbed by large quantities of HC smoke, 
while GaAs is seriously degraded with even a small auaount. 
Thus full compatibility (ability to guide ANYTIME the FLIR 
can be used to acquire a target) requires the laser to 
operate within same the spectral band as the FLIR. 


DETECTABILITY 

Figure 8 depicts the off-axis detectability of CO 2 (10.6 
microns) and Nd:YAG (1.06 microns) laser wavelengths. The short 
wavelength laser detectability is higher by at least a factor of 
ten at any given range, so CO 2 is obviously the better of the two 
to avoid enemy detection. However, two targets even several 
hundred meters apart will likely both be in the gunner's field of 
view. Multiple or even rapid target engagement by the gunner 
would thus significantly reduce the chances of enemy response even 
if laser detection occurred. 


133 


LASER GUIDED SYSTEMS 


U.S. DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS 


There are several U.S. missile programs currently under 
development that plan to employ some type of laser guidance. The 
four to be mentioned here are in different stages of development; 
two are being developed by the MICOM RD&E Center in-house, while 
two are being developed by contractors and managed by project 
offices. 

The Combined Arms Multipurpose Missile System (CAMMS) is an 
in-house program that will use a COj laser beam projector and 
raster scan to guide a missile initially, then use a tv or 
infrared seeker for the latter stage of flight. A multi-guided 
missile such as this would provide fire and forget capability 
under the best conditions, but allow for engagement of longer 
range targets or partially obscured targets as well. If the 
seeker could not accurately lock on to a target, the gunner could 
use the beamrider mode to guide the missile until the seeker was 
within target detection range. It is noteworthy that the laser 
beamrider signals are used to point the seeker to aid in seeker 
target lock-on. 

The Advanced Kinetic Energy Missile (ADKEM) is another in- 
house program, with competing guidance technologies (CO 2 laser 
beamrider and MMW). The missile will consist of a projectile 
which will be accelerated to supersonic speeds by a cluster of 
booster motors, which will fall away after expenditure. Though 
the concept is still in the early stages, several static motor 
tests and simulations have already shown that communication 
through the missile plume and smoke with a carbon dioxide laser is 
possible, providing an accurate, low cost guidance method. A beam 
projector and raster scan pattern are the planned guidance 
techniques if the laser concept is chosen. The MMW differential 
track approach is similarly promising, less affected by smoke, and 
has some adverse weather capability. 

The Line Of Sight-Forward-Heavy (LOS-F-H) project office has 
chosen a CO 2 laser beamrider system as part of the Forward Area 
Air Defense (FAAD) initiative. The concept and technology is the 
same as the foreign Air Defense Anti-Tank System (ADATS, described 
below) developed by Switzerland in the U.S., but it will be 
integrated into a Bradley vehicle for the U.S. Army. LOS-F-H will 
use a CO 2 laser to create a digital position code utilizing phase 
shift keying (PSK). The missile will fly non-line of sight in 
the initial stages of flight for plume smoke avoidance, then 
converge back to a line of sight trajectory until target impact. 

The Line Of Sight Anti-Tank (LOSAT) project office has 
selected a COo laser commanded KEM system as its primary 
candidate. This system is the one described earlier; if 
successful as a guidance technique, it will provide a significant 
overmatch to current and future threat armor out to extended 
ranges. LOSAT is foreseen as a replacement for the TOW system. 

FOREIGN SYSTEMS 


134 



As mentioned, ADATS is a foreign system which has been 
purchased by Canada and other countries. It is mounted on a 
modified personnel carrier as a dedicated air defense and anti¬ 
tank weapon system. 

RBS-70 uses GaAs laser diodes to create an azimuth and 
elevation bar scan for missile guidance. It is a ground-launched, 
portable air defense weapon system; the gunner's seat, sights, and 
the launcher and guidance system can be rotated 360 degrees by the 
gunner to allow full manual track of air targets. 

Starstreak is a British supersonic, GaAs laser beamrider air 
defense weapon. The missile has a two-stage motor and is shoulder 
launched using the first motor, then when the missile has reached 
a predetermined safe distance from the gunner the second motor 
accelerates it beyond Mach 1. The first motor is dropped after 
expenditure for reduced drag. The gunner continues to sight the 
laser on the target until missile impact. 


135 



FIGORE Is SBKI'ACnVB LASER GUIDANCE 


UNE-OF—SIGHT GUIDANCE 
OPTICAL BEAMRIOER 



FIGURE 2: LASER BEAMRIOER GUIDANCE 






rOUR OUAORANT 


■AR SCAN 


RASm SCAR 



FIGURE 4: RETICLE GENERATED CODES 


137 















FIGURE 5: LASER UPDATED MISSILE GUIDANCE FIELD 


• StngterulM AMlwMiarEMiiUpM* 

• Mm ThM tl AnMI C « ii M rt »< M X>T Ali W wi 
• a«W«««e«n«all«MtM«tfMOIN««Mi 



FIGURE 6: LASER UPDATE CONCEPT 


138 






DISTANCE OFF-AXIS (M> 5g Transmission. Percent 


(O.IHIitiHI 


10;.. IMK:»ri on 

10 :.. fS 

lOi., Wp; PWf 


C02 and FLIR 
Wavelengths 



range, KETERS, at C-.IO g»/M^ 

0 25 SO 75 100 125 ISO 175 200 225 250 

RANGE, METERS, at C-.02 rm/M* 


.9u.up;p«p GaAs Wavelength 

7-i.li,, wp;pv.T Broadband Silicon 

Detector Wavelength 

. 9 lj. DIESEL on. 

7-1.lu. 

DIESEL OIL 


7-1.ly. HC;rS; 
.9o. FS 

.9u, HC 


E 7; LASER TRANSMISSION THROUGH SELECTED AEROSOLS 



FIGURE 8: OFF-AXIS LASER DETECTABILITY 


139/(140 Blank) 






Measuring Radar Cross Section 
Using a CW Track-While-Scan Radar 

Will D Caraway III 
Research, Development and 
Engineering Center 
Redstone Arsenal, A1 

ABSTRACT 

Fielded radar systems offer a realistic means of measuring 
an airframe's radar cross section (RCS) and the effects of RCS 
reduction attempts. This paper presents a method for performing 
these measurements using a CW Track-While-Scan radar. RCS 
measurements of a target with a known cross section are presented 
to establish error boundaries. 

INTRODUCTION 

Most airframes currently in use undergo extensive flight 
testing before their actual production begins. These flight 
tests are generally conducted on well instrumented test ranges 
equipped with a wide variety of instrumentation and threat 
simulation radars. This paper presents a method for calculating 
an airframe's radar cross section based on the detection data 
normally collected by the range radars during these tests. This 
allows the realistic evaluation of an airframe's RCS during its 
flight tests without the added time and expense of using an RCS 
measurement facility. In addition, this method can be used to 
measure the change in RCS that occurs when an airframe is 
modified, provided similar data exists for the original 
configuration. 

During a 1985 tracking test, a technique was developed for 
estimating the RCS of a target from detection data collected by 
the Track-While-Scan Quiet Radar (QR) [1]. The QR is an 
exploratory development, short range, air defense radar capable 
of performing both track and search functions. As the number of 
tracking tests involving the QR grew, the technique was refined, 
generalized and implemented in modularized software. In its 
present form, the technique is an extremely flexible tool capable 
of being used with almost any well characterized radar. 

This paper describes the basic theory behind the use of 
detection data for calculating a target's RCS and its specific 
application to the QR. A discussion on the issues involved in 
applying this technique to another radar is also provided. 
Finally, data collected with the QR on a static target of known 
cross section is provided to establish a minimum error boundary. 


141 



RADAR CROSS SECTION COMPUTATIONAL METHOD 


The basic equation from which to calculate RCS is the radar 
range equation: [2] 


5_ 

N (4n)^R*KTB^NF-L 


where 


S/N = signal to noise ratio, 

= power transmitted, 

= gain of transmit antenna, 

= gain of receive antenna, 

X = wavelength of transmit frequency, 

a = target RCS, 

R = target range, 

KTB = thermal noise power in the processing 

bandwidth, 

NF = noise figure, 

L = losses. 


Solving Eq. 1 for RCS yields: 

(Aii)^R*KTB’NF-L{ — ) 
0 =- — 


( 2 ) 


Those readers accustomed to using RCS measurement systems may be 
more familiar with Eq. 2 in the following form: 

, 3 , 


where P^ = power received at the antenna. 

While this form of the equation is preferable for RCS work, most 
radars, including the QR, do not measure the received power at 
the antenna but rather the signal to noise ratio at the output of 
their signal processor, necessitating the use of Eq. 2. At first 
glance, Eq. 2 seems to provide a relatively simple and accurate 
means for calculating target RCS; however, several of the 
parameters can be difficult to quantify, injecting a proportional 
amount of inaccuracy into the result. 


142 





The parameters in Eq. 2 can be divided into two distinct 
classes: those parameters independent of target returns and 
parameters dependent on target returns. Target independent 
parameters include P^, G^, G^, k, (4ir)^, KTB, and NF and are all 
dependent on the radar in question. For the QR, these values 
have been well quantified by MICOM or Hughes Aircraft Co ., the 
QR's manufacturer. Target dependent parameters are R, S/N, and L 
and are determined from the radar's detection data. Up to now, L 
(losses) has been treated as one unknown; however, in practice, 
it is made up of several unknowns. The determination of L is 
generally the most challenging aspect of the problem and the one 
most prone to error. In addition, the formulation of L is 
usually unique to the radar. The components of L for the QR are 
shown in Eq. 4. 

L{in dB's) = + I^oP + + Lbpa + (4) 

where = range cell straddle loss, 

= doppler filter straddle loss, 

Lgpg = beam pointing loss in elevation, 

= beam pointing loss in azimuth, 

= calibration determined losses. 

The beam pointing losses will reduce the parameters G^ and Gp 
which are fixed to represent maximum antenna gains, and the 
processing losses, I^^p and will reduce the processing gain 

for the speed and range of tne target. The term accounts for 
any bias found when calibrating the algorithm against a target of 
known RCS, This could result from unusual atmospheric conditions 
on the day of the test, aging degrading the target independent 
radar parameters, etc. 

Since the target independent parameters are constants or 
previously determined quantities, the determination of a target's 
RCS is contingent upon accurately estimating the target dependent 
parameters. Range and S/N can, in general, be obtained directly 
from the radar detection reports. The various loss components 
are then calculated from differing combinations of detection 
reports and, if necessary, high accuracy target position data. 

The target position data is needed to calculate beam pointing 
losses for radars such as the QR that have no way of determining 
where in their beam the target is located. This is not the case 
for all radars. For instance, a staring, monopulse system would 
be able to determine where in its beam the target is located, and 
its reports should have sufficient information to calculate beam 
pointing losses without need of position data. This information 
is then processed and stored in a separate loss table for each 
track so that the RCS at each detection in the track can be 
calculated. For the interested reader, the specifics of the 
calculation of L for the QR are presented below. 


143 


Once the loss table for a track is complete, an RCS table 
can be calculated from it. For ease of calculation and 
convenience, RCS is usually calculated in dB's since most of the 
parameters are conventionally in dB's. In addition, Eq. 2 (in dB 
format) can be rearranged into the following form: 

a {dBsm) + — + C (5) 


where I, = 40U)G,„(R) + -f + W + + V 

sum of target dependent parameters 
S/N = signal to noise for current detection 

C = 30log(47c) + KTBNF - P^. - G^. - Gj^ - 20log(A.) 

sum of target independent parameters 
= 177.6 dB for the QR 

These RCS tables can then be analyzed as appropriate to determine 
either absolute RCS or difference RCS. 

Eq. 5 can easily be applied to any standard radar. First, 
the quantities that compose C would need to be accurately 
determined so that C can be recalculated. Then, the equation for 
L 2 may need to be adjusted for any differences in the radar's 
loss mechanisms. Finally, if absolute RCS measurements will be 
made, the RCS of a target of known RCS needs to be measured in 
order to determine 


QR LOSS CALCULATION 
Range Cell Straddling Loss [1] 

The QR is a CW radar and uses bi-phase codes to resolve 
range. A 31-bit maximal length code is implemented using two 
code repetition frequencies (CRF) providing thirty-one identical 
range cells, numbered 1 through 31. The range cell spacing is 
62.5 and 59.4 meters for CRFl and CRF2, respectively. As a 
result of the range cell spacing, the maximum unambiguous range 
for CRFl and CRF2 is 1937.5 and 1840.6 m. The two CRFs are 
combined to extend the QR's maximum unambiguous range to 36.8 km. 

The range cell straddling loss is determined by using a 
range cell interpolation algorithm. The data required by the 
algorithm is the detection range cell amplitude along with the 
highest adjacent filter amplitude. The difference in the 
amplitudes, in dB's, is determined by subtracting the adjacent 
amplitude from the detection amplitude. As can be seen in Fig. 

1, this difference defines a unique point in the two range cells. 
This difference is then used as the interpolation point on a 
difference vs straddling loss table; a graph of which is shown in 
Fig. 2. 


144 



Doppler Filter Straddling Loss 

The QR perforins doppler processing via a digital Moving 
Target Indicator (MTI ), for clutter rejection, and 32 digital 
doppler filters providing inbound and outbound velocity 
determination [2], Generally, doppler filter straddling loss for 
the QR is calculated using a method virtually identical to the 
one described above for range cell straddling loss. Sometimes 
though, a target will not have sufficient airspeed to make this 
possible. For instance, a helicopter’s average speed is 55 m/s, 
but the center of the QR's first doppler filter is approximately 
75 m/s. Consequently, instead of appearing in the main lobes of 
two same sign, adjacent filters, the target appears in the main 
lobe of filter + or - 1 and the first sidelobe of the other. As 
can be seen from Fig. 3, small changes in the amplitude 
difference yield large changes in doppler frequency, and 
therefore doppler loss, for targets in this portion of the 
filters. This problem makes this technique too unstable to use 
to calculate doppler loss for low radial velocity targets. 

The solution to this problem is to determine the target's 
doppler frequency from time tagged positional data. This 
requires calculating the velocity vector of the target, 
extracting its radial component relative to the QR, converting 
this component into frequency, and determining the doppler loss 
from a table based on normalized frequency. Reference radar data 
is generally used to calculate the target's velocity vector since 
their higher data rate makes it fairly simple to calculate a new 
velocity vector for each QR detection. The radial component of 
the velocity vector can then be found by foirming the dot product 
of the velocity vector and the QR unit pointing vector. Finally, 
the normalized frequencies are calculated by converting the 
radial component into frequency and dividing by each pulse 
repetition frequency (PRF). The complete mathematical 
development of this method is shown below. 


Given: Target positions i and 
i-x w.r.t. QR in (X,y,Z) 
coordinates 



145 



T/ _ ^i-x— , ^i-x— , ^i-x — 

Velocity Vector ^ ~ ~z z ^ ~Z Z y ^ ^ 

‘'a '^i-x '-i ^j-x •'i *'i-x 


QR Pointing Vector Q = X^x + Y^y + Z^z 


Unit Pointing Vector 



Radial Component ~ ^ ^ 

x^iXj-Xj.j * y^jy^-yj-x) * 


tJxj + r? + z| 


Doppler Frequency 2Vj, 

" IT 


Normalized Frequency ~ 


where the PRFs are 81494 and 77419 Hz and are related to the CRFs 
by multiplying by 31. 

Beam Pointing Losses [l] 

The QR uses a rectangular phased array antenna with 
electronic steering in elevation and azimuth scanning by 
mechanical rotation. Its radiation pattern is very closely 
approximated by the following equation: 

G(e,,0,) = G(0JG(e,) 

where ^(0^,6^) = the radiation pattern as a function of 

elevation and azimuth 

G(0,) = the elevation principle plane radiation 

pattern 

G(0a^ ~ azimuth principle plane radiation 

pattern. 

As indicated by the above equation, the radiation pattern can be 
separated into the elevation and azimuth principle plane 
patterns. Thus, the beam pointing losses can be determined 
independently for both elevation and azimuth. A Taylor 
illumination function is employed to produce the principle plane 
patterns in both elevation and azimuth. 


146 






Elevation Pointing Loss [1] 

To determine either an elevation or azimuth pointing loss, 
the exact position of a detected target is required. Elevation 
'•truth " data must be obtained from a reference radar with 
accuracy significantly greater than .25 deg. Using this data and 
the elevation of the detection beam's center during a target 
detection, an elevation offset with respect to the beam's center 
is determined. This offset is then used as the index into the 
elevation loss lookup table to find the elevation pointing loss. 

A plot of the elevation offset versus pointing loss is shown in 
Fig. 4. This plot was generated from the elevation loss lookup 
table. Note, Fig. 4 is normalized with respect to beam numbers 
and can be used for all beam positions. The following equation 
relates beam numbers to elevation angles: 

BN= sin(e--10. 3 ) 
c ^ 


where BN = beam number 

f = frequency in Hz 

d = element spacing = .0174 m 

c = speed of light 

0^ = elevation angle of the target. 

Azimuth Pointing Losses 

Azimuth pointing losses are determined using exactly the 
same method as is used for elevation with one minor difference. 
The azimuth pointing error is calculated in degrees. Fig. 5 is a 
plot of azimuth offset versus pointing loss and was generated 
from the azimuth loss lookup table. 

Calibration Determined Losses 

It is rarely possible to account for all the losses and 
system aging effects associated with a radar; therefore, it is 
important to calibrate Eq. 5 when attempting to perform absolute 
RCS measurements. In the case where RCS differences are being 
tested, this calibration is unnecessary since these losses will 
affect each target equally and will be nulled out in the 
comparison. For the QR, this calibration is performed using a 
stationary target of known RCS located at a surveyed point. A 
statistically large sample of data is collected and the target's 
average RCS is calculated using Eq. 5 with 1^=0. This average 
is then compared to the target's known RCS and L^^^ is set to the 
difference. 


147 



ERROR ANALYSIS 


The results from Eq. 5 are expected to vary because of two 
uncontrollable phenomenon: the unpredictable nature of complex 
target returns (category 1) and the variation in radar operating 
characteristics (category 2). The measurement variation caused 
by category 1 effects are the result of actual variations in a 
target's RCS and should not be counted as errors; however, the 
variation caused by category 2 effects are the result of errors 
in determining the target dependent and independent parameters 
and should be counted as errors. Determining the amount of 
variation caused by these random events would be a very 
complicated task since each target return received by the QR is 
affected by many parameters within these two categories. For 
instance, in the first category, target scintillation and aspect 
variation could cause significant fluctuation in a target's RCS; 
and the characteristics of these fluctuations are target 
dependent. RCS variation due to these variables should not be 
included in defining an error for Eq. 5. On the other hand, 
varying radar parameters, such as antenna beam pointing loss, 
doppler and range filter straddling loss, signal-to-noise ratio 
(S/N), multi-path, and equipment instability, contribute to some 
variation in the RCS results; and these parameters are considered 
responsible for the error associated with Eq. 5. The processes 
to determine losses and S/Ns are implemented as accurately as 
possible; but as with all estimated phenomenon, some error must 
exist. These category 2 parameters contribute some variation 
(error) to the results of Eq. 5; but as mentioned before, 
determining the amount of variation due to category 2 quantities 
is extremely complex in the presence of the category 1 
quantities. 

An additional complication is the filter rolloff associated 
with doppler and range filter losses. As can be seen from Fig. 2 
and 3, any corruption of the filter amplitudes used to calculate 
losses will corrupt the loss calculation. In addition, the 
degradation will not be uniform. Targets in the center of a 
filter, where the response is flatter, will experience less 
degradation than targets beyond the filter knee, where the 
response is changing rapidly. Also, returns with low S/N ratios, 
where small noise changes may produce significant amplitude 
corruption, will be less reliable than returns with high S/N 
ratios, where small noise changes produce little amplitude 
corruption. Clearly, the worst possible case would be a target 
well into the filter rolloff region with a low S/N ratio, and the 
best case would be a target centered in the filter response with 
a high S/N ratio. Further complicating the situation is the fact 
that over the course of a test most moving targets will appear in 
a wide variety of filter locations at varying S/N ratios. 
Consequently, while the error for a single measurement could be 
calculated, determining the error for an entire test would be 
extremely complex. 


148 



As an achievable alternative, a method has been derived to 
estimate the error associated with Eq. 5 by determining the RCS 
of a stationary target with constant RCS. A target of this type 
exhibits no category 1 phenomenon in its RCS results, so the 
variation caused by the category 2 parameters can be directly 
observed; however, the error derived for Eq. 5 will only be valid 
for stationary, non-complex targets. Using this approach, a 
minimum error bound can be established (for various situations), 
and a small error will verify the validity of the approach. 

A stationary target with known RCS was placed at four 
locations and detection data was collected with the QR. The S/N 
ratios for three of the sights were set to 20 dB, and the fourth 
was set to 16 dB. RCS estimates were generated for the 
calibrated target using Equation (5) with mean and 

standard deviation of the RCS data was then calculated for each 
site. The difference between the mean and theoretical RCS was 
-2.5 dBsm for the 20 dB S/N sites and -4 dBsm for the 16 dB S/N 
site; therefore, a -2.5 dBsm bias for the 20 dB S/N sites and a 
-4 dBsm bias for the 16 dB S/N sites was defined as being present 
in the RCS data. They could be removed by adding 2.5 or 4 dBsm 
to the corresponding RCS results generated by Equation (5). The 
standard deviation of the four sites ranged from about 1.7 to 2.9 
dBsm. The largest of these, approximately 3 dBsm, would be 
chosen as a conservative estimate of the error. Thus, the 
minimum error associated with Eq. 5 for measuring the RCS of a 
target would be 3 dBsm. 

The standard deviation of the RCS data was used to represent 
the error associated with Eq. 5, because the RCS measurements 
were considered independent and Gaussian distributed. 

Independence was assumed because RCS estimates were determined 
from detection data that was collected on a beam to beam basis. 
Two measurements were made for each beam, one for CRFl and one 
for CRF2, which would be correlated if one assumes a Swirling 
case 1 target; however, the category 2 parameters mentioned above 
were independent, so the RCS values varied enough between CRFs to 
safely assume independence between these measurements also. The 
RCS data was also assumed to be Gaussian distributed when 
properly normalized. The logarithmic results from Eq. 5 were 
shown to fit a log-normal distribution without having to 
normalize the magnitude of the data with respect to the mean and 
standard deviation, so the error was approximated in these units. 


149 



In summary, an error analysis was performed to validate the 
procedures used to estimate RCS. A worst case error of 3 dBsm 
was associated with Eq. 5 when measuring the RCS of a stationary 
target with constant RCS. The magnitude of this error indicated 
the methodology described earlier is sound, and the QR produced 
fairly accurate results for a system of its complexity. In 
addition, a marked increase in accuracy was noted for high S/N 
ratio returns. Also, it was noted that a -2.5 or -4 dBsm bias 
was present in the RCS data, and it could be removed by adding an 
equal amount to the respective RCS results generated by Eq. 5. 

CONCLUSION 

In this paper, a method for determining an airframe's RCS 
from the radar detection data collected during its flight tests 
has been presented. The solution methodology for a generic radar 
has been formulated with the methodology for the QR being 
provided as a specific example. In addition, data collected with 
the QR on a static target of known RCS has been presented to 
validate the methodology and demonstrate the performance of the 
QR. 


150 




REFERENCES 


[1] McElroy, R. R., et al, "Measurement of FOG-M's Radar Cross 
Section Using the Track-While-Scan Quiet Radar," US Army Missile 
Command, Redstone Arsenal, AL, September 1987, TR-RD-AS-86-20 

[2] Berkowitz, R.S., ed., Modern Radar Analysis. Evaluation, and 
System Design . John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, New York 

[3] McElroy, R. R., et al, "Angular Interpolation Algorithms 
Implemented in the Track-While-Scan Quiet Radar," US Army Missile 
Command, Redstone Arsenal, AL, February 1989, TR-RD-AS-89-8 


151 




Filter 2 Filter 






152 


Figure 1 (U) Ra nge cell res pnn,^ 





153 


10 LOGin / Range Filter Output Power _ 

Adjacent Range Filter Output Power 










-niO-HAY rOIMTINO Lost IN 41* ■ 



Figure 4 Elevation pointing loss vs elevation offset. 


155 






Figure 5 


.- ^ 1— . 1 1 .1 


l.O 

Ax OFFSET 19 OECRZES 


2.0 


(U) Azimuth pointing loss vs azinuth offset. 


156 




- SESSION III - 


GUIDANCE AND CONTROL 






THE DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATION OF AUTOMATIC TARGET 
CUEING TECHNOLOGY FOR MAN-IN-THE-LOOP FIRE CONTROL SYSTEMS 

Traci K. Malone and Pat H. Mclngvale 
AMSMI-RD-GC-C 


ABSTRACT 

The Control Systems Group, Guidance and Control (G&C) 
Directorate has been actively involved in the development of 
image processing techniques and hardware for automatic 
target cueing applicable to man-in-the-loop fire control 
systems. This effort has included development of a video 
data base, development of processing algorithms and 
implementation of the algorithms in prototype hardware. A 
major result of this program was the development of a 
brassboard automatic target cuer applicable to a FOG-M or 
unmanned aerial vehicle. This cuer processes video from the 
imaging sensor and produces cues around those objects that 
have a high probability of being targets. The operator 
makes the final decision of whether it is a target. This 
prototype cuer has been evaluated in a series of field and 
lab experiments at MICOM and White Sands Missile Range 
(WSMR). Although the design goals have not yet been 
achieved, the results are encouraging and planned system 
improvements are expected to allow achieving these goals. 

INTRODUCTION 

One of the major challenges to be overcome in the 
application of man-in-the-loop fire control systems is the 
efficient, fast, and accurate accfuisition of targets. The 
problem is compounded because the use of wide field-of-view 
sensors (necessary for midcourse guidance and to achieve a 
large search area) results in tank or helicopter targets 
subtending a very small angle when viewed a reasonable 
distance from the sensor. A missile technology program has 
been evaluating techniques and developing real-time, 
prototype hardware to demonstrate an automatic target cuer 
that can assist a system operator in locating these elusive 
targets. 

The prototype target cuer was developed under a 
cooperative venture with Loral Defense Systems Division. 

The actual hardware, development, and much of the evaluation 
of the algorithms and processing techniques that defined the 
hardware were performed by Loral. The Control Systems Group 
had a very strong in-house effort in algorithm development 
and evaluation which contributed significantly to the cuer 
design. Some of the processing techniques were first 
developed/evaluated at MICOM and then given to the 
contractor for modification and implementation in hardware 
for real-time operation. 


157 





The target cuer was developed using a very limited set 
of recorded video data. In order to fully evaluate the 
potential of the cuer, it was subjected to more realistic 
testing during the Non-Line-of-Sight (NLOS) missile Initial 
Operational Evaluation (lOE) Captive Carry Test (CCT). The 
cuer was taken to WSMR in January-March 1989 and field 
tested as a side experiment during the NLOS CCT. Although 
the cuer performance was considered reasonably good, there 
was considerable room for improvement in the area of false 
alarms. LORAL developed and installed a series of shape 
screening algorithms that were intended to reject false 
targets without adversely impacting the classification of 
actual targets. The modified cuer was reevaluated in the 
laboratory using the same video data base as used before. 

The results of these evaluations were documented in MICOM 
technical reportsL^^J. This paper will generally describe 
the cuer process, hardware implementation, test and 
evaluation techniques, and results collected to date. 

DESCRIPTION OF THE AUTOMATIC TARGET CUER 

The automatic target cuer design and operation has been 
well documented but a brief summary of its operation 
will be given here. The cuer uses known parameters 
(altitude, field of view, and look-down angle) to calculate 
an estimate of range from the sensor to the ground at 
various places in the video image. This, in turn, allows 
using size as a discriminant. Thus, the operation of the 
automatic target cuer requires both the video to be searched 
and dynamic sensor parameters as just described. 

Figure 1 is a block diagram of the improved automatic 
cuer discussed in this paper. Input video (to the cuer) is 
first digitized to six bits with an automatic gain control 
to obtain maximum dynamic range. The object detection 
process uses a modified contrast box with local adaptive 
thresholding. The adaptive thresholding is utilized to help 
overcome problems with low contrast (as caused by objects in 
a shadowed area, for example). Object detection scans the 
entire image and determines the locations of objects of 
about the right size and having a relative contrast 
exceeding a pre-set threshold. The locations and 
approximate sizes of the objects are passed to the object 
segmentation process. This process seeks to find the best 
outline of the objects. Two different segmentation 
processes can be used depending upon the object's size. For 
objects of 12 pixels or less in area, a segmentation process 
based on intensity data is used. Larger targets are 
segmented based upon gradient data. After the best outline 
of an object has been determined, gradient phase data is 
checked to determine if the object is the proper shape. 


158 




SEEKER 

VIDEO 



159 


Figure 1. Improved automatic target cuer funtional block diagram. 


















The object outline is next passed to the feature 
extraction process. This process uses intensity, gradient, 
and contrast box data, along with size data to determine a 
series of features and screeners that provide maximum 
discrimination of targets from non-targets. Following this 
is the optical flow stage which serves as both a smoothing 
filter and a screener. This stage screens non-targets by 
requiring that a valid target be contained in at least 3 of 
5 consecutive video fields and that it have a consistent 
feature set between images. This acts to smooth out 
problems in the object detection and segmentation stages. A 
modified Kalman filter is used to extract the velocity and 
positional information used to predict future locations of 
objects. Those objects passing this stage go to the 
classifier. The classifier examines the same parameters 
measured in the feature extractor (but uses more rigid 
threshold values) to make a final determination of whether 
an object is a target or not. In the total cuer software 
section (segmentation through classification), there are 140 
screeners which typically screen out twenty or more false 
alarms per image. The persistence filter performs temporal 
smoothing to help reduce false alarms while helping 
eliminate occasional target detection dropouts. It does 
this by requiring that an object must have been classified a 
certain number of times in its recent past in order for it 
to be cued/highlighted. Once an object has been detected 
and highlighted, the feedback feature increases its 
constancy of being cued by reducing the severity of its 
screeners. These potential targets are then highlighted on 
the output video in real-time. 

An example of cuer output video is illustrated in 
Figure 2. The cuer correctly cues the 2 helicopter targets 
located at the right and upper middle screen. The lower 
left cued object is a shadow in the terrain which is 
incorrectly cued (i.e., a false alarm). 

In the field evaluation of the cuer, it was found that 
the false alarm rate was excessive. In an attempt to remedy 
this, a series of 8 shape screening algorithms were added to 
the "feature extraction" block of Figure 1. The basic idea 
behind the screeners was to find those shape related 
features that were not expected to be part of an actual 
target and eliminate objects containing them. For example, 
filter 2 (Box Filter) eliminates those rectangular objects 
that have square corners since neither helicopters nor tanks 
have such a characteristic. Although the reasoning behind 
some of the other filters is more obscure, Loral designed 
them to screen out those features which their research 
showed to be characteristic of false targets. 


160 


Figure 2. Example of cuer ou'tt3Ut:» 


NON-LINE-OF-SIGHT CAPTIVE CARRY TEST DESCRIPTION 

The NLOS CCT series was conducted to evaluate the 
ability of military operators to acquire targets under a 
variety of conditions. The test was implemented by carrying 
the NLOS seeker and related processing in a twin engine, 
propeller driven aircraft that could be flown at an airspeed 
approximating the normal velocity of the NLOS missile. A 
radio frequency data link was used to send video information 
to the gunner's station from the aircraft and to send 
control information back to the aircraft/seeker. The design 
of the cuer is such that it is intended to utilize certain 
data from the weapon or fire control system with which it is 
operated. This data (consisting of seeker altitude, down- 
look angle, and field of view (FOV)), was available in the 
gunner's station and therefore accessible to the cuer. 


161 




















The raw seeker video (with encoded parameters contained 
on the audio channels) and the cuer output video (the video 
images with the highlights around potential targets) were 
both recorded during the CCT. The cuer video was used to 
evaluate its performance during these tests. The raw video 
was used to create a video data base which was used to 
evaluate the cuer after the shape screeners were added and 
will also be used for testing future improvements. 

Because of the search technique employed, most test 
runs (or vectors) had a series of disconnected segments of 
video of 3 to 6 seconds duration. Some of the segments 
contain targets and some do not. Therefore, the test data 
was screened to determine which video was appropriate for 
evaluating the cuer. Video segments chosen as good test 
data had to meet the following criteria. It must contain at 
least one target (between 4 and 80 pixels in size) in its 
FOV for at least one second. Also, the cuer must be 
receiving parameters during the evaluation segment (an 
indicator on the video gave this information). If cuer 
parameters were withheld for any reason until after the 
target entered the FOV, the timing started when the 
parameters became available. The video data base thus 
created consisted of.86 selected runs and is documented in a 
MICOM letter report^^J. 

EVALUATION PROCEDURE 

After selecting the test data from all the video 
collected during the NLOS CCT, the cuer's performance was 
evaluated. When considered from a fundamental viewpoint, 
the most significant measures of performance for a target 
cuer are; how many real targets did it cue, how many real 
targets did it fail to cue, and how many false targets did 
it cue? These were the basic questions that the data 
analysis attempted to answer. As the evaluation evolved, 
additional questions were raised and some discussion will be 
given to those. 

The evaluation process was as follows. First, all data 
analysis was performed by an analyst viewing the cuer output 
video on the monitor many times. Some of the test segments 
contained multiple targets so this data was collected for 
all targets in each video segment. For a cued object to be 
considered a false target it had to be cued for at least one 
second. Each false target was only counted once per 
repetition even if the cueing "box" blinked on and off 
several times during the time interval of the repetition. 
Also, it was noticed that some of the helicopters presented 
an extremely low contrast to the eye, so the contrast was 
calculated for several of the images by measuring the pixel 
gray levels at the target and background. The contrast was 
then calculated as: 

Ct =« 1 - Pt/Pb Where Pt * target pixel value 

Pb » background value 

The above information was measured for each run and 
documented in raw data tables. 


162 








After the addition of the shape screener algorithms, the 
cuer was reevaluated in the laboratory using the previously 
described video data base and evaluation techniques. 

EVALUATION RESULTS 

The information from the raw data tables of the first 
evaluation (without shape screeners) can be summarized as 
follows: 

Correctly Cued Targets = 63.3% 

False Alarms^ = 7.7 per repetition or .66 per second 

While the correctly cued target ratio was less than 
expected (63% instead of the predicted 85%), it was the 
false alarm rate that was of most concern. It was expected 
(from the process simulations with the limited data base) 
that a false alarm rate of one per scene would be 
experienced. Instead, an average of more than 7 false 
alarms per test repetition was measured. Of course, the 
repetitions lasted for a period of 2 to 40 seconds which 
gave a long time for false alarms to be triggered (they only 
had to last approximately one second to be scored a false 
alarm). For this reason the number of false alarms per 
second may be a more descriptive mear're of this parameter. 
At any rate, the results of the firs evaluation led to the 
development and installation of the shape screener 
algorithms in an attempt to improve false target rejection 
without adversely impacting the classification of actual 
targets. 

There are several other points that need to be 
considered before the results of the shape screener 
evaluation are discussed. The first of these is target to 
background contrast. Obviously an object in a video image 
must have some contrast with the background to be detectable 
by any means (human eye or digital processing). There is a 
wide band of contrast that may be rei^ired based on the 
process to be followed. The automatic target cuer has a 
dynamic gain control that attempts to compensate for such 
occurrences as targets located in large shadowed areas. The 
cuer does not have a means of enhancing the contrast where 
the target and background both present the same (or nearly 
the same) gray level in the video signal. A situation like 
this occurred during the CCT when a faded olive drab (OD) 
helicopter (which actually appeared to be a light tan color) 
used for some of the tests was flown over a background of 
predominantly light colored soil. Nine runs were recorded 
with this helicopter and background. Three of these were 
cued although it appears that the shadow rather than the 
helicopter itself was cued on one of these. The contrast 
values for the normal olive drab and the faded or tan 
helicopter from these runs are presented in Table I along 
with whether the targets were cued. 


^The false alarms were counted only during the test time 
when a valid target was in the FOV. 


163 






TABLE I. Contrast For Normal and Faded Helicopters 


RUN 

OD TARGET 

"FADED" TGT 

CUED 

# 

CONTRAST 

CONTRAST 



7 

40% 

12% 

YES/NO 

9 

53% 

-0 - 27% 

YES/NO 

11 

50% 

0 - 24% 

YES/YES 

12 

47% 

43% 

YES/YES 

18 

50% 

7% 

YES/NO 

75 

53% 

18% 

YES/NO 

76 

52% 

5% 

YES/NO 

77 

59% 

7% 

YES/NO 

79 

52% 

10% 

YES/YES 


In run #9, the faded target so closely matched the 
color of the background that no contrast could be measured 
for most of the run; however, the contrast increased 
considerably near the end. The same situation occurred on 
run 11 and is attributed to the fact that the color of the 
helicopter only matched the color of certain portions of the 
background and when it flew over other background areas, the 
contrast increased. In the cases where the contrast was 
reported as approximately 0, the target could be detected 
only because it was moving when viewed in the dynamic video. 
Therefore, the contrast was recorded as approximately 0. In 
the other cases, the contrast was high enough to be measured 
but, as seen above, it was consistently much lower than the 
normal olive drab helicopters (except for run 12 where the 
contrast of both helicopters was nearly the same). Note 
that in runs ll and 12 where the •’faded" helicopter was 
cued, their contrasts were some of the higher values 
measured. In run 11, cueing did not occur until the 
contrast reached the 24% level. In run 75, the olive drab 
helicopter is visible and was correctly cued. The faded 
helicopter, which is extremely difficult to spot, was never 
cued. 


Of the three runs where the "faded" target was cued, 
one appeared to actually be cueing the helicopter's shadow 
(run 79). In addition, there were two other cases (runs 4 
and 5) where the cuer located the normal helicopter's shadow 
but failed to locate the actual target. At first, this was 
considered to be a false target (with the actual target 
missed) and was scored accordingly. However, upon 
reflection it appeared that this was not the proper way to 


164 










handle that occurrence. First, consider what a false target 
is and what its effect on the weapon system operation is. 
Obviously, a false target is an object which is not a target 
but which is marked as if it were. Its effect is to obscure 
the real target or to confuse the operator's search for the 
actual target. However, in the case of the helicopter's 
shadow, the situation does not often fit the false target 
scenario. Usually the shadow will be located close to the 
helicopter, particularly at reasonably long ranges. 
Therefore, if the operator's attention is directed to the 
helicopter's shadow, it is very likely he will also see the 
actual helicopter, particularly if there is any movement. 

As mentioned earlier, this was the only way to locate one of 
the tan helicopters. 

Thus, it does not seem unreasonable to consider a cued 
shadow of a target as a correctly cued target when the two 
are located close together. Since the human operator is the 
final decision maker (real versus false target) it is very 
likely that finding the target's shadow is essentially the 
same as finding the target. Therefore, in some cases, the 
cued shadows of the targets were considered as correctly 
cued targets. If this rationale is unacceptzd>le to some, 
the correctly cued targets on these three runs can be 
deleted which will slightly lower the success ratio of the 
cuer (by about 1%). 

The evaluation of the cuer performance after shape 
screener modification provided the following results: 

Correctly Cued Targets = 53.6% 

False Alarms = 4.5 per repetition or .39 per second 

The target classification performance was degraded some (as 
expected) by achieving better false target rejection. When 
compared with the results of the original evaluation, the 
false alarms were reduced by 41% while the amount of 
correctly cued targets was reduced by 15%. This indicates 
that the process is at least going in the right direction. 
The "cost" of reducing false targets is .37% reduction in 
correctly cued targets for each percent reduction in false 
targets/second. 


165 




CONCLUSION 


This paper has described the automatic target cuer 
developed under a missile technology program. It has 
documented the cuer's performance during two phases of its 
development. The overall performance of the cuer in the 
original field tests was not as good as had previously been 
predicted in simulations during process development. The 
major objection was the relatively high false alarm rate 
although the actual correct target classification was less 
than hoped for. The addition of the shape screeners were 
successful in reducing the false alarms significantly but 
the correct target classification was also reduced (although 
not as much as the false alarms). Unfortunately, it was 
known in advance that the likelihood of achieving 
significant false target reduction without some reduction in 
actual target classification was low. This is because of 
the small size of the targets and the type discriminants 
being used (essentially contrast and size with optical flow 
measurements between fields of video). On the positive 
side, it must be recognized that the addition of the shape 
screeners was a low cost, simple addition to the basic 
process which gives reasonably good results. 

The shape screener addition to the automatic target 
cuer was but a single step to improve the performance based 
on the results of actual field testing in a realistic 
environment. Additional research is already in process. 

Some of the CCT data indicates that the fields of view 
likely to be utilized may allow cueing on larger targets 
than originally expected.. The current cuer was designed to 
operate with targets that are between 4 and 64 pixels in 
size. If the fields of view are such that "typical" targets 
are larger than this, then the additional information 
available for the larger targets can be utilized to provide 
more accurate discrimination. An extensive re-evaluation of 
the screeners (including the shape screeners) has been 
conducted with the result that the weightings (and possibly 
the operation) of these screeners is being optimized. The 
primary research effort at this time is to develop the 
ability to detect motion. The emphasis is to enable the 
cuer to detect an object's motion with respect to its 
background as well as rotor motion from helicopter blades. 

An approach based on optical flow determination techniques 
proposed by Horn and Schunck is showing considerable 
promise in simulation and the design of hardware for real 
time implementation should begin later this year. As 
indicated in the discussion on contrast, it is frequently 
possible to detect motion where there is essentially no 
measurable contrast between the target and background. As 
additional improvements are added to the processing, the 
cuer will be evaluated using the same captive carry video as 
used in the reported experiments. 


166 




REFERENCES 


1. Mclngvale, Kilpatrick, and Cardno, "Field Evaluation of 
the Improved Automatic Target Cuer," TR-RD-GC-89-25, U.S. 
Army Missile Command, November 1989. 

2. Mclngvale and Kilpatrick, "Evaluation of Shape Screening 
Processes for Reducing False Alarm Rate in the Improved 
Automatic Target Cuer," TR-RD-GC-90-2, U.S. Army Missile 
Command, March 1990. 

3. "Improved Automatic Target Cuer Function," ER-177446, 
Loral Defense Systems Division - Akron, August 1988. 

4. Mclngvale, Kilpatrick, and Carper, "A Wide Field-of- 
View, Small Target, TV Video Data Base for the Evaluation of 
Automatic Target Cuer/Recognizer Systems," LR-RD-GC-90-08-C, 
U.S. Army Missile Command, February 1990. 

5. Horn and Schunck, "Determining Optical Flow," Artificial 
Intelligence . Volume 17, 1981, pages 185-203. 


167/(168 Blank) 





LOCK-ON-AFTER LAUNCH (LOAL) TESTBED FACILITY 


By 

Charles L. Lewis and Heinz G. Sage 
Guidance and Control Directorate 
Research, Development, and Engineering Laboratory 
U.S. Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 


ABSTRACT 

This paper describes the Army Missile Command's dual-mode guidance, auton¬ 
omous Lock-On-After-Launch (LOAL) Testbed Facility which resides in the 
Research, Development, and Engineering Laboratory's Guidance and Control 
Directorate. This real-time Hardware-ln-The Loop (HWIL) Facility was developed 
to aid in the test and evaluation of low-cost dual-mode guidance mechanizations 
that are being considered for future weapon systems. The primary quantitative 
output of the LOAL Testbed Facility is probability of successful completion of 
in-flight handover from an inertial midcourse to a terminal seeker. A detailed 
description of the Facility mechanization is presented and results of verifi¬ 
cation tests to date are summarized. 

INTRODUCTION 

The ability to LOAL is vital for modern Army missile systems when vertical 
launch, defilade, excessive target range, remotely tracked targets, and other 
conditions prevent terminal seeker lock-on before launch. Figure 1 shows a 
cartoon depicting one such dual mode application; that of a remotely launched 
air defense missile that employs an inertial midcourse flyout to some 
"acquisition basket" where an autonomous handover to the onboard terminal 
seeker is attempted. Once a successful, timely handover has occurred, some 
form of terminal homing guidance can be applied to achieve the desired final 
miss. The particular inertial flyout mode shown in Figure 1 utilizes an on¬ 
board computer and an inertial package to perform strapdown navigation for 
missile position; thereby removing the requirement for missile track by the 
ground sensor. Target state estimates are maintained in the missile computer 
by a target predictor periodically updated via uplink of the ground sensor 
track data. Onboard knowledge of missile and target states allows midcourse 
guidance to be performed, range to go to be estimated, and, when combined with 
missile angular information from the Inertial components, where to command the 
seeker to point in order to acquire the target. 

Efforts under the Guidance and Control Directorate's 6.2 Technology Line 
Item RG-3 have developed the analysis and evaluation tools required to design 
LOAL guidance concepts such as those shown in Figure 1, quantify hardware 
performance requirements for specific applications. Implement breadboard 
mechanizations, and perform HWIL test and evaluation for simulation validation 
and laboratory demonstration. Although the simulation and design tools are 
applicable to any LOAL requirement, the supporting LOAL Testbed Facility 
presented in this paper is presently constructed to focus HWIL testing on 
low-cost small field-of-view (FOV) non-imaging infrared (IR) terminal seekers 
and medium accuracy strapdown Inertial components. 


169 



FACILITY CONCEPT 


The real-time HWIL evaluation of various missile hardware components such 
as IR seekers, inertial packages, and flight computer mechanizations to deter¬ 
mine their effect on the handover process is the primary application of the 
LOAL Facility. This scheme utilizes the probability of successful handover 
as the evaluation criteria for the candidate hardware components being tested. 
Figure 2 shows the requirements for a successful acquisition to occur. As can 
be seen from the figure, both missile and target uncertainties contribute to 
the seeker look-angle error at handover and these values must be sufficiently 
small so the target is contained within the seeker FOV. 

In order to realistically measure acquisition probability, the LOAL Test¬ 
bed Facility simulates the launch, raidcourse flyout, and handover phases of a 
dual mode guided missile. Successful terminal homing is assumed if the hand¬ 
over is achieved within the time allowed for transition and is, therefore, 
not simulated. An estimate of probability of handover is obtained by running 
a set of simulated flyouts; with noisy, uplinked ground sensor target track 
data being the independent input variable, then dividing the number of success¬ 
ful in-flight handovers by the total number of runs. 

The Facility is also used to perform open loop evaluation of the indivi¬ 
dual hardware components, such as determination of strapdown navigation accur¬ 
acy with various gyros, and test results are used to validate the supporting 
all-digital six degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) Monte-Carlo inertial mid-course LOAL 
trade studies simulation. 

FACILITY DESCRIPTION 


OVERVIEW 


The LOAL testbed facility consists of the major subsystems shown in Figure 
3. The computer systems involved are located in one room, with the Moving 
Taget Simulator (MTS) and Carco flight motion table located in an adjacent 
room. The figure illustrates how these components are functionally configured 
into a flexible, modular HWIL simulation system. The missile dynamics, in¬ 
cluding autopilot and actuator models, are simulated in real-time on a special 
purpose AD-10 high speed digital processor being hosted by a VAX 11/780 digi¬ 
tal computer. True target motion is modeled on the AD-10 to provide the data 
needed for intercept geometry calculations and MTS drive signals, while missile 
angular motions calculated by the AD-10 are used to drive the Carco table 
upon which the IR seeker and inertial measurement unit (IMU) hardware being 
tested are mounted. The ground control station, made up of a PDP 11/73 
digital computer, performs the missile initialization and launch command fire 
control functions, simulates the ground sensor target track and uplink func¬ 
tions, and performs data logging and post processing on all the simulation 
data collected by the other computer. The final computer in the Facility is 
an in-house built flight computer (FC) breadboard constructed of two INTEL 
86/14 processors and associated supporting software development, I/O, and 
power supply equipment. The FC utilizes either simulated or actual 3-axis 
missile angular rate data from the IMU being tested and simulated 3-axis 
missile translational acceleration data from the AD-10 simulation to perform 
strapdown inertial navigation for missile position and angles. This computer 


170 




also performs target estimation between target state uplinks, then utilizes 
this missile and target data to calculate autopilot angular rate feedback 
signals and raidcourse guidance acceleration commands which are sent to the 
AD-10 missile simulation. Finally, the FC determines when to begin the in¬ 
flight handover and generates seeker pointing and scanning precession commands 
which are output to the seeker hardware being tested. 

TARGET GENERATION 


The MTS is resident in the LOAL Fa'.ility to provide the proper dynamic 
missile/target line-of-sight geometric relationships to the seeker hardware 
during the handover phase of testing. The MTS is shown schematically in 
Figure 4. The target source is an IR temperature controlled black body 
coupled with a collimator to permit representation of a target focused at 
infinity. The collimation is accomplished by a ten-inch off-axis parabolic 
mirror and a beam director. The beam director utilizes precision closed loop 
position servos to rotate a flat 14" diameter pointing mirror in azimuth and 
elevation to present a moving point source target to the seeker hardware being 
tested. The beam director mirror gimbal order is illustrated in the figure. 
The mirror is mounted on the elevation servo. The mirror/elevation servo is, 
in turn, mounted on the azimuth servo, all of which is then mounted on the 
transverse linear servo. The AD-10 real-time simulator generates azimuth 
angle, elevation angle, and translation position commands to position the MTS 
optics such that the collimated target beam Intersects the seeker receiving 
optics from the desired angular orientation. The installed MTS is shown 
interfaced with the Carco flight motion table in Figure 5, with specific per¬ 
formance characteristics as given in Table 1. 

FLIGHT MOTION SIMULATOR 


A CARCO Model S-450 3-axis flight simulator is utilized in the LOAL 
Facility to provide simulated missile motion to the IR seeker and IMU hard¬ 
ware being evaluated. Under the present setup, missile roll stabilization 
is assumed and no roll gimbal is used. This electronically controlled, 
hydraulically driven fixture is shown in Figure 6 with representative seeker 
and IMU hardware mounted. Specific performance characteristics for the Carco 
simulator are given in Table 2. 

FACILITY INTERFACE STRUCTURE 


The functional operation of the Facility is shown in Figure 7. Inertial 
data from either the multisensor IMU (MIMU) or the AD-10 is transmitted to the 
FC at 100 Hz. Using this data, the FC calculates missile attitudes at 100 Hz 
and missile position and velocity at 20 Hz. The FC receives target state 
updates from the ground control station every 1.33 seconds which it uses to 
update its 10 Hz target predictor. The raissiel to target position and velo¬ 
city vectors are then calculated at 20 Hz with the latest missile and target 
position information. These vectors are then used by the FC together with the 
proper missile attitudes to compute the missile guidance commands at 20 Hz. 
They are then sent to the AD-10. The FC also computes seeker precession com¬ 
mands at 50 Hz using seeker feedback angles in conjunction with the missile 
and target data. 


171 






Using the guidance commands from the FC, the AD-10 simulates the missile 
dynamics and stabilization with a 2.5 ms integration step size and a 2d order 
Adams-Bashforth integration scheme. Actual missile attitudes are generated 
at 400 Hz. Also, at 400 Hz, appropriate commands for the Carco table are 
calculated and output that will allow the Carco table to subject the seeker 
and MIMU to the actual missile attitudes. The Ad-10 also calculates commands 
necessary to properly position and orient the MTS every 2.5 ms so that an 
accurate presentation of the simulated target is produced. 

FACILITY ALIGNMENT 


The Carco flight table, MTS (including each of the individual mirrors 
within the MTS), and the seeker hardware being tested needs to be aligned 
to the same boresight. A procedure has been developed that performs this 
alignment to within .05 degrees. 

LOAL FACILITY VERIFICATION 

Proper operation of the LOAL Facility was verified by comparisons with an 
existing, well checked-out, 6-DOF simulation program. There were definite 
differences between the HWIL simulation and the 6-DOF and as many of these as 
possible were incorporated into a special version of the 6-DOF for comparison/ 
verification purposes. Some differences could not be accounted for, however, 
such as the AD-lO's 16-bit resolution limitation. The verification of the 
HWIL simulation was done in sections so that any differences found could be 
attributed to particular causes. 

NAVIGATION SOFTWARE VERIFICATION 


The navigation portion of the HWIL FC code was verified by running the 
6-DOF reference simulation to obtain true inertial information which was then 
stored in a table for use as input to the HWIL FC. Navigated positions calcu¬ 
lated at 47 seconds into the flight were then compared between the HWIL FC 
and 6-OOF as shown in Section A of Table 3. The interface between the AD-10 
and the FC was then verified by using the same inertial data previously used, 
but instead of the FC reading the data from a table in memory, it read the 
data from the AD-10. Navigated position results were again compared (see 
Section B of Table 3). Latency in the prototype FC was reduced by utilizing 
trigometric look-up tables and reducing the guidance update rate from 20 Hz 
to 16.67 Hz. Comparison of the FC navigation results with the trig look-ups 
and quidance update reduction were made with the 6-DOF and results were docu¬ 
mented in Sections C and D respectively of Table 3. Finally, Section E of 
Table 3 lists the 6-DOF versus HWIL simulation comparisons with all the FC 
errors included. 

AD-10 SOFTWARE VERIFICATION 


The missile positions calculated by the AD-10 were verified by storing the 
guidance acceleration commands generated by the 6-DOF into a file and feeding 
them to the AD-10 in place of the ones generated by the FC. The actual missile 
positions calculated by the AD-10 were then compared to those calculated by 
the 6-DOF as presented in Table 4. The reasons these values do not match 
exactly were attributed to the 16-bit resolution limitation of the AD-10 and 


172 




to the fact the AD-10 did not generate the inertial information the same as 
the 6-DOF (they were not generated the same because of the 16-bit resolution 
limitation) and therefore, would not produce Identical guidance acceleration 
commands. The results were considered to be as close to the 6-r>F as was 
posible with the AD-10. 

GUIDANCE SOFTWARE VERIFICATION 


The next step in the validation process was to integrate the FC and AD-10 
to perform closed loop guidance and compare actual navigation error with the 
6-DOF. This was done and the results given in Table 5. Section A of Table 5 
shows the results running in nonreal-time with no FC latency optimizations 
included. Section B is with the FC latency optimizations included and Section 
C is with the FC latency optimizations and the simulation run in real-time. 

The navigation error shown in Section C equates to about a 0.6 degree pointing 
error at 3 k.m. 

SEEKER SEARCH AND ACQUISITION SOFTWARE VERIFICATION 

The seeker software verification was a two part effort. The FC code that 
generates the seeker scan and is responsible for converting the seeker pointing 
and scan requirements into precession commands was checked out first using a 
seeker emulator. The emulator's outputs were compared to seeker feedbacks 
output by the 6-DOF. Once these matched, then the emulator was replaced by 
Che actual seeker and its outputs compared to the 6-DOF. Figure 8 displays 
seeker scan patterns from the 6-DOF and the HWIL for a typical seeker scan 
about missile boresight with no pointing required. 

TEST RESULTS 

DEMONSTRATION HARDWARE DESCRIPTION 


The dual-mode guidance LOAL Testbed Facility is designed to allow closed 
loop, real-time HWIL evaluation of various IR seeker, Inertial angular measure¬ 
ment device, and flight computer hardware that has been configured to provide 
inflight handover from inertial midcourse to IR seeker terminal homing. A set 
of laboratory demonstration hardware has been configured that allows checkout 
of the LOAL Testbed. The demo hardware set is composed of the following 
Individual stand-alone components: 

Seeker - The seeker used for the LOAL Testbed demonstration is a CHAPARRAL 
ANDAW-IB IR seeker that has been extensively modified to have a pointing and 
scanning capability under computer control. Figure 9 shows this seeker mounted 
on the Carco flight Cable. The seeker's scan capability effectively increases 
its FOV from approximately 1.3 degrees radius to 4.8 degrees radius. During a 
LOAL Testbed HWIL run, the seeker is mounted on the Carco flight table and 
will be exposed Co simulated missile angular motions. It will remain in a 
non-scanning, but pointed mode until it reaches the allowable acquisition 
range of the particular scenario being run. Then it will begin scanning and 
pointing, using commands sent from the FC at a 50 Hz rate. The seeker sends 
an acqulsition/nonacquisition signal back to the FC, also at 50 Hz. Table 6 
provides the seeker's performance characteristics. 


173 





Inertial Device - A Singer-Kearfott MIMU has been made available to the 
LCAL Testbed Facility for demonstration and evaluation. This solid state, 
strapdown inertial package is representative of the low cost, medium accuracy 
performance required in a short-to-medium range dual-mode air defense applica¬ 
tion. The MIMU is installed onto the Carco flight motion simulator table as 
shown in Figure 9. It will sense pitch and yaw angular rates during HWIL 
operation and send them to the FC at 100 Hz. It also supplies the master 
clock sync to the AD-10. 

Flight Computer - As described earlier, the LOAL Testbed Facility demo 
FC hardware is an in-house built breadboard constructed of two INTEL P6/14 
processors and associated supporting software development, I/O, and power 
supply equipment (see Figure 10). Major tasks performed are inertial naviga¬ 
tion, target estimation, guidance, and seeker pointing. 

DEMONSTRATION TEST SETUP 


The LOAL Testbed Facility's closed loop, real-time HWIL performance was 
evaluated by exercising the demonstration seeker and flight computer hardware 
through three simulation flight sets, with each set consisting of 25 individual 
simulation runs. Each successive flight set was designed to expose the hard¬ 
ware being tested to increasingly difficult scenarios. This was accomplished 
by first reducing the allowable misslle-to-target acquisition range from 4 km 
to 3 km, then increasing the radar noise in the target state updates for the 
3 km case. These parameters were first modified in the 6-DOF simulation 
program and reference simulation runs were then generated. The target update 
files which were generated by the 6-DOF during these runs were saved to be 
used in the HWIL simulation. The radar noise was increased in the third run 
set by decreasing the radar power paramenter in the 6-DOF. Table 7 details 
the parameter values used to run each of the 3 flight sets. All other para¬ 
meters remained the same for the three flight sets. Selected key parameters 
are listed in Table 8. 

TEST RESULTS 


The test results for the demo HWIL flight sets were recorded as acquis- 
tions or nonacquisitions and were compared to identically computed outputs of 
the 6-DOF. The performance of the simulation was related to its ability to 
match the 6-DOF results. The summary results of the three flight tests are 
given in Table 9. An example of the individual run comparisons for Flight 
Run Set #2 is given in Table 10. Look angle error values are given for each 
flight at 42.2 seconds and can be used as a measure of how well the HWIL 
simulation is correlating with the 6-DOF. Detailed plots in both pitch and 
yaw for total look angle error and also of target position, predicted target 
position, navigation error, and seeker feedback for runs /^1 and #6 of Flight 
Run Set #2 are presented in Figures 11 and 12 respectively. 


174 






TEST CONCLUSIONS 


Based on the percentages of acqulsitlons/nonacquisitIons that the HWIL 
facility matched the 6-DOF, and the corresponding general agreement of look 
angle error values, it was concluded that the HWIL facility is sufficiently 
robust to effectively evaluate candidate seeker hardware using simulated 
inertial data. 

Aging and outdated hardware are major contributors to the errors encoun¬ 
tered by the LOAL facility. The modified CHAPARRAL seeker has been undergoing 
severe HWIL testing for several years and its performance reliability is 
marginal at best. Seekers that would be brought in for evaluation would hope¬ 
fully be less utilized. 

The LOAL Testbed Facility itself is comprised of hardware components that 
are aging and have reached or surpassed their useful limit. New equipment has 
already been ordered and is in some cases being incorporated into the facility. 

The AD-IO computer is the main component that is currently being phased 
out of the facility. Although a powerful machine, the AD-10 poses restric¬ 
tions such as 16-bit resolution that impede the simulation's accuracy and 
performance. A modern microprocessor-based real-time controller driven by a 
50 MHz Clipper chip is in the process of replacing the AD-10 computer. Better 
data resolution and easier programming of simulation modifications or new 
airframe models are examples of why the new real-time controller will be an 
excellent improvement to the facility. 

An effort is also being made to replace the current FC with a new 386 
based Intel 520 multi-bus II system. The additional speed of the Intel 520 
will eliminate any latency that is present in the current flight computer and 
will simplify the two processor configuration currently required to perform 
1/0 and calculations simultaneously. 

An automated matrix I/O and operations control system is also being 
installed into the LOAL Testbed Facility. This will enable potential users 
to bring in their own test equipment and diagnostic tools and easily interface 
them to existing equipment. 


175 








LAUhKHEn 


UPLINK ANTtNNA 


Ainsn 

RADAR 


Figure 1. Dual Mode Guidance Scheme. 


ESTIMATED 



ESTIMATED 

missile 

POSITION 


Figure 2. Acquisition at Handover 
Scenario. 


176 



































Flight motion simulator table. 












Figure 7. LOAL Facility Functional Flow Chart. 


180 











































SC*> C>Q CMOStPL*! 10(0 ea-J<a-Ot ll *1 H 



too 



a. 6-OOr 'ler.cratci! scar. 

b. HUIL generated scan position before feedback 

c. Scan feedbacks from seeker emulator box 

d. Scan feedbacks from actual seeker 








Figure 8. Seeker Scan Patterns About Boresight. 


181 









Figure 9. LOAL prototype hardware being tested. 



































TABLE 1. Moving Target Simulator (MTS) Performance Data 


TARGET PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS: 

• SOURCE wavelength - IR BLACK BODY RADIATION 

• TEKPERATURE RANGE - O TO 950 DECREES CELSIUS 

. IKAGE - POINT SOURCE FOCUSED AT INFINITY 


I.TNE OF SIGirr ILOS) NOTION CAPABILITIES: 

• TARGET LOS ANCLES SUPPORTED 

• STATIC POSITION ACCURACY 

• DYNAMIC POSITION ACCURACY 


* ANGULAR RATE CAPABILITIES 

• ANGULAR ACCELERATION 
CAPABILITIES 


AZIMUTH 

(♦/-) 26.5 DEC. 

(+/-) 0,01 DEC. 

< 0.1 DEC. 
lUmCOFF AT 20 
DEG./SEC. LOS 
RATE 

120 DEG./SEC. 
1200 DEG./SEC.^ 


ELEVATION 

(+/-) 9*5 DEC. 

(+/-) 0-01 DEG. 

< 0.1 DEG. 

RANCOFF AT 20 
DEC./SEC. LOS 
RATE 

90. DEG./SEC. 

900 DEC./SEC.^ 


TABLE 2. 


Flight Motion Simulator Performance Data 
With 5.0 Ib-in-sec.^ Load 


MAXIMUM ACCELERATION 
MAXIMUM VELOCITY 
DISPLACEMENT 

FREQUENCY RESPONSE, 90 DEG- 

REPEATABILITY 

POSITION ACCURACY 

maximum DRIFT (ONE HOUR) 

LOAD INERTIA 

POSITION SCALE FACTOR 


YAW AXIS 

25,000 DEG./SEC.^ 
250 DEG./SEC. 

(+/—) 45 DEG, 

2 3 HZ 

(+/-) 0.005 DEG. 
(+/-) 0.053 DEG. 

(+/-) 0.01 DEG. 

5 in-lb-sec.^ 

1.0 DEG./VOLT 


PTTCH AXIS 
12,000 DEG./SEC. 
200 DEG./SEC- 
(+/-) 120 DEG. 
12.8 HZ 

(+/-) 0.005 DEG, 
(+/-} 0.053 DEG. 
(■^/-) 0.01 DEG. 

5 in-lb-sec.^ 

1.0 DEG. /VOLT 


186 



TABLE 3. Navigation Position Comparisons 


h• OOF(f I > 


FC(f t) DIFFERENCE(ft) 


A 


KC 

X 

y 


LoC'kup 

-7800^ . A 
. A'.'J) 
-3620.U1 


CoAt^>.irAtiun 

-78002 .A 
- 32.4242 
>3620.81 


0.0 

O.OOII 

0.0 


h 


AL' - I u 
X 

y 

2 


I- C i n L o r t a • 
7MOU3 . -1 
-.' 7.4231 
-jb20.8 I 


c 1 nun 

-78002 
-32-42S 
- 3620.8 


0 

0.002 

0.0 


yc Ti I 
K 
Y 


I.(»< ik - «t| * t' • >Ai| I' I :»• >r\ 

-78002 4 
;i2 4 23 1 
U. y •> >u 


-78002 
- 39 .S 69 
-3621 .S 


0 

7.146 

0.7 



11 \ ( t ■ > 11( • ( ' ' •fttltt.« !■• 1 


J 2 . 4 2 1' 1 

.• 6 2 0 . H I 


P c (*mp^ r 1 3 on 
-/7986 
- 30 . 90 « 

- 3622.3 


-16 

- 1.515 
1.5 



I l NLi' NAV 1 '.,A’l I UN 

• 7 800.: 4 

• 1 

• .-t.i u . H i 


lo-ITION EkkOR 
- 7 V 9 9 S 
38.O >u 
-3o23.1 


-15 
5.526 
2.3 


TABLE 4. Actual Missile Position Comparisons 


AXl;. .. A0-.0<rt» DIFFEREHCEtft) 


AO 10 Oukd.tiCv Coaa.ild 
X -76060.4 

V -38.3923 

Z -3663.16 


Lookup T«s^ Coap.rl.on 
-77976 
-58.594 
-3593.4 


-82 

20.202 

- 59.8 


TABLE 5. Navigation Error Comparison 


HwlUfc) DIF FERENCE(lt) 


No1 cjo ; ] on trier r i son 

X - o 0 

V • '.'*♦»**/ 


with No FC Errors 

'38 

1>1 339 

-7.1 


-18 

-57.308 
-25.3 


>■ 

Y 

2 


V 1»; j j »111 


'>0 , 

5.9692 
-32.35 


1 uor* 


with ^ 6 LI r o r Ji 
54 

57.167 

-5-1 


-2 

-63.136 

- 27.3 


C . 


Navigation 

X 

Y 

2 


Error Comparison 
-56.0 
-5.9692 
-32.35 


with FC Errors and 
-80 

50.417 
51 .7 


Latency 

24 

-64.386 

- 84.1 


187 




TABLE 6. IR Scanning Seeker Performance Data 


INSTANTANEOOS FIELO-OF-VIEW (POV) 

STATIC POSITIOHING ACOIRACY 
tanUN 10 DEC. RADIUS EHVEliOPE 

SCANNIHC MODES 

MAXIMUM SLEW RATE (VECTOR SOM) 
MAXIMUM EFFECTIVE SCAM FOV 
SCAN TIKE (SPIRAL 18 DEC./SEC.) 
MAXIMOM FOINTINC ANCLE 


1.3 DEC. RADIUS 

(+/-) O-iO DEC* 

COMICAL,SPIRAL 
IS DEC./SBC. 

4.8 DEC. RADIOS 
2.88 SEC. 

30 DEC. 


TABLE 7. Simulation Run Set Parameters 


RUN SET NO. ACQUISITION RANGE RADAR POWER 


1 4000RI 192dB 

2 3000ni 192dB 

3 3000b ISOdB 


TABLE 8. Selected Key Simulation Parameters 


T«rq«c Ranq* 2S >c» 

T«r9«t AltlCud* 1 Nb 

Targ«t Vaiocicy Stationary 

MTS source tenporature 77* C 

Seeker coeeand gain 43 

Seeker coeeand acale factor .019S3 

Guidance loop frequency 16.67 Hz 

Seeker ginbal liaita z25* 

Flight table liaita - pitch :30* 

Flight table liaita - yau *25* 

FC delta 6 acale factor .045 

FC delta V acale factor (X) 10 

FC delta V acale factor (X,Z> 4.5 


TABLE 9. LOAL Testbed Facility Preliminary Results 

Run Set • * Acquialtiona HVIL/6-DOF 



6-OOF 

HWtL 

Correlation (X) 

4 

88 

88 

92 

2 

72 

84 

76 

3 

48 

18 

68 


188 


TABLE 10. Run Set #2 Test Results 



XAESEE 

ACOoismpN 

LOOK ANGLE 

(LA> 

DELTA lA 


ACQOIRED 

TIKE 

(sec,) 

ERROR 842.28ec.fdeq.( 

ERROR fdea.( 

BOHJ 

6-DQF 

HWIL 

»-pp.r 

HWIL 

6-DOP 

HWIL 


1 

YES 

YES 

43.835 

43.093 

2.661 

2.911 

0.250 

2 

YES 

YES 

43.885 

43 953 

0.398 

0.572 

0.174 

3 

YES 

YES 

44.035 

44.304 

1.660 

1.409 

0.251 

4 

NO 

NO 

— 

— 

2.980 

2.639 

0 341 

5 

YES 

YES 

45.310 

44.884 

2.637 

3.117 

0.480 

6 

NO 

NO 

— 

— 

1.069 

1.035 

0.034 

7 

YES 

YES 

43.885 

43.944 

0.037 

0.122 

0.085 

8 

YES 

YES 

44.245 

45.033 

0.886 

1.035 

0.149 

9 

YES 

NO 

43.885 

— 

3.771 

4.006 

0.235 

10 

YES 

YES 

43.885 

44.003 

1.302 

1.298 

0.004 

11 

YES 

NO 

45.125 

— 

2.297 

2.242 

0.055 

12 

YES 

NO 

44.455 

— 



— 

13 

YES 

NO 

45.275 

— 

3.756 

3.647 

0.109 

14 

NO 

NO 

— 

— 

1.163 

1.215 

0.052 

15 

YES 

YES 

45.030 

44.463 

1.943 

1.884 

0.059 

16 

NO 

NO 

— 

. — 

— 

_ 


17 

YES 

YES 

43.985 

44.113 

2.313 

2.012 

0.301 

18 

YES 

YES 

43.795 

44.014 

1.966 

1.773 

0-193 

19 

YES 

YES 

44.665 

44.733 

2.261 

2.009 

0.252 

20 

NO 

NO 

— 

— 

2.627 

2.311 

0.316 

21 

YES 

NO 

45.120 

— 

4.528 

4.155 

0.373 

22 

YES 

NO 

45.360 

— 

0.056 

0.275 

0.219 

23 

NO 

NO 

— 

— 

0.527 

0.603 

0.076 

24 

YES 

NO 

45.040 

— 

0.048 

0.306 

0.258 

25 

NO 

NO 

— 

— 

2.691 

2.788 

0.097 


189/(190 Blank) 



WINDING AND ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

OF 

POLARIZATION-MAINTAINING FIBERS 


Paul B. Ruffin 

US Army Missile Command, RD&E Center 
ATTN; AMSMI-RD-GC-L 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 35898-5254 


ABSTRACT 


Winding and environmental effects on the state of 
polarization in optical fibers designed for Fiber Optic 
Gyroscopes (FOG) are addressed in this paper. An 
experimental setup for the measurement of the degradation of 
the state of polarization in polarization-maintaining (PM) 
fibers under external stresses (caused by small bends, 
lateral pressures and temperature changes) is discussed. An 
analytical fiber paclc stress model, developed under the Fiber 
Optic Guided Missile (FOG-M) Inertial Operational Evaluation 
(lOE) program, is utilized in the development of novel 
winding techniques required to reduce the environmental 
effects caused by winding tensions, temperature and 
vibration. An arc fusion splice model, developed for high 
strength splicing under the FOG-M program, is also utilized 
in the development of techniques for coupling the fiber optic 
sensor coil to the fiber pigtail of the integrated optic 
chip. Some preliminary results from laboratory experiments 
conducted to evaluate the performance of commercially 
available PM fibers under realistic environmental conditions, 
in particular the wound coil configuration, are presented. 


191 





1. INTRODUCTION 


The Fiber Optic Gyroscope (FOG) is emerging as a rugged, 
solid state device. Recent progress in the development of 
integrated optic components for the device suggests that the 
FOG is most likely to achieve a clear cost advantage and a 
significant weight, power, and size advantage over the 
corresponding conventional gyroscopes [1]. Present efforts 
in the development of integrated optic components for 
increased performance at reduced dimensions include the 
development efforts, to fully integrate the optics (phase/ 
frequency shifters, polarizers, beam splitters/directional 
couplers, modulators, single mode fiber optic guides/pigtails 
laser sources and detectors) onto a single chip to achieve a 
reliable low drift FOG of reduced dimensions [1,2,3]. 

It has been reported that the birefringence state of the 
fiber and integrated optic components for FOG can be altered 
in adverse environments, thus causing polarization state 
instabilities and optical losses [4]. The birefringence 
changes due to increased radial pressures and small radius 
bending can be significant [5,6]. Little has been reported 
on the problems associated with the winding of rate sensor 
coils that possess reduced environmental sensitivities and 
the demonstration of stable, low-loss fiber-to-fiber 
connections between the fiber pigtails and the fiber sensor 
coils. 


The stresses that contribute to birefringence changes in 
polarization-maintaining (PM) fibers, that are wound under 
tension for FOG sensor coils, are investigated in this paper. 
The mechanisms that cause drift, noise and scale factor 
changes that limit the sensitivity and accuracy of the FOG 
are given prime consideration. The unique problems 
associated with the winding of PM fibers for FOG applications 
are discussed in the next section. The fiber optics and 
integrated optics measurement and test laboratory is 
discussed in the next section. A set of experiments for 
investigating the performance of PM fibers, fiber optic 
coils, and integrated-optic components under realistic 
environments is presented. A summary is given in the last 
section. 


192 





2. FIBER OPTIC COIL WINDING 


The Guidance and Control Directorate brings a unique 
capability uo the development of fiber and integrated optic 
components for the FOG. The Inertial Systems Development 
Group has gained more than seven (7) years experience in 
winding very small optical filaments/waveguides for the Fiber 
Optic Guided Missile (FOG-M) program. A picture of the fiber 
winding system is shown in Figure ]. 

We have done extensive studies [7,8] on the subject of 
winding multiple layers of optical fibers, with crossover 
sites throughout the pack, for fiber optic payout systems. 
Lessons learned on winding of very small fibers on the Fiber 
Optic Guided Missile (FOG-M) program are applied to the FOG 
application. The bending (with tension) of the fiber, which 
cannot be avoided in the small fiber-optic coil, fiber 
crossovers in the presence of lateral pressures due to 
multiple layer winding, and temperature changes can 
introduce microbends and stresses in wound optical fiber and 
cause mode coupling. Coupling of the HE-vertical mode to the 
HE-horizontal mode, or vice versa, can cause fading of the 
detected signal and ultimately noise and drift in the FOG. 
Therefore, special winding techniques are required for the 
production of fiber optic rotation rate sensor coils for 
reduced sensitivity to environments. 

Efforts are presently underway to modify the existing 
fiber winding system, which uses precision sensors and drives 
under computer control, to provide for more accurate tension 
control. A subsystem, unique to FOG coils, is presently 
being designed that will reduce the fiber optic coil’s 
sensitivity to temperature and thermal gradients. An 
analytical fiber pack mechanics model, developed under the 
FOG-M program, is being utilized to optimize the winding 
parameters for the fiber optic coil. 






3. ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING AND INTEGRATED OPTICS TECHNOLOGY 


The G. & C. Directorate has been designing, developing 
and testing inertial systems and components for many years. 
The available equipment instrumentation include: Contraves 
Rate Table (0-1000 Deg/s), Thermotron Environmental Chamber 
(125 to 375 F), Contraves Indexing Table, MB vibration Table 
(Random vibration. Sinusoidal vibration and Shock [up to 
log's, frequency range 5-3000 Hz]), etc. The tremendous 
progress in integrated optic components for the FOG has 
created a new thrust in the Inertial Systems Development 
Group. 

A fiber/integrated optic component measurement and test 
laboratory is presently being developed to evaluate and test 
integrated optic components for the FOG. Several 
commercially available polarization-maintaining (PM) fibers 
are presently being evaluated. Schematics of the state-of- 
the-art PM fibers are shown in Figure 2. Geometry-induced 
and stress-induced birefringent fibers are prime candidates 
for optical fiber gyroscopes. 

A set of experiments has been devised to ascertain some 
quantitative data on the effect of external stresses on the 
birefringence and state of polarization stability in PM 
fibers. A schematic of an experimental apparatus for the 
measurement of state of polarization, extinction ratio, and 
polarization-holding parameter is shown in Figure 3. Optical 
radiation from the source is linearly polarized and focused 
onto the end of the test via a microscope objective. The 
fiber output is collimated before encountering a polarized 
beam splitter cube that splits the single beam into two 
orthogonal polarized beams that are detected along two 
directions. The first and second half-wave plates are 
adjusted until the detected signal is at a minimum in one 
direction. Known stresses are applied to the PM fibers in 
various orientations to determine the environmental effects. 
Schematic representation of the approaches for applying 
periodic and random bends, uniform transverse pressure (with 
and without twist), randomtransverse pressure, and small 
radius bends (with and without tension) are illustrated in 
Figure 4. 


194 





Finally, an Arc Fusion Splicing Model, developed under 
the FOG-M program is presently being modified to evaluate the 
mode propagation characteristics of the PM fibers. A 
Fujikura Arc Fusion Splicer is also being utilized to 
investigate low loss coupling in the fiber-to-fiber pigtail 
fusion splice and the effects of azimuthal misalignment on 
fiber coupling losses. 


4. SUMMARY 

A brief overview has been given of the Fiber Optic 
Gyroscope (FOG) activities that are presently being conducted 
at MICOM. A set of experiments has been designed to evaluate 
the performance of PM fibers, fiber optic sensor coils, and 
integrated optic components for FOG. Some preliminary 
results from these experiments have verified that pure 
tension and bending ( > l inch-radii) does not have a 
significant effect on polarization degradation. However, 
temperature changes have a notable affect on the polarization 
state. The results from an extended matrix of experiments 
will be presented at a later date. The results of these 
efforts provide useful information required for designing PM 
fibers and integrated optic components for the FOG. 


5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The author wishes to acknowledge the technical 
assistance and helpful consultation received from 
Dr. C. C. Sung. The author would like to thank 
Mr. Mark Smith for technical support in setting up the 
experimental apparatus. The assistance provided by 
Ms. Monica Jefferson in performing the extinction ratio 
measurements is greatly appreciated. Fiber samples for 
testing were provided by Corning Glass Works, AT&T, York 
Technologies, Andrew Corporation, and 3-M. 


195 






6. References 


1. G. Pavlath, R. Carroll, G. Adams, J. L. Page, R. Swarts 
and D. Courtney, Fiber Optic Gyro Development, Paper 
presented at the DoD Fiber Optic Conference, McLean, VA, 
20-23 March 1990. 

2. V. Ramaswamy, R. H. Stolen, M. D. Divino and W. Pliebel, 

Applied Optics, 18, 4080, (1979). 

3. A. Ourmazd, M. P, varnham, R. D. Birch and D. N. Payne, 
Optical Waveguide Sciences, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 
Boston, MA, p. 87-90 (1983). 

4. Ezelciel, S. and Arditty, H. J., Fiber-Optic Rotation 
Sensors and Related Technologies, Springer-Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg New York, p. 65-68, (1982). 


5. Ulrich, R., and Rashleigh, S. C., Opt. Lett., 5, 354-356 
( 1980 ) . 

6. Ulrich, R., and Rashleigh, S. C., IEEE J. Quantum 

Electron., QE-18, 2032-2039, (1982). 

7. Ruffin, P. B. and Sung, C. C., SPIE Proceedings, 
vol. 776, Metrology of Optoelectronic Systems (1987). 

8. Ruffin, P. B. and Sung, C. C., SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 842, 
Fiber Optics Reliability: Benign and Adverse Environments 

(1987 ) . 


196 

















LigNSoum 


BuIk-lo-Tibcr 

Coupler 


Pdanzaiion 

Matmaining 

Ftocr 


F2>ef-to-Bulk 1/2 X 
CouF>ler Plato 


Pdartzed 
Beam Splitter 
Cube 


Figure 3. Experimental Apparatus for Measuring Extinction 
Ratio and the State of Polarization 





^ // 7 // 
// / // 

// / // 



// // /y / ; 




Figure 4. Schematic Representation of External Stresses 
Used in the Experiments 








CONTROL SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT 


Mark D. Dixon, Roger P. Berry, and Stephen C. Cayson 
U.S. Army Missile Research, Development, and Engineering Center 

Redstone Arsenal, AL 

ABSTRACT 

The objective of the Control Systems Development program is to explore 
control technologies which support the development of missile actuation sys¬ 
tems to meet the needs of current and future missile weapon systems. Current 
emphasis in missile system development is to increase the missile energy effi¬ 
ciency (ratio of energy delivered on the target to launch weight) in order to 
defeat advanced armor systems. Flexibility in launch and flight modes are 
required to provide the capability to launch these missiles from various plat¬ 
forms including armored vehicles, aircraft, and personnel. These system level 
requirements result in a need for control subsystems which are capable of pro¬ 
viding effective control over a wide range of flight regimes including velo¬ 
city up to Mach 6. Simultaneous to this need for increased performance is the 
conflicting requirement to decrease size, weight, and cost. This paper will 
discuss significant recent accomplishments in the Control Systems Development 
program including development and evaluation of a Dual Rate pneumatic actua¬ 
tor, a low cost, light weight Trolon pneumatic actuator, and the most recent 
work in developing a multi-mode control system for a hypervelocity guided mis¬ 
sile. The discussion of the multi-mode control system development will illus¬ 
trate the trade-offs between control system size, complexity, and performance. 

INTRODUCTION 

The objective of the Control Systems Development program is to explore 
technologies which support the development of missile control actuation sys¬ 
tems (CAS) to meet the needs of current and future missile weapon systems de¬ 
velopment. A high priority need in current missile systems development is to 
increase the missile energy efficiency, that is the ratio of energy delivered 
on the target to launch weight, in order to defeat advanced armor vehicles. 

To address this need a program has begun to develop a guided hypervelocity 
missile utilizing a solid rod penetrator to defeat both armored vehicles and 
aircraft. Also required is flexibility in missile launch and flight modes to 
provide the capability to launch these missiles from various weapons platforms 
including ground vehicles and aircraft and with 360 degree azimuth coverage. 

These system level requirements result in a need for a control subsystem 
which is capable of providing effective control over a wide range of flight 
regimes including velocity up to Mach 6. Simultaneous to this need for in¬ 
creased performance is the conflicting requirement to decrease the CAS size, 
weight, and cost. These are the challenges which the Control Systems Develop¬ 
ment program has undertaken. 

This paper will discuss significant recent accomplishments in the Control 
Systems Development program. These accomplishments Include development and 
evaluation of a Dual Rate pneumatic actuator concept which has the potential 
to significantly reduce gas storage bottle size without degrading CAS small 


199 






signal performance. Also discussed is the development of a polymer (Torlon) 
pneumatic actuator which demonstrated a significant reduction in CAS weight 
and cost and finally, the most recent work in developing a multi-mode control 
system for the Advanced Kinetic Energy Missile (AdKEM) will be discussed. 

DUAL RATE PNEUMATIC ACTUATOR 

The Dual Rate pneumatic actuator concept was conceived to tailor an open 
center valve actuator's pneumatic power consumption to fit system demand. 

This characteristic is particularly valuable to a system such as the Fiber 
Optic Guided Missile (FOG-M), because the fins are active during boost, rela¬ 
tively inactive during fly-out, and again active during terminal. If the ac¬ 
tuator is tailored to this scenario, the required pneumatic power is minimized. 

The Dual Rate pneumatic actuator concept is an open center valve actua¬ 
tor, with the capability to switch from a low vane rate to a high vane rate, 
based on position error. A schematic of the Dual Rate actuator design is 
shown in Fig. 1. This design uses a typical open center valve in series with 
a flow control valve. When the flow control solenoid is unenergized, flow is 
directed through the low flow orifice. The flow area of this orifice is suf¬ 
ficiently smaller than the upstream open center valve, such that, flow rate 
(vane rate) is controlled by the orifice. Since a single orifice sets the 
flow area for the charge and discharge cycles, the charge and discharge vane 
rates will differ in accordance with the regulated and control pressures. 

When the flow control solenoid is energized, the conical poppet valve opens. 

The conical poppet has a flow area which is sufficiently large such that flow 
rate is controlled by the open center valve’s charge and discharge flow areas. 
As shown in Fig. 2, the error signal may be used to switch the actuator from 
the low to high rate mode. 

A prototpye Dual Rate actuator was designed, fabricated, and tested. 
Results from testing the Dual Rate pneumatic actuator in the low and high rate 
modes are summarized in Table 1. Comparing the low and high vane rates, one 
would expect a three fold difference in gas consumption, however it may be 
noted that only a 20% reduction in gas consumption was measured. To determine 
the cause for this unexpected behavior, the gas dynamics of the low rate mode 
was investigated. Analysis, combined with the experimental data shown in Fig. 

3 revealed the cause. 

Consider the fact that stored gas is only consumed during the charge 
cycle. The measured gas consumption is the flow rate during the charge cycle, 
averaged over the period of the pulse width modulation (PWM) frequency. Now, 
the rate of gas consumption during the charge cycle is determined by the pres¬ 
sure difference across the inlet valve and the inlet valve’s flow area. Note 
from Fig. 3 that the pressure difference across the inlet valve is initially 
significant and exponentially approaches a small value as the Intermediate 
volume is charged. Once this pressure difference becomes small, the rate of 
gas consumption will be dictated by the low flow orifice area and the differ¬ 
ence between the Intermediate pressure and control pressure. However, as seen 
in Fij. 3, the time required for the intermediate pressure to reach the supply 
pressure exceeds the charge cycle time. Therefore, the average rate of gas 
consumption in the low rate mode is driven by the inlet valve flow area, 
rather than the low flow orifice area. From this, it is obvious that improve¬ 
ment in gas consumption can be achieved by minimizing the intermediate volume. 


200 






TORLON PNEUMATIC ACTUATOR 


The design objective for the Torlon pneumatic actuator was to provide a 
low-cost, light-weight pneumatic actuator that meets the performance require¬ 
ments for the FOG-M control actuator. To accomplish this objective, Torlon 
4301, a polyamide-imide produced by Amoco Performance Products, Inc., was cho¬ 
sen as the primary component material. Torlon 4301 was chosen because of its 
excellent wear resistance qualities, low coefficient of friction, and high 
compressive strength. All of these characteristics are important in the 
design of actuator components such as pistons, piston chambers, and valve 
seats. The high compressive strength property is especially advantageous in 
the design of valve seats because the seat must be immune to the cyclic pound¬ 
ing administered by the ball. This results in virtually no increase in ball 
travel during operation, thus providing consistent actuator performance as 
operation continues. The room temperature tensile strength of Torlon 4301 is 
28% less than that of annealed 7075 aluminum, but this strength is provided at 
48% less weight. Because of these attributes, a 37% increase in material 
strength-to-weight ratio is realized. 

The Torlon actuator pictured in Fig. 4 is a closed-center valve pneumatic 
actuator that meets the control actuator requirements for FOG-M. All compo¬ 
nents of the actuator, excluding the outi-ut shaft, were manufactured using 
Torlon 4301. However, during actuator testing the Torlon crank failed as a 
result of decreased strength caused by incorrect machining techniques. The 
faulty machining caused the crank to overheat and become brittle upon cooling. 
Consequently, a new crank fabricated from aluminum was used to replace the 
Torlon crank. 

The Torlon actuator, weighing 205 grams (0.45 lb), compares to a weight 
of 391 grams (0.86 lb) for the original FOG-M pneumatic actuator made from 
aluminum and steel. The Torlon actuator offers this substantial weight reduc¬ 
tion and also meets the performance requirements for FOG-M. It provides equal 
hinge moment capability and approximately the same bandwidth as the current 
FOG-M pneumatic actuator. A comparison of the closed-loop frequency responses 
is shown in Fig. 5. 

A cost study was performed to determine the savings realized from fabri¬ 
cating an actuator with Torlon. This study showed that a Torlon actuator 
could be manufactured for 75% less than an actuator using conventional mate¬ 
rials. This analysis was based on a production quantity of 200,000 actuators 
and assumed that most of the Torlon pieces could be injection molded to toler¬ 
ance, eliminating the need for costly detailed machining work. 

HYPERVELOCITY MISSILE CONTROL ACTUATION SYSTEM 

The development of a CAS for a hypervelocity missile, such as the AdKem, 
illustrates the conflicting requirements for improved CAS performance with 
reduced size and weight. The AdKEM is a command to line-of-sight guided, 
hypervelocity missile carrying a solid rod penetrator to defeat heavy armor 
and airborne threats. The AdKEM, as shown in Fig. 6, is comprised of a 5 cm 
(2 in) diameter airframe or centerbody and four discardable solid propellant 
boosters. The AdKEM concept is to launch the missile vertically from a ground 


201 





vehicle, orient the missile to a horizontal position, boost to Mach 6, and 
then coast to the target using beamrider guidance. With this concept the CAS 
must provide control during three distinct flight modes: vertical launch, 
boost, and coast. 

As shown in Fig. 7, the AdKEM centerbody CAS includes three pneumatic ac¬ 
tuators operating four control vanes for pitch, yaw, and roll missile control. 
During the boost phase these vanes act as jet tabs in the booster plumes and 
during coast (after booster separation) the same vanes act as aerodynamic 
control surfaces. Control during vertical launch is provided by a discardable 
orientation package which uses jet reaction thrusters and is attached to the 
rear of the missile. The orientation package thruster valves are also actu¬ 
ated by the centerbody CAS actuators. The AuKEM CAS is truly a multi-mode 
control system. 

The AdKem CAS mechanical design is strongly driven by the need to mini¬ 
mize centerbody cross sectional area and weight and by the requirement to 
operate under the high acceleration and large forces of boost and control at 
Mach 6. The CAS dynamic performance is driven by the extremely fast missile 
response and resulting high autopilot bandwidth. The CAS performance require¬ 
ments are given in Table II. 

The AdKEM actuators must provide large hinge moment and lift force capa¬ 
bilities in a small package size. In order to meet the load requirements and 
stay within the designated package, it was necessary to overload the output 
shaft bearings. A prototype actuator was tested to determine the effect 
bearing overload has on actuator performance. The output shaft bearings were 
overloaded by 80% of their maximum static load rating and a frequency response 
curve was generated. A comparison of the actuator performance before and 
after the overloaded condition is shown in Fig. 8. As seen in Fig. 8, the 
reduction in actuator performance is not significant. Visual inspection after 
the series of tests showed no appreciable damage to the output shaft bearings. 

Another result of the large hinge moment requirement and small package 
size was the necessity to utilize a high supply pressure in order for the 
actuators to develop the required output torque. Two cold gases, nitrogen 
and helium, were considered for the CAS power supply. Each actuator uses a 
solenoid driven ball poppet valve to control the gas flow through the actuator 
and the resulting motion of the vane. Each valve contains two orifices to 
limit gas flow into and out of the actuator control chamber. The flow control 
orifices each consist of a fixed-area orifice and a variable-area orifice 
arranged in series. The area of the variable-area orifice is a function of 
the ball travel and seat diameter. Typically, the use of nitrogen is advan¬ 
tageous because of its lower cost and lower leakage rates. The advantage of 
helium is that a smaller flow area can be used to achieve an equivalent volume 
flow rate (vane slew rate). Equating sonic velocity equations shows that 65% 
less area is required for a helium valve compared to a nitrogen valve with the 
same volume flow rate. This leads to a decrease in solenoid spring force 
requirements, resulting in a smaller solenoid package. Because of these 
qualities, the use of helium was found to be advantageous over nitrogen for 
the AdKEM actuators. 


202 



The thrust required to accelerate the AdKEM and the required maximum 
velocity results in the actuators being subjected to axial acceleration loads 
approaching 1400 g's and lateral and vertical accelerations or 50 g*s. These 
acceleration loads cause the solenoid plunger inertia forces to be a signifi¬ 
cant part of the solenoid force requirements. If the solenoid is oriented so 
that its centerline is parallel to the missile centerline, a spring force of 
70.7 Newtons (15.9 Ibf) is required to push the ball off the discharge seat 
when the valve chamber is filled with gas at supply pressure. Of this force, 
83% is required to overcome the plunger’s inertia force. Conversely, when the 
solenoid centerline is oriented perpendicular to the missile centerline, as 
shown in Fig. 7, the required solenoid spring force drops to 16.5 Newtons (3.7 
Ibf), of which only 27% is required to overcome the plunger's inertia force. 
This simple change in solenoid orientation resulted in solenoid force require¬ 
ments that were much lower and, more importantly, made it possible for a sole¬ 
noid to be designed which would fit into the package space. 

The AdKEM pneumatic power supply contains 143.1 cm^ (8.73 in^) of helium 
stored at 86.19 kilopascals (12,500 psig). The unit provides an average power 
of 84,000 watts (117 horsepower) for a duration of 6.9 seconds. Upon system 
activation an electro-explosive piston actuator pierces a burst disk. This 
releases the stored gas, which is regulated to 14.48 kilopascals (2,100 psig) 
and transferred to the control actuators. In the design process it was ini¬ 
tially suspected that helium, due to its lower compressibility factor, would 
result in a smaller bottle volume than nitrogen. Isentropic blowdown analy¬ 
sis, which used the Benedict-Webb-Rubin state equation, revealed that nitrogen 
would provide pneumatic power 25% longer than helium, for an equivalent ini¬ 
tial pressure and volume. Investigation into the cause of this revealed that, 
due to the higher specific heat ratio of helium, it cooled to a lower temper¬ 
ature during blowdown. This resulted in helium, on the average, having a 
higher compressibility factor than nitrogen during the blowdown process. 
Therefore, helium was not selected as the working fluid for this reason, but 
rather, was selected to reduce forces in the actuator valve as discussed 
above. 

The design requirements for the CAS actuator control electronics are to 
achieve adequate CAS bandwidth and stability over the full range of vane 
deflections and load conditions. For the AdKEM, the relatively high bandwidth 
of the autopilot drives the CAS bandwidth to 30 Hz or better under full load. 
Actuator stability Is specified somewhat qualitatively in that the CAS should 
not exhibit sustained oscillations under any flight condition. 

A block diagram for the actuator controller is shown in Fig. 9. Control 
of the gas flow is accomplished by pulse width modulating (PWM) the bistate 
solenoid ball valve, with the pulse width proportional to the compensated po¬ 
sition error signal. The PWM frequency is ideally selected to be much greater 
than the natural frequency of the actuator so that the actuator does not move 
in response to the PWM pressure fluctuations but only the average gas flow. 

The PWM frequency is limited on the high end by the response time of the sole¬ 
noid. For the AdKEM actuator the natural frequency is 150 to 200 Hz and the 
solenoid response time is approximately 1.0 millisecond. The PWM frequency 
was selected at 250 Hz. 


203 







The compensation element shown in Fig 9 was designed to provide stable 
performance of the actuator with no hinge load (worse case). For the AdKEM 
actuator, the compensation is a first order lead network with a lead frequency 
at 20 to 30 Hz. The actuator controller including the compensation is imple¬ 
mented digitally with a 500 Hz basic update rate. A digitized version of the 
compensation element was obtained using the Tustin method with frequency 
pre-warping. 

The actuator control equations are integrated with the AdKEM navigation, 
guidance, and autopilot equations in the on-board flight computer. This com¬ 
puter is based on the Texas Instruments TMS 320C30 32 bit Digital Signal Pro¬ 
cessor which has floating point math capabilities. A 10 bit A/D converter is 
utilized for the actuator position feedback. The pulse width modulation is 
implemented in software by comparison of the error signal with a 32 bit timer 
to set the pulse duration. The flight computer programming language is "C". 

A detailed block diagram of the pneumatic actuator model and controller 
is shown in Fig. 10. A derivation of the equations of Fig. 10 is provided in 
the Reference. These equations were utilized to develop a detailed digital 
simulation of a complete AdKEM CAS (three actuators). The equations were 
coded in FORTRAN 77 on a VAX 11/785 computer. The actuator equations of 
motion were integrated using a Runge-Kutta routine with a 0.1 millisecond 
integration step size. This detailed simulation was utilized to verify per¬ 
formance of the CAS design and was also incorporated into a complete AdKEM 
system simulation for autopilot design and missile system performance 
evaluation. 

Simulation results are shown in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12. A typical step 
response of the actuator with no hinge load is provided in Fig. 11. which 
illustrates the 1000 deg/sec rate capability of the actuator. Figure 12 shows 
the small signal bandwidth for the actuator with the maximum predicted hinge 
load of 12 in-lb/deg. 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

The Control Systems Development program has made significant contribu¬ 
tions in the development of missile control technologies which can meet the 
needs of current and future missile weapon system requirements. These contri¬ 
butions Include developing and evaluating actuation system concepts for 
reducing CAS size, weight, and cost without sacrificing performance. These 
concepts include a Dual Rate pneumatic actuator which demonstrated a 20% 
reduction in gas consumption and thereby a proportional reduction in power 
supply volume and a Torlon actuator which was 48% lighter and could poten¬ 
tially cost 75% less to produce than a conventional metal unit. Finally, the 
Control Systems Development program has designed and is currently developing a 
multi-mode CAS for the AdKEM. The mechanical packaging and performance of 
this unit represents the limits of design and well illustrates the size/ 
performance trade-offs for a tactical missile. 

References: 

(1) MICOM Technical Report RG-82-2, "Model For Pneumatic Control Systems", 
Gordon D. Welford, August 1982. 


204 









Figure 1. Dual Rate Pneumatic 
ActuatorSchematlc 




205 













SUPPLY PRESSURE /-VANE COMMAND 


CO 

♦ 


POSITION (DEQ) 


a> 

I 



lO 


o 

Ul 

CO 




10 


207 


Figure 3. Dual Rate Pneumatic Actuator Test Results 












180 


<6ap) aStlHd 


in 


o 

cu 


o 

o 


(0 


cn 


to 


o 

CD 


o 
O) . 


(U 


o 

ID 


CD 



21 


Intermediate Actuator Test Results 














Niya 



Figure 8. Frequency Response With Overload 























OROUE EOUATIONS 


r 


n 


r 


Qi" H 


L 


1 H£ 


4- 




cn 


ffO 


§ 

Z 



<? 

5 


♦ 

X 



(D 





OD 

I 


'a 


—» 

u 



3 







TZ 
05*1 cel 




■Q^l te. 

C 4 - 


L 





(r 


(X 

Tl 

U 


“■ 

u 

u 


Ui 

u 

:i: 


u 

< 


0 

< 




M 


« m 


' 



— 



ii 


J 


i 


^ fi 






u 

e 


i£ 


i 

uTl 

m 

- 


- 



’ - 

I 

1 

tfO 



X*! 


Or—B 


J 


Q) 

•V 

o 


o 

4J 

(0 

D 

u 

< 


Q> 

U 

o 

M) 

bu 




2 
















215 


Figure 11. AdKEM Actuator Step Response 









Q U1 O 

o o o o o 

OOOOO OCSOOOCNTTVOOO 

OO'O'^CMOOOOO 

»H»H^»HrHOOVO-^CMOI « • I I I I I I 


m 



AdKEM Actuator Frequency Response 





Stall Torque: 2.26 N-m (20 in-lbf) 

Vane Travel: +/- 20° 

Aerodynamic Loading; .034 N-m/deg (-30 

Control Vane Inertia; 67.3(10)”® m -kg 

in 
( . 

-1 bf/deg) 

23 in^-lbm) 

Vane Rate: 

Low Rate 


High 

Rate 

Charge Cycle 
Discharge Cycle 


205°/s 

157°/s 


607 

516 

°/s 

°/s 

Frequency Response: 





1° P-P 

e. 0 

6.5 

Hz @ -3 dB 

Hz @ -90° 


20 Hz 
18 Hz 

@ -3 dB 
@ -90° 

3° P-P 

6.7 
5.4 

Hz @ -3 dB 

Hz @ -90° 




6° P-P 

3.5 

3.6 

Hz @ -3 dB 

Hz @ -90° 


20 Hz 
20 Hz 

@ - 3 dB 
@ -90° 

Pneumatic Power; 
Consumption 






30 Hz PDM 

92 scc/s 

(. 195 scfm) 

103 

scc/s 

(.218 scfm) 

Bang-Bang 

83 scc/s 

( . 177 scfm) 

103 

scc/s 

(.218 scfm) 


Table I 

Dual Rate Actuator Performance 


217 






Stall Torque; 

Fin Aerodynamic Loads: 

Lift Force 

Roo>y Bending Moment 

Missile Acceleration: 

Axial 
Pi tch 
Yaw 

Static Stiffness: 

Vane Trave1: 

Frequency P;esponse: 

Slew Rate: 

Hys teresis: 

Operating Time: 

Duty Cycle: 

Storage Temperature: 

Operating Temperature; 


10.6 N-m (94 in-lbf) (min) 

934 N (210 Ibf) 

1005 N (226 in-lbf) 

-150 to +1400 g’s 
±150 g’s 
±150 g’s 

147 N-m/r (1300 in-lb^/r) 
±10' (min) 

50 Hertz with 1° P-P Input 
1000 degrees/second (min) 
0.05 degrees (max) 

7 seconds (min) 

Continuous; ±2.5' 10 Hertz 
Input Signal 

-40' to +150'F 
-40' to +400'F 


Table II 

AdKEM Control System Performance Requirements 


218 








Microprooessor Technology Utilization Program 

(MTCRDHJP) 

Michael C. Pitriizzello and L. Pedigo 
Guidance & Control Directorate 
Pesearch, Develcpraent, & Engineering Center 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 


Abstract 



Ihe basis for this technology program is to demcxistrate the utility of 
coranercicilly-produoed micrcprocessor technology for military 
c^lications. TNnio efforts undertaken in this program are described in 
this pe^>er. Ihe first, begun in FYSS, was a stix^ to determine the 
utility of hi^ speed serial data bus technology for use in military 
systems. In order to investigate Loceil Area Network (IAN) technology, a 
"mini” POG-M system was developed. The network consisted of several 
prototype military nodes and PCs emulating military nodes in a IQMB/s 
serieil bus configuratiCTi. Several ocaiclusic^is were derived fron research 
and denoistration results. Token Passing Bus (IEEE 802.4) provides 
deterministic data throu^put at hi^ rates, decreases connectors and 
cabling, aids system debug, and eillows rot only data transfer but also 
audio and video data transfer. However, current protocols using the token 
passing scheme c^}pear to cause delays significant enou^ to affect real 
time systems. This study demonstrabes seme clear performance advantages 
of IAN techrology over military systems connected ty MIL-STD-1553 type 
technology but also demonstrates same potoitial pitfalls. The second 
effort, begun in late FYSS, investigated processors for a develcpnental 
missile system. Due bo space constraints, floating point operation, and 
hi^ throuc^put required, the Texas Instruments TMS 320C30 was chosen. 
Prototype missile com pu te are now being constructed using the TMS 320C30 
and, with associated emulators, the processors will be examined against 
regiiired performance criteria. Digit£d Signed. Processors show significant 
promise for military applications requiring large numbers of repetitive 
mathematical operations, on-chip peripherals and on-chip memory. Guidance 
and C3ontrol Directorate engineers will produce six fli^t-capable 
autopilot oorputers to demexistrate the merit of state-of-the-art 
oonmercial microprooessor technology in military systems. Fli(^t tests 
are scheduled to begin in early FY91. 



219 





INIRODUCTICN 


Ihe micaxpriooessor is less than a quarter csentury old, but it has 
dramatically changed the way the world processes and uses information. 

This is just as true in the Department of Defense (Dc^) as it is in the 
civilian world, for it has long been recognized that information 
processing is one of the keys to the development of force multiplying 
'•snart'* weapcsis. Micrcprocessors are and will ccaitinue to be the 
technology of choice for raiKdi informaticxi processing in the foreseeable 
future. The reason is that microprocessor performance continues to 
increase tremendously and at reasonable cost (see Figures 1 and 2). 
However, DoD does not hold a large share of the microprooessor market, so 
in general Dc^ has little influence on how products are designed and which 
are produced. Ihis is e^jecially true in the current enviromnent of 
shrinking defense budgets. For this reason, DoD must be content to use 
the developments of the ccnmercial microprooessor world vhere applicable. 

The Guidance and Control Directorate of the US Anry Missile laboratory 
has Icaig recognized the inportanoe of microprooessors in missile guidance 
systems. To ensure incorporaticai of the latest technology into 
developmental systems, the directorate establi^ed the Micrcprocessor 
Technology Utilization Program (MICIiDIUP). Ihe purpose of this paper is 
to describe two of the projects laidertaken fcy MIO^CTUP. The first 
project, dealing with a previous effort vising Local Area Network (IAN) 
technology, will be discussed briefly. The second project, dealing with 
the current MICROTUP effort, is ccxicemed with the development of a 
conplete missile fli^t ooraputer for the developmental ADKEM missile and 
will be covered in more detail. The purpose in discussing two projects is 
to shew the breadth of the MICRCTUP prtsgram. 

WCKL AREA NETNCX^ (IAN) EROJECT 

A IAN is typically associated with a cable (usually coaxial or twisted 
pair) connecting together ncuny oonputers or peripherals and over which the 
oenputers and peripherals can oonitunicate with one another using a bit 
serial data stream. A two-oonductor cable, vhich forces the bit serial 
method of ocnnunicatian, is used to ke^ wiring costs to a minimum and 
reliability of the cable hi^. Many years ago, the Air Force recognized 
the savings in cable wei^t vhich could be achieved by using bit serial 
ocmnunications between its avionics boxes. This resulted in the creation 
of the MIL-STD-1553 bus. In addition to saving wei^t, the establishment 
of such a bus reduced interface development costs, increased wiring 
reliability, and sirplified troubleshooting and maintenance procedures to 
the line Replaceable Unit (IHJ) level. These desirable characteristics 
are as valid today as they were when the 1553 bus was created, but today 
IAN technology offers an order of nagnitude greater throuc^^xit (from 1 
Mbit/seoond to 10 Mbit/seocxid) with no Dc^ development effort. It is 
certain that increased data needs of emerging s y s t em s (e^)ecially those 
utilizing artificial intelligenoe techniques) will benefit from the 
increcised throu^’put. Indeed, at least cxie Amy system (NIOS) has had to 
resort to a second 1553 bus in order to meet its information bandwidth 
needs. 


220 





MULTIPLY/ACCUMUUTE TIME 



TIME AND TECHNOLOGY 


Figure 1. Performance and complexity of DSPs are typical of 

microprocessors in general. Both performance and 
complexity have increased dramatically over the 
past ten years . 


221 


OE ON-CHIP TRANSISTORS 





Cost per Chip Set (dollars) 


1500 -j 

1400 -I 

1300 - 
1200 - 
noo - 
1000 - 
900 - 
800 - 
700 ■ 
600 
500 
400 
300 
200 


80386 > 

+ 80387 


80206 -I- 80287 


8086 + 8087 


Time (year) 


Figure 2a 


nf fcvDical m icroproces sors 


INTEL 80386 
■f 80387 


TMS 320C30 


TMS 320C2X 


TMS 320C1X 



Figure 2b, 


Time (year) 

Costs of DSPs and a high performanc e 






The puxpcDse of the IAN project was to investigate the utility of inodem 
LANs for use in military systems. To this end, a survey of the IAN market 
was made. The intent was to purchase eguipiient for several of the more 
premising lANs and demonstrate their utility. However, funding 
limitations limited the project to one IAN. In order to narrew the field, 
the following selection criteria was adopted: 

1. The IAN nust be norproprietary and preferably based on an IEEE 
standard. 

2. Inplementation of the physiceil layer must require no more than 
five integrated circuits. 

3. The data rate must be at least 10 Mbits/second. 

Only two LANs met the selecticn criteria, that based on the tekik 802.3 
[1] specificaticai (such as Ethernet) and IEEE 802.4 [2] specification 
(such as is used in the MAP/TOP specificaticai). At this point, it was 
decided that the application would be used to discriminate between the 
two. Due to availability of existing peripherals, it was decided to 
create a "mini” Fiber Optic Guided Missile (FOG-M) system vhose block 
diagram is shown in Figure 3. The > 802.4 IAN was chosen as a better 
fit to the application. The basic reascais for this were: 

1. The IEEE 802.4 IAN, being based cai token passing, is 
deterministic. IEEE 802.3 is not. Further, the throu^^ut during hi(^ 
network loading is greater for token passing lANs [3] (see Figure 4). 

2. The IEEE 802.4 IAN, being a broadband system, would allcw growth 
to having video transmission cxi the same cable eis data transmission. This 
would sqpport the video channels used in the POG-M system. 

FROOECT RESUITS 

I The system shown in the blcxdc diagram of Figure 3 was constructed ixsing 
hardware and software based on the MAP/TOP specification. This system was 
used because it was the only IEEE 802.4 ocnpatible IAN available at the 
time. A photogreph of the hardware is shown in Figure 5. A photogr^^h of 
one of the Multibus IAN boards is shown in Figure 6. Note the single chip 
used to irpleonent the IEEE 802.4 token passing scheme. The remainder of 
the board contains an Intel 80186 processor, wid^sand modem, memory, and 
Multibus interface logic as required to iuplement the MAP/TOP protocol and 
to interface to the host (roaster) on the Multibus. The ^fe^ster controller 
(see Figure 3) was loaded with actual FOG-M software vhich had been 
modified by deleting the existing multiple software drivers and inserting 
the single IAN driver. 

During testing, the IAN ocnnunicaticns worked as expected with cxie 
serious exception. The time required from transmission of a data packet 
to a IAN board and its reception by the receiving host was found to be 
approximately 26 milliseconds. This was too long to support the desired 
60 Hz autopilot ifxiate rate (i.e. 16.67 millisecond autopilot cycle). The 
delay e^peeuned to be in the IAN boards and it is surmised that most of the 
delay comes from processing the MAP/TOP protocol. The lesson learned, as 
is often the case in the conputer world, is that the ^jeed of the hardware 
was conpromised by the software overhead used to process the protocol. 

For such a IAN to be effective in a real time system such as FCX>-M a 
streamlined pro t ocol would have to be developed. 


I 


223 






MASTER CONTROLLER 
WITH AUTOPILOT 
SIMULATOR 
(IBM AT) 



g O H 

O « g 

^2 S 

IS t; 

O C O 

0^9 

Sg > 


Figure 3. Block diagram of the LAN demonstration system. 






















IEEE 802.4 



Figure 4. Throughput of IEEE 802.3 and 802.4 LANs 










226 












Figure 6. Multibus LAN board implementing IEEE 802.4 token passing bus and MAP/TOP protocol. 









DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSOR (DSP) PRDOECT 

As previously mentioned, the current MICRCflUP effort is aimed at 
providing a Fli^t Oonputer (PC) for the ADKEM program. As in most guided 
missiles, the PC consists of one or more processors vAiich generally 
provide the following functions: 

1. An autopilot loop to keep the missile stable. This loop 
generally requires a suite of sensors (uisually of the inertial variety as 
in ADKEM) to sense missile motion and a Control Actuator System (CAS) loop 
to ocxTtrol missile attitude. 

2. A CAS loop vihich has missile attitude control devices (such as 
actuator driven fins as in AdKEM) with feedback mechanisms (such as 
potentiometers as in AdKEM), 

3. A guidance loop v^ch keeps the missile heading toward the 
target. This loop typically accepts the processed output of a target 
sensor (a radar in the AdKEM case) and uses this information to execute 
the appropriate guidance law. 

4. Miscellaneous functions such as missile Built-in-Test (BIT), 
controlling of missile inodes, firing squibs as required during fli^t, 
etc. 

It is clear that any general purpose processor with sufficient speed, 
memory and Irput/OuQxit (I/O) facilities can perform the above functions. 
However, todays' DSPs provide significant advantages over typical general 
purpose machines in this application because they are optimized to provide 
the mathematical and I/O facilities required by the above listed 
functions. These on-chip facilities usually include: 

1. Fast hardware multiply/accumulate, usually performed in a single 
machine cycle, and available in floating point frcm several 
manufacturers. The muLtiply/aoamulate function is the basis for nearly 
edl digital filter algorithms. 

2. Integrated peripheral facilities such as serial ports, parallel 
ports, timers, and Direct Memory Access (DMA) oontrollers. 

3. A small but significant amount of both Randcm Access Memory (PAM) 
and Bead Only Memory (PCM). In some dedicated applications no external 
memory is required. 

4. An optimized bus architecture usually containing more than cxie 
bus to get data into and out of the math unit quickly. 

The net result of having these facilities axhip in this ^^)lication 
is lower FC cost, size and wei^t. As will be seen below, space is at a 
premium in the AdKEM missile. Having all these facilities on-chip was one 
of the keys vhich edlowed the PC to fit within the allowable ^»ce without 
having to resort to e^qiensive technologies such as hybrid circuits. 

THE ADKEM PC PEXJUTREMENTS 

The ADKEM missile is a hypervelocity missile containing a penetrator 
rod. Its primary targets are armored ground vehicles and both fixed and 
rotary winged edrcraft at moderate ranges. There is a strcxig desire to 
keep overall missile wei^it low. These rec^iiranents in essence dictate a 
missile with a small diameter (i.e., low drag) and as short a length as 
possible. These characteristics drove many of the ADKEM PC requirements 
as listed below: 


228 



1. Ihe required processor throuc^^xit is estimated at 6 Million 
Floating Baint Operations Per Seocxid (MFTDPS). This estimate is based on 
the figures given in Table 1 vhich ocrae frcoi another develcpnentcil missile 
system. The actual estimated throu^iput requirement was multiplied by 2.5 
in order to arrive at the throu^^xrt figure of 6 MFIDPS. This was done to 
edlow for errors in the estimate and to meet Arxny requirements vhich 
require a processor to have at least 50% spare throu^^xit for growth vhen 
initiedly fielded. Note that these figures are based on efficient hi^ 
order languages such as C or PIHl. A not-so-efficient language such as 
Ada may require considerably more throu^^xit than estimated. 

2. The size constraints of the PC are shown in Figure 13. Note that 
most of the circuitry is packaged around the penetrator with only the 
processor board requiring the full missile inside diameter of 45.7inm 
(1.8”). In this way the PC contributes no more than lOl.emm (4.0”) to the 
overall missile length. 

3. The memory required is estimated to be 256 Kbytes. Again, this 
is based on another developmental mii^ile program using an efficient hic^ 
order language. At this time s^jarate RCM and RAM requirements are not 
firm, so it was decided to provide at least 256 Kbytes of both. 

4. The PC is required to have the circuitry necessary to interface 
to the Inerticil Measurement iMit (IMU ), CAS, telemetry unit. Millimeter 
Wave (tWl) receiver, ground oonputer, and booster s^erate squibs. 

5. The PC nust si:pply regulated power to all missile items vhich 
require such power. 

6. The processor chosen must have good software development tools 
available including hi^ order language and hardware emulator support. 

7. The PC must of course operate in the AdKEM envircnment. To date, 
only the acceleration environment is defined, being lOOOg's eilong the 
missile center line and lOOg's in the other two orthogonal axes. 


TABLE 1. Projected ADKEM Processing loed. 


# of 




Executive 2700 
Attitude Reference 550 
Coordinate Transform 125 
Navigation 1350 
Guidance 1150 
Autopilot 875 
Telotetry 125 
Actuators 309 


Total Projected Processing Load 


Execution 


InstructiOTs 
Second 


675,000 

275,000 

62,500 

337.500 

287.500 

437.500 
31,250 

154.500 
2,260,750 

X 2.5 
6,038,125 


229 






FIGURE 13: FLIGHT COMPUTER SIZE CONSTRAINTS 







CESIOJ OF THE PC 


Onoe requireanents are known, the first st^ in most cxHiputer designs 
is the choice of the processor. A floating point pirocessor was desired to 
ease the time cOTSuming software development required vhen trying to 
provide floating point ccnputatiOTS in software. Also, as many on-chip 
peripherals as possible were desired to ke^ space utilization to a 
minimum. The processor chosen for the ADKE3M FC was the Texas Instruments 
TMS 320C30. At the time the processor decision was being made, only two 
DSPs were found vhich could meet the throu^i^xit requirements, contained 
floating point arithmetic units, were iitroediately available, and were 
being premised as military parts in the near future. These were the AT&T 
DSP32C and the Texcis Instruments TMS 320C30. The DSP32C was initieilly 
chosen for its more COTvenient eunchitecture and lower cost, but the VAX 
hosted C cross ccnpiler was found to be seriously defective and the 
hardware emulator had a number of bugs vhich made software and hardware 
development less than efficient. Given the qucility of the AT&T products 
received, it was decided that the Texas Instruments TMS 320C30 was more 
cost effective in the Icxig run. Onoe the processor decision was made, a 
block diagram of the FC was derived and is shown in Figure 8. The design 
of the various subsystems are given belcw. 

MEMDRY 

As previously stated, the PC memory requirement was specified as 256 
Kbytes. Because ADKEM is a developmental system, it was decided that a 
r^rogrammable RCM technology would be used to hold the PC software. 
However, standard EIKM technology had two dravtoacks. First, dense (256 
Wait or greater) parts were required to meet the severe PC space 
limitation, but no dense parts were available vhich would meet the FC 
throucfiput requirements (i.e., 25 ns access time). Second, ETRDM 
technology required physiceil removal of the parts to reprogram and this 
required sockets. Not caily was there no room for ttie sockets, there was 
also no vendor found vhich would guarantee that their socket would eperate 
in the 1000 g operating envircxunent. For these reascxis it was decided 
that EEEKM technology would be used to hold the fli^t software and, on 
power up, would dewn load the fli^t program to fast RAM for execution. 
Flash EEPRCMs were selected as they are more cost effective than standard 
EEFRCMs and there is no requirement to change single memory locations in 
EEFRCM during code execution. One sli^t problem with this architecture 
was that the TMS 320C30 keeps its start-ip> vector and interrupt vectors in 
low memory starting at locaticai 0. This means that EXTRCM must start at 
location 0, and vhenever an interrvpt occurs wait states must be inserted 
into the memory cycle to meet the EEEKM access time. Fortunately, the 
TMS 320C30 coTtains an on-chip, very flexible wait-state generator. By 
vising a single inverter as shown in Figure 9, an address line is used to 
select betwee''. zero wait states (i.e., RAM access) and 4 wait states (i.e., 
EEFfCM access). A block diagram of the memory system is shown in Figure 
9. It is a convmitioned design and uses dense memory parts to ke^ size 
to a minlimm vhile still using cost effective standard parts and mounting 
techniques. RAM access time was selected at 25ns since faster dense 
devices in a military temperature range could not be found. Althou^ this 
limits the maxinum processor clock frequency to 28 MHz (and the maximum 
throughput to 28 MFLDPS) this is still ccxisiderably faster than the 
estimated required throii^iput. 


231 







232 


Figure 8. ADKEM flight computer block diagram . 














DSP PRIMARY DATA BUS 



Figure 9. ADKEM memory block diagram. 












INTERFACES 


Hie FC (xmtains interfaces to the IMLJ (vdiich consists of three gyros 
and three aooelercmeters), CAS, MMW receiver, the ground ccsrputer, missile 
squibs, and telemetry unit. Hte latter two are not well defined and will 
not be discussed in this paper. The others are discussed in more detail 
below. 

The IMJ interface consists of conventicnal analog filters, analog 
multiplexer, saitple-and-hold (S/H) anplifier, 16 bit Analog-to-Digital 
(A/D) cOTverter, a First-In-First-CXtt (FIFO) buffer, and miscellaneous 
timing and interface logic as shown in Figure 10. It is memory mai^ied 
into the primary bus of the DSP. In operaticxi, the analog data from the 
HU is sanpled and ccxiverted to a digital format. As each conversion is 
oaipleted, it is stored in the FIFO buffer. VJhen all six signals have 
been converted, the ccaitrol logic issues an intem^xt to the DSP vhich 
then reads all of the data out of the FIFO. This intem?>t marks the 
beginning of each autopilot cycle. The process repeats every two 
milliseconds (i.e., 500 Hz autc^ilot rate). 

The CAS interface consists of aneilog ir^xjt filters, a monolithic VD 
converter chip (containing an analog multiplexer, S/H aitplifier, and 10 
bit converter), a reference voltage generator, control logic, and three 
bit latch with solenoid power drivers as shewn in Figure 11. In 
operation, the DSP writes the analog channel number of the CAS 
potentiometer to be converted to the control logic which then starts the 
ccaiversion. When the conversicxi is ccnplete the DSP is interrupted to 
read the results of the ccaiveirsicsi. This data, in conjunction with one of 
the DSP's cxirchip timers, is used to oonpute the pulse width required to 
drive the appropriate CAS solenoid. The pulses are output throui^ the 
three bit latch to the solenoid power drivers. The three bit latch and 
A/D converter are at different locations on the DSP's auxiliary bus so 
that their operations are ind^xendent. The reference voltage generator 
generates the reference voltages for both the pobenticroeters and the A/D 
converter. 

The M1W receiver interface uses a single chip microcontroller 
(designated the Master Ocxitroller) to aoc^xt and decode pulses supplied by 
the MMW receiver. Data is encoded as a pulse stream, with the time 
between pulses signifying logic 0, logic 1, or sync. The chosen 
microcontroller contains a hardware timer circuit vhich captures the time 
between pulses. Its internal software then decodes each pulse time, packs 
the resulting bits into digital words, and then sends them to the DSP over 
a memory mapped parallel interface. A block diagram is shewn in Figure 
12. Note that the Master Controller also performs the ground cosmpater 
interface functicai. 

The ground oenputer interface is a serial, asynchronous, full duplex 
interface vhich is used for the following functiuxis: 

a. Allows the FC to ccnitunicate its BIT status to the ground 
oenputer prior to being comatted to fli^t. 

b. Allcws the ground oonputer to give initial target position 
information to the FC so that it can navigate before being ceptured by the 
MMW radar beam. 

c. Allcws research and development persOTnel to upload flicfit 
software into EEEKH prior to missile assembly. 


234 



INPUT 



Figure 10. Block diagram of the IMU interface. 





































q: 




237 


Figure 12. Ground computer and MMW receiver interface. 








PHYSIC3U^ OCKFTGURATICW 


As previously mentioned, and shown in Figure 13, the ADKEM FC must fit 
into a snail ^aoe (about 706 cxibic centimeters or 43 cubic inches) with a 
non-ideal form factor. After sere debate, the mounting scheme shewn in 
Figure 13 was chosen. The memory, interface, and power supply circuitry 
is mounted oti the three boards surrounding the penetrator. Ihe boards are 
ccxinected together using flat printed circuit flex cabling. The DSP, with 
its associated clock, pull-ip resistors, and decoupling capacitors is 
mounted cxi a small board behind the penetrator because of the size of the 
DSP chip. It is connected to the memory board with flat printed circuit 
flex cabling. Hirough judicious choice of oerponents this scheme will 
accommodate 2 lL 1 of the circuitry envisioned for the FC vhile using only 
standard through-hole parts and surface mounted (J-lead) parts. 

During the design process there was concern over the 1000 g 
acceleration envircsTment vhich exists when the ADKEM boost motors are 
fired. In orSer to gather preliminary data as to the mechanical integrity 
of standard throu^-hole and surface mounted parts, a set of test boards 
was constructed and sent throu^ a series of centrifuge tests vshich 
subjected them to accelerations of up to lOOO g's for several seconds. A 
variety of parts, including 300 mil and 600 mil DIPs in both ceramic and 
plastic packages, J-lead parts, and miscellaneous discrete resistors and 
capacitors, was tested. Figures 14 and 15 cune photographs of these boards 
after the tests. The caily mechanical damage noted throu^out the tests 
was that seme of the RIV siliocne rubber adhesive used to fasten the wire 
wrap wires to the back of the active board was thrown off the board (see 
Figure 15). The wires themselves remaiived intact throu^out the tests. 

Most of the test parts were not eperated during the tests. Hewever, 
two test circuits, one consisting of a crystal oscillator and the other 
consisting of an 87C51 microcontroller, were operational during the 
tests. The purpose of these two circuits was not only to confirm 
operation throu^ the lOOOg envirOTment but also to check the stability of 
typiced crystals in this envirtMiment. A plot of frequency versus 
acceleration for the two circuits is shown in Figures 16 and 17. Ihere is 
reason to believe that much of the frequency variation seen in these plots 
is actually pickup noise contributed 1:^ the centrifuge drive motor. This 
is suggested by the fact that at particular g-levels the frequency counter 
readout was not constant (see HIGH and l£M BMtGE levels in Figures 16 and 
17), but vAien the centrifuge motor was turned off at an acceleration of 
1000 g's (i.e., at the end of a test run) the frequency counter value 
remained constant throu^KUt ^indown. Regardless of the cause of the 
frequency variatioTS noted, the readings demenstrated a maximum change of 
less than 0.02%. 

SUMMARY 

In the current era of shrinking defense funding, DoD can greatly 
benefit frem state-of-the-art technology found in the ccmmercial market 
place. This is especially true in the microprocessor world where 
oonnercial demands and pressures have driven performance ip dramatically 
and price/performanoe down just as dramatically. This peper has presented 
two projects using state-of-the-art microprocessor based technology. The 


238 

























































































































250.140 



o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

fO 

CN 

■»— 

o 

C7) 




»— 

o 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

iD 

m 

lO 

m 

IT) 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 


(ZH>1) A3N3n03dJ 




241 


Figure 16. Changes in processor output pulse r 





1.562540 



Figure 17. 










IAN project, althou^ not meeting its intended goals, revealed v^iere the 
shortocmings in such technology existed and pointed to possible 
soluticns. Ihe ADKEM project uses the latest DSP technology to help solve 
the throu^^Mt and physiced space problem aboard a small missile without 
resorting to expensive or nonstandard mounting technology. Such projects 
are cruciail to the understanding and use of such technology in future 
missile systems. 


243 




Beferencses 


[1] carrier Sense Multiple Acxxss with Collision Detection IEEE Std 
802.3-1985, Ihe Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 
Inc., October 1985. 

[2] Token-Passing Bus Access Method and Physical layer Specifications. 
IEEE Std 802.4-1985, Ihe Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, Inc., October 1985. 

[3] William Stallings. Local Networks: An Introduction, page 255, 
Maanillian Publishing Oatpany, 1984. 


244 



REAL TIME EXECUTIVE FOR MISSILE SYSTEMS 

(RTEMS) 


Wanda M. Hughes and Phillip R AcufF 
Guidance & Control Directorate 
Research, Development & Enmneering Center 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 


ABSTRACT 

A study was completed in 1988 which compared the various aspects of the 
Ada programming language as they relate to the application of Ada code in dis¬ 
tributed and/or multiple processing ^sterns. Several critical conclusions, which 
have a major impact on the way the Government develops software, were 
derived from the study. The two major conclusions were that the Ada program¬ 
ming language does not fully support multiprocessing and the run time execu¬ 
tives being delivered with tne Adfa compilers were too slow and inefficient to be 
used in modern missile systems. Because of these shortfalls in the implementa¬ 
tion of the Ada progranuning lan^age for embedded systems, software 
developers in Army Research and Development and missile system prime con¬ 
tractors are purchasing and utilizing specialized third party kernel code to fill 
the void where Ada is Tacking. The contractor, and eventually the Government, 
must pay a licensing fee for each copy of the kernel code used in an embedded 
^stem. The main drawback to this development environment is that the 
Government does not own, nor has the right to modify code contained within the 
kernel. Techniques for Verification and Validation (V&V) of software in this 
situation are more difficult than if the complete source code were readily avail¬ 
able and could be modified. 


245 






INTRODUCTION 


In 1974, the United States Department of Defense (DoD) realized that far 
too much money was being expended on software development and maintenance 
activities. As a result, a study was performed to determine how software costs 
were distributed over the various application areas. The study indicated that 
over half of all software expenditures were directly attributed to embedded sys¬ 
tems [1]. In addition, the study concluded that two key factors were primarily 
responsible for these costs: an overabundance of programming languages and 
the "primitive" nature of those languages. 

A proliferation of languages (more than 450) emerged as defense ^encies 
and system project offices repeatedly spawned new languages from existing ones 
in an attempt to meet new project requirements. With numerous languages 
came numerous problems. For instance, lan^ages were largely incompatible; 
They could not easily "talk" to each other. This computer "Tower of Babel" 
resulted in many costly mistakes. In one situation, an attempt was made to 
develop a tacticd operations system that would use computers to assist bat¬ 
tlefield commanders in making decisions. When this system was interfaced to 
other tactical systems (using different computer languages), translation was slow 
and error prone. The entire development program was halted after $100 million 
were expended. Another problem with numerous languages was that the 
software being developed was not portable. It could not be easily transported to 
different computers or projects. Similarly, software engineers could not transfer 
their skills across a broad spectrum of projects; rather, they had to become high¬ 
ly specialized. The use of so many lan^ages also resulted in restricted competi¬ 
tion in the maintenance and enhancement phases of projects as well as 
producing a minimal amount of software available in each language. Competi¬ 
tion was restricted as competitors had to bear the initial investment associated 
with a new language, including the development and acquisition of both program¬ 
mer training and support software. Obviously, the original developer of the 
software system would not incur these costs. 

In addition to the overabundance of computer languages, the existing lan¬ 
guages were inadequate because they were obsolete (they did not support 
modern software engineering principles). As a result, code generated in these 
languages was difficult to read and understand. In turn, these characteristics in¬ 
creased both design complexitv and maintenance difficulty. The code lacked 
clear structure and contained low-level details that would have been hidden by a 
more modem language. These obsolete languages also resulted in software that 
was hard to reuse, because units of code were so interdependent. Modules often 
could not be extracted and used in different programs. This interdependency 
also made it difficult to modify code without introducing unwelcome and often 
"fatal" side effects. 

All of these problems were especially severe in embedded systems. An em¬ 
bedded system is one in which a computer is part of a larger system, such as com¬ 
puterized radar used in aircraft. Embedded systems are typically complex 
real-time systems that contain many lines of code, are long lived, and are con¬ 
tinually being modified. Because of the size, complexity, life-span, and volatility 
of these systems, they were responsible for 56% of DoD software costs in 1973. 


246 




The software issue, then, included such problems as software being exces¬ 
sively expensive, not portable, difficult to maintain, and not reusable. All of 
these problems were intensified in embedded systems. Clearly, something had 
to be done to help address this growing problem. The solution was the creation 
of a new standard software development language, Ada [2]. 

Ada was designed primarily for programming embedded computer sys¬ 
tems. It is a real-time language and execution environment in that it not only 
contains a complete set of general purpose lan^age features, but also provides 
facilities for multi-tasking, real-time S3mchronization, and direct progr ammi ng of 
low level device hardware[3]. Ada offers many advantages over other prowam- 
ming languages. For instance, since no subsets or supersets are allowed, Ada 
source code may be ported between different Ada compiler systems, with mini¬ 
mal changes. In addition to code portability, people portability is enhanced. 
Programmers can move from project to project without having to learn new lan¬ 
guages. Ada also helps manage the complexity and improve the maintainability 
of software by supporting modem software engineering principles [2]. This is ac¬ 
complished by enforcing a strict programming discipline designed to make 
pro^ams more readable, reUable, portable, modular, maintainable, and efficient 
- all qualities of good software [4]. 

It should be pointed out, however, that Ada is a large and complex lan¬ 
guage. The difficulties involved in learning how to use it effectively should not 
be underestimated [3]. In fact, the virtues of this language are still being tested 
within both the Government and in the private sector. In accordance with this, 
the study that was completed in 1988, comparing the various aspects of the Ada 
programming language as they related to the application of Ada code in dis¬ 
tributed and/or multiple processing systems, brought to the forefront several 
critical conclusions which have a major impact on the way the Army develops ap¬ 
plication software for embedded systems. This impact applies to both in-house 
software development activities as well as contractor developed software. The 
MICOM/RDEC programs which have immediate impacts in this area include 
Non-Line Of Sight (NLOS/FOG-M), Army Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (AUAV), 
Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS), and Advanced Kinetic Energy MissUe 
(AdKEM). 

A conclusion of the analysis, which has been previously recognized by 
other agencies attempting to utilize Ada in a distributed or multiprocessing en¬ 
vironment, is that the Ada programming language does not fully support multi¬ 
processing (^sterns with more than 1 processor). Ada does provide a 
mechanism for multi-tasking, but this capability exists only for single processor 
systems. The language also does not have an inherent capability to access global 
named variables, flags or program code. These critical features are essential in 
order for data to be shared between processors. Although these drawback do 
have workarounds, they are sometimes awkward and defeat the real intent of a 
"self documenting" progranuning language, such as Ada. 

However, the featime most essential for a distributed system is the 
capability to spawn tasks on another processor. This capability does not exist 
within the Ada language. Furthermore, there appears to be no suitable 
workaround within the language itself for this critical capability. 


247 





Another conclusion drawn from the analysis, was that the run time execu¬ 
tives being dehvered with the Ada compilers were too slow and inefficient to be 
used in modem missile systems. These run time executives are the core part of 
the Ada run time environment that provide operating systems functions such as 
task scheduling, input/output management and memory management. 

REAL TIME SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 

To properly evaluate the impact of these problems with the Ada language 
a thorough understemding of the "art" of developing effective real-time software 
is essential. Real-time embedded software development differs from other 
software development in that two computers, one for development and one for 
fielding, are tmically used instead of one. Because embedded systems perform 
clearly defined, limited sets of functions, they often lack features needed for 
software development. They frequently have limited memory and disk storage, 
and often have a specialized interface to the external world, such as buttons, 
gauges, sensors, or actuators. Developing software for them usually requires a 
different computer with the necessary software development tools. This 
software development computer is called the host, while the embedded com¬ 
puter is called the target. 

The implementation phase for embedded systems software consists of 
developing soitware on the host, and then downloading the software to the tar¬ 
get for testing. When software errors are found, they are corrected on the host 
before downloading again to the target for more testing. This cycle continues 
until all the bugs are worked out. The software may then be burned into 
PROMS, if desired, and installed on the target system. Figure 1 illustrates this 
process. 

Although Ada was designed with real-time embedded applications in 
mind, such implementations depend heavily on the interaction between the com¬ 
piler, interface library, and the embedded system’s kernel, or executive. 

REAL-TIME EXECUTIVES 

Real-time software development also differs from other software develop¬ 
ment by its very nature: in real-time, the right answer late is wrong. The sys¬ 
tem must respond to the une:roected events in the outside world rapidly enough 
to control onTOing processes. Special needs exist for an extensive set of support 
tools and technology to properly design and implement real-time software. Real¬ 
time design requires determinism, preemptive scheduling capabilities, real-time 
interrupt response with low interrupt laten^, explicit tasking control, time-slic¬ 
ing, ana prioritization of tasks to ensure reliability and predictability in a 
system’s behavior [5]. 

Another key requirement is multitasking. Multitasking is the ability of 
the software to handle many tasks concmrently, because events in the real 
world usually overlap rather than occur in strict sequence. 

The multitasking capability of a real-time operating system provides a 
framework that allows the design of very complex real-time software which has 
well-defined and controlled interactions among its various components. In ad^- 


248 






Program on target 


Program 

Works? 


no, revise it and try again 


Bum PROM 


Figure 1: Real Time Software Development Procedure. 


249 











tion, the operating system supplies a number of prewritten and debugged 
software facilities such as interrupt handlers, data-transfer functions, real-time 
clocks, and I/O device drivers. 

At the heart of a real-time executive is the concept of a task, or process. A 
task is an activity carried out by the computer. It consists of a program, data as¬ 
sociated with the program, and computer resources such as memory space or 
I/O devices required to execute the program [6]. 

Programmers and designers of real-time systems frequently spend more 
time developing basic mechanisms such as intertask communications, 
synchronization, and memory management, than on the application program it¬ 
self In embedded applications, this set of mechanisms is c^led a re^-time 
operating system or a real-time executive. Programmers build their applications 
using the real-time executive as the foundation. 

It is important to note the difference between real-time multitasking 
operating systems and real-time executives. A real-time executive does not offer 
operating system commands and is not a replacement for an operating system 
such as UNIX. A real-time executive is used to create a single application on a 
target machine. Its sole purpose it to integrate a series of small programs into 
one real-time application [7]. A fullfledged real-time operating system adds a 
disk file system to the capabilities provided by a real-time executive. 

A real-time operating system is distinguished from a normal multitasking 
operating system by its ability to schedule tasks on the basis of external events 
which are simaled to the computer by interrupts. Operating systems which are 
not intended for real-time applications usually do not give the user mechanisms 
to control how interrupt requests are handled and may actually disable inter¬ 
rupts for substantial periods while the operating system nucleus is executing. As 
a result, response to interrupts may be slow or interrupt requests may be missed 
entirely. Real-time operating systems are designed to provide fast response to in¬ 
terrupt requests. An interrupt latency time is often given in the specifications 
for a real-time operating system. This is the maximum amount of time it will 
take the operating system to recognize an interrupt request and begin servicing 
it. 


Another distinguishing feature of real-time operating systems, or execu¬ 
tives, is that their command interpreters are usually rather simple and they do 
not include many utility programs. The goal of a real-time executive is usually 
to serve the system it controls rather than human users. 

The centralized multitasking capability offered by a real-time executive is 
not always required. In very simple real-time systems the application program 
can often be configured as a combination of a main program which executes se¬ 
quentially and a set of interrupt service routines which respond to external 
events. However, as the system gets more complex and additional processors 
are added, it becomes more difficult to coordinate the interactions between the 
interrupt service routines and the main program. At some point, some well-or¬ 
ganized means of coordination is required and multitasking becomes a necessity. 
This is the case for almost all DoD/military applications. 


250 







Highest Address in 
Memory 


Lowest Address 


Operating System 
stack area 


Task 1 
stack area 


Task 2 
stack area 


Tasks 
stack area 



Free memory 
pool 



Global (external) 
variables 


Program 

code 



Interrupt and 
execution vector 
_table 





> 


Must be 
RAM 


Maybe 
RAM or 
ROM 


Figure 2: Memory Map for a Multitasking System. 


A memop^ map for a multitasking ^stem is shown in Figure 2. Each task 
and the operating system is assigned its own stack area in memory. This is used 
to store private data. A free memory pool is used by the operating system to cre¬ 
ate message channels or common data areas which allow tasks to exchange data. 
A certain number of global variables, accessible to all tasks and to the operating 
system, may also be required. 

Two tasks can execute the same program but be distinct because they use 
different stack areas, message chaimels, and resources. For example, if a com¬ 
puter system contains three identical Analog/Digital (A/D) converters which pro¬ 
vide input to the computer, three distinct tasks could be created to service the 
three devices. Each task will run the same code but will be assigned a different 
resource (A/D convertor), a different stack area, and a different message channel 
to transfer the incoming data to other tasks. The tasks will run independently 
(as 3 mchronousIy) depending on when their A/D converter has data available. 
Since tasks can share program code, it is very important to use only reentrant 
programs in a real-time multitasking system. 


251 







Most real-time executives are designed so that a task can be in one of four 
states, as shown in the state transition diagram in Fi^re 3. If a task is in the 
running state, the computer is executing that task. Ii the task is ready to be ex¬ 
ecuted but not actually executing, it is in the ready state. A task that is unable 
to execute because it is waiting lor an event or a resource is in the suspended 
state or is said to be blocked. For instance, if a task is an interrupt service task, 
it must await the interrupt signal from the external device (an event) before it 
can execute. Similarly, a task which wishes to use a printer (a resource) may 
have to wait until another task has finished using the printer. Finally, if the 
task is not needed by the real-time system, it is in the dormant state. 

The scheduler in a real-time operating system is responsible for control¬ 
ling the transitions of the tasks among these states. The elements of a simple 
task scheduler are shown in Figure 4. The scheduler program receives interrupt 
requests from the computer’s interrupt system. In addition, it receives mes¬ 
sages from the running task in the form of system calls to the operating system. 
The scheduler maintains hsts of ready, suspended, and dormant tasks. It also 
carries out the task switching function where the execution of the currently run¬ 
ning task is stopped and a task on the ready list is started. 


252 









List of 

Suspended 

Tasks 



List of 

Dormant 

Tasks 


Running Task 



Figure 4: Elements of a Task Scheduler. 


The scheduler’s ability to control the execution of tasks is the key to the 
efficiency and speed of response of a real-time executive. A task which is waiting 
for an event to occur or a resource to become available does not execute and 
therefore does not take up any CPU time. When the event occurs or the 
resource becomes available (usually signaled by an interrupt or a messaro from 
the running task), the scheduler allows the task to continue execution. The 
amoimt of time that elapses between the occiurence of an event and the execu¬ 
tion of the task which was blocked on that event depends on the scheduling 
strategy used by the scheduler [6]. 

The actual scheduling method used to select the next task to nm varies. 

In real-time operating ^tems, round-robin or priority-based preemptive 
scheduling techniques are typically implemented. In round-robin scheduling, all 
tasks have equal priority ana the ready list is configured as a simple first-in-first- 
out (FIFO) queue. I^riority-based preemptive scheduling, tasks are assigned 
different priorities. The highest priority task that is not in the suspended, or 
dormant, state is always running. In practice, a mixture of round-robin and 
priority-based scheduling is often used. 


253 
















In order to cany out its scheduling functions, the scheduler makes use of 
task control blocks (TCB), or process descriptors. Each task is assigned one of 
these blocks, which is simply an array of data about the task. An example of a 
task control block is shown in Figure 5. The TCB contains data on the state of 
the task (i.e., dormant, suspended, ready, or running), the priority of the task, 
and events or resources for which the task is waiting. The starting address for 
the task’s proCTam code and the initial pointer value for the task’s stack are also 
stored in the TCB. This information is used by the scheduler when a task is 
first activated and when a task is reactivated by moving it from the dormant to 
the ready state. 

In addition, the task control block is used to store the task’s context. The 
task context represents all the information that must be saved when the execu¬ 
tion of a task is stopped and restored when task execution is resumed. In most 
real-time executives, this information is the contents of the computer’s registers 
just prior to the moment when execution of the task was stopped. Note that 
this is the same information (the machine state) which must be saved and res¬ 
tored when the s}^tem responds to an interrupt. 

In a simple ^tem with more than one task, there is no inherent 
s 3 aichronization between the execution of tasks; each task executes inde¬ 
pendently. However, in most real-time systems, tasks must work closely 
together and may also have to perform their functions at defined times. Some 
synchronization mechanisms must be provided. 


254 







A common technique, used in real-time operating systems to synchronize 
two or more tasks, is to use the semaphore variable, s, and two system calls, 
Wait(s) and Signal(s), which act on the semaphore. A semaphore consists of a 
counter for signals that have not been received, and a queue for tasks that are 
waiting to receive the signals [6]. 

In addition, semaphores are used in the exchange of data between tasks. 
They prove quite useful in solving problems associated With the use of common 
data areas to transfer data between tasks. This process is also known as mutual- 
exclusion. 

Most real-time operating systems provide a complete real-time clock 
facility. A task can make a system call to suspend itself for a time interval or 
until a certain time of dav occurs. The scheduler suspends the task and places it 
back on the ready list only when the requested time interval has elapsed or the 
requested time of day has arrived. Thus, a task can ensure that it performs its 
functions at defined times [6]. 

To date, real-time executives have had their limitations. They must be 
custom designed for a given microprocessor. Therefore, the designer needs to 
choose a specific processor and hardware configuration before he/she can select 
an executive. Any executive chosen must meet certain performance criteria. It 
must be fast enough to allow the tasks under it to operate in real time. An 
executive’s code should be small enough so that a large amount of program space 
does not have to be dedicated to it. Finally, the executive should not add a lot of 
unnecessary overhead to a task when that task needs to use executive utilities. 

The ability to modify an executive can be important. Features can be 
modified or added to an executive as they are needed through the use of source 
code. Without the source code for an executive it is difficult, if not impossible, to 
alter it. Source code for some real-time executives cannot always be purchased. 
The cost of this code, when available, can easily cost up to $50,000 or more [7]. 

MICOM CASE HISTORY 

Traditionally, whenever efficient executive code was required by the ap¬ 
plication, the user develraed in-house custom code, sometimes written in as¬ 
sembler language. The FOG-M gunner station code is an example of an in-house 
custom executive. 

In 1982 the Research and Development Center (then known as Army Mis¬ 
sile Laboratory), MICOM, began a technology demonstration program to prove 
out the use of fiber optic cable control in missiles. This successful program is 
now known by all in the MICOM community as the Fiber Optic Guided Missile 
(FOG-M) program. Personnel in the Guidance and (Control organization were 
directly responsible for the computer hardware and software designs for FOOM, 
The FO(j-M multiprocessor configuration uses several microprocessors, com¬ 
municating with each other on a common MultiBus. These processors are tight¬ 
ly coupled under software control to distribute the processor load. Since the 
hardware configuration contained global memory, tnis configuration was not dis¬ 
tributed processing in the strictest since, but was a multiprocessing configura¬ 
tion. 


255 





At the initial development stage, the FOG-M computer software and 
hardware was the most complex multiprocessing architecture using the Intel 
8086 fEunily of processors in existence. This complexity was mandated by the 
complex fimctions required of the system. Due to this complexity the software 
had to be very efficient, thus the choice of a higher order language to develop 
the code, was a critical design decision. Since the requirements of the Gunner 
Station software dictated the software operate under a multitasking software ar¬ 
chitecture, engineers began looking at commercial off the shelf software to fulfill 
the needs of a real time executive. 

After several trade studies were completed, an initial design choice was 
made. After the initial code development, aebug and testing were completed, it 
was determined that this commercial real time executive was not suitable for 
the speeds required of the software (e.g.; trigonometric functions were derived 
W table lookup versus a math coprocessor because of the timing constraints.) 
Engineers working on the FOG-M software program began studjdng the 
feasibility of developing a custom in-house executive which met the needs of the 
FOG-M program, and only the FOG-M program. 

As a result, a minimal executive was developed which contained specific 
functions required for the executive (i.e.; task scheduler, interrupt handler, 
global memory handler, exception handler, etc.). This executive was not con¬ 
tained in a single section of program code, but was distributed around the 
software as the need arose. Since the code was developed for the specific applica¬ 
tion, it is highly unlikely much of the code could be used in applications other 
than follow on work to FOG-M using the same processor family. 

Although the FOG-M program was a success on most every front, the 
above exai^le illustrates the way real time executives have been developed and 
used at MIuOM in the past. Individual software developers "re-invent the 
wheel" each time an executive is needed for an application. With the primary 
push for software reusability in the Ada progreimming language, the software 
developers within the G&C Directorate realized that this programming practice 
must end. The development of RTEMS is an attempt to alleviate this redevelop¬ 
ment cycle. 


STANDARDS 

The advent of Ada has created the need for efticient Ada-based develop¬ 
ment tools to augment the standard Ada runtime environment. This support 
must provide for efficient and flexible concurrent pro^am execution that meets 
demanding real-time constraints. As we move from single to tightly-coupled to 
loosely-coupled multiple-CPU architectures, this support must be standardized 
to the extent practical. (Tightly-coupled ^tem are generally characterized by 
the ability to communicate over a backplane. Loosely-coupled systems generally 
use some external communications media such as RS232 or network connection.) 
Existing Ada compiler runtime sj^tems do not meet these needs. 

Many real-time embedded computer ^tems require efficient, determinis¬ 
tic, and adaptable software concurrency, commimication, and s 3 mchronization 
support. T^is support is needed for sin^e processor systems and for distributed 
computer ^tems. The tasking model m Ada provides for concurrency, com- 


256 





munication, and synchronization and applies in principle to all computer architec¬ 
tures and applications. However, existing Ada compilers and their runtime sup¬ 
port do not meet industry demands for emciency, determinism, and adaptability 
in real-time embedded applications, and Ada implementations for distributed tar¬ 
gets are only now becoming available. 

The Ada language addresses a large application domain and offers many 
desi^ features needed to promote reliable software; however, its intrinsic 
capability has not as yet been implemented with the efficiency and adaptabilitv 
required to support many real-time computer system requirements. The need is 
the same for other languages used in re^-time apphcations, but the power and 
formality of Ada dictate special emphasis on well-engineered execution environ¬ 
ments that are integrated with Ada compilers. 

Runtime support must be provided that allows embedded computer sys¬ 
tems to be implemented with inherent runtime efficiency and with designed-in 
determinism. And, to increase reliability and reduce development cost and 
schedules, implementors must be able to tailor proven, available runtime sup¬ 
port capabilities to their specific program needs. The Ada standard does not 
precluae any of those nee^, nor does it overtly support them. Available im¬ 
plementations of the Ada tasking model do not meet either efficiency or deter¬ 
minism needs, and compiler vendor products and third-party products do not 
meet the system tailoring requirements of many DoD systems. 

We have established that the run time executives being delivered with 
the Ada compilers are too slow and inefficient to be used in the increasingly com¬ 
plex modern missile ^sterns of today. This code is purchased from compiler ven¬ 
dors who are not in the business of writing and properly testing and debugging 
real-time executive code. Indeed, their primaiy concern is in providing the cus¬ 
tomer (the Government) with a good compiler. The real-time executive is in¬ 
cluded as part of the run time environment in order to satisfy the underlying 
requirements of a run time support system and to attempt to overcome some of 
the shortfalls of the Ada programming language. 

To date, software developers are purchasing and utilizing specialized third 
party kernel code. Problems imposed from purchasing third party kernel (execu¬ 
tive) code is that the contractor, and eventually the (juvemment, must pay a 
licensing (royality) fee for every copy of the kernel code used in an embedded sys¬ 
tem. This concept is similar to purchasing multiple copies of word processing 
software. In both cases, the oripnal manufacturer of the software is the sole 
owner, while the end user pays a hcensing fee for the right to use the code in a 
system design. This obligates the government on a per copy basis, every time 
the code is being utilized. 

Another drawback to this development scenario is that the (jovemment 
does not own, nor has the right to modify any code contained within the kernel. 
Techniques for Validation and Verification (V&V) of software in this situation 
are more difficult than if the complete source code were available. Most commer¬ 
cially available real-time executive manufacturers do not offer source code to the 
licensee. If they do, it is usually very expensive. Responsibility for system 
failures due to faulty software is yet another area to be resolved under this en- 


257 









vironment. The vendor will not accept any responsibility for a failure of any sys¬ 
tem containing its’ code. 

Typically, real-time software has been ignored by standardization and 
software engineering groups. Each system is Smost an original, free-form ex¬ 
pression of the development team. Unfortunately, real-time desim is still in its 
infancy. This results in schedule overruns and maintenance problems. As a 
result, the cost of software continues to accelerate, even as the cost of hardware 
continues to decline [8]. 

To meet these challenges, the software industry must develop new and 
better tools for the design, analysis, development, and verification of real-time 
systems. Although research is constantly advancing the techniques of software 
development, the benefits of this research often take time to become available to 
the red-time software development community. As the results of real-time 
operating system research become accessible, the number of real-time operating 
systems and executives available to software developers will continue to grow. 
This fact makes it imperative that system developers recognize the common fea¬ 
tures and capabilities required to provide the needed support environment and 
incoiTiorate them into an industry standard interface environment. This stand¬ 
ard interface should allow the software developer to concentrate on the 
hardware dependencies and unique requirements of the application system 
being developed instead of learning to use yet another real-time executive. 

RTEID 

One such standard interface, the Real Time Executive Interface Defini¬ 
tion (RTEID) has been developed by Motorola, Inc. with technical input from 
Software Components Group. It has been submitted to the VMEbus Internation¬ 
al Trade Association (VITA) for adoption as a standard multiprocessor, real-time 
executive interface. RTEID defines a standard interface for the development of 
real-time software to facilitate the writing of real-time appi.'cations programs 
that are directly portable across multiple resd-time executive implementations. 
This interface includes both the source code user interface and the run-time be¬ 
havior as seen by a real-time application. It does not include the details of how a 
kernel implements these functions. Simply stated, the RTEID goal is to serve as 
a complete deRnition of external interfaces so that application code which con¬ 
forms to these interfaces will execute properly in all real-time executive environ¬ 
ments. With the use of an RTEID compliant executive, routines that acquire 
memory blocks, create and manage message queues, establish and use 
semaphores, and send and receive signals need not be redeveloped for a different 
real-time environment as long as the new environment is also RTEID compliant. 
Progranuners need only concentrate on the hardware dependencies of the real¬ 
time system. Furthermore, most hardware dependencies for real-time applica¬ 
tions can be localized to the device drivers [9,10]. 

An RTEID compliant executive provides simple and flexible real-time em¬ 
bedded multiprocessing. It easily lends itself to both tightly-coupled and loosely- 
coupled confl^rations (depending on the system hardware configuration). Both 
forms of multiprocessing, tightly-coupled and loosely-coupled, have unique ad¬ 
vantages, disadvantages, and suitability for a specific application. RTEID does 
not favor one form over the other, but leaves this decision to the developer of an 


258 





RTEID compliant executive. Objects such as tasks, queues, events, signals, 
semaphores, and memory blocks can be desimated as global objects and accessed 
by any task regardless on which processors the object and the accessing task 
reside. Each object may exist on a single processor configuration; or in a multi¬ 
processor system. The system is defined as the collection of interconnected 
processors; including processors connected by network or other communications 
media [9]. 

RTEMS 

The Guidance and Control Directorate began a software development ef¬ 
fort in 1989 to alleviate many of the problems discussed in this paper. A project 
to develop an experimental nm time kernel was begun that will eliminate the 
two major drawbacks of the Ada programming language mentioned previously: 
that the Ada programming language does not fully support multiprocessing and 
that the run time executives being delivered with the Ada compilers are too slow 
and inefficient to be used in modern missile systems. The Real Time Executive 
for Missile Systems (RTEMS) is an implementation based on Draft 2.1 of the 
RTEID specification. RTEMS provides full capabilities for task management, in¬ 
terrupt management, time manc^ement, multiprocessing, and other managers 
typic^ of generic operating systems. The code will be (jovernment owned, so no 
licensing tees need be paid. The executive was designed as a linkable, ROMable 
library with the Ada programming language. Initially the library code is being 
developed on the Motorola 68000 family of processors using the ’C’ programming 
language as the development language. The ’C’ programming language was 
chosen because of its portability and efficiency. However, other language and 
processor family interfaces are planned in the future. 

The final RTEMS product will be capable of handling either homogeneous 
(processors of the same family type) or heterogeneous systems. The kernel will 
automatically compensate for architectural differences (byte swapping, etc.) be¬ 
tween processors. This will allow a much easier transition from one processor 
family to another without a major system redesign. 

RTEMS was designed to fulfill three fundamental design objectives: per¬ 
formance, reliability, and ease of inteCTation. It provides a multitasking environ¬ 
ment for single or multiprocessor real-time application systems. The RTEMS 
executive was developed by contractors for MICOM to perform research for mul¬ 
tiprocessor based weapons systems. RTEMS is currently implemented on the 
Motorola MC68020 microprocessor [10]. 

The RTEMS executive provides a high performance real-time environ¬ 
ment which include the following features: [10,11] 

• multitasking capabilities 

• event-driven, priority-based, preemptive scheduling 

• intertask communication 

• semaphore, signal, and event synchronization mechanisms 

• dynamic memory allocation 


259 







• real-time clock management 

• user-specified configurations 

• user-extendable directives 

These features provide a robust set of cababilities that allow system desig¬ 
ners the flexibility to efficiently and cost effectively solve the complex problems 
associated wtih real-time systems. 

Another important design goal of the RTEMS executive was to provide a 
bridge between two critical layers of typical real-time systems. It serves as a 
buffer between the project dependent application code and the target hardware. 
Standard software routines that acquire memory blocks, create and manage mes¬ 
sage queues, establish and use semaphores, and send and receive signals need 
not be redeveloped for a different real-time environment as long as the new en¬ 
vironment is RtEMS/RTEID compliant. RTEMS provides efficient tools for in¬ 
corporating these hardware dependencies into the system while simultaneously 
providing a general mechanism to the application code required to access them. 

A well designed real-time system, such as RTEMS should maximize these two 
concepts to build a rich hbrary of standard application components which can be 
used repeatedly in other real-time projects [9,10,11]. 

The executive can be viewed as a set of components that work in harmony 
to provide a collection of services to a real-time application system. These com- 


260 
































Figure 7: Real Time Executive Board Support Package. 


ponents consist of a board support package, an executive core and a set of 
resource managers. Figure 7 shows this concept. 

RTEMS makes minimal assumptions about its hardware environment. It 
does not depend on any particular implementation of interrupts, timers, buses, 
or I/O devices. This concept is necessary to allow the executive to be truly port¬ 
able. To achieve this portability, the user must supply a small amount of code to 
interface RTEMS to those aspects of the surroundii^ hardware that it needs to 
know about. The board support package is a single piece of code that sets up 
the environment and controls the initic^ation process for the remainder of the 
software. 

In every executive there exists a set of basic functions that must be per¬ 
formed, but do not naturally align themselves with any of the logical sets or 
groups of directives. Such thin^ as scheduling, error processing, and data struc¬ 
ture manipulation are very critical to insure the proper functioning of a real¬ 
time executive. The RTE^MS design groups these functions together forming a 
component called the executive core. 

The RTEIMS core consists of the following components: 

• scheduler 

• dispatcher 

• chain handler 


261 



















BAStC SYSTEM SERS/CES PACKAGE (BSSP) 


FADUTY MANAGER 


TASK ^ time ^ 
(mSSAOe ^ ^ EVEMT ^ 


(signal J (memobv ^ 

D 


SEMAPHO-'TE 


EXECUTIVE KERNEL 


SCHEDULER DISPATCHER 


SUPERVISORS 


(^CHAIN ^ (^EUE 


HEAP ^ 


HANDLERS 


( fatal ERROR ^ 
( ^INTERRUPT ^ 
OBJECT ^ 

C "^ ) 


EXTENDED SYSTEM 
SERVICE PACKAGE 
(ESSP) 


MMU 

MANAGER 

■ VO DEVICE 
MANAGER 

INIT. 

MANAGER 


DEVICE ORTVERS 


BOARD SUPPORT package 


TTY 


I 1 


SHARED 

MEMORY 


INIT 


I I 


ISP 


MULTIPROCESSOR 

COMMUNICATION 

INTERFACE 


TACTICAL ARSSILf SYSTEMS HARDWARE 








■MH 

■m 


HI 


IIHBBI 


OTHER 

PERIPHERALS 


Figure 8: Basic System Services Package of RTEMS. 


• queue handler 

• heap handler 

• utilities 

Although no requirement exists for the RTEMS user to understand the 
details of the executive’s implementation, it is important to be familiar with the 
basic concepts and algorithms used to control the real-time environment. 

The RTEMS interface presented to the application is formed by grouping 
the RTEID specified directives into logical sets c^ed resource managers. 
Together these components provide a powerful run time environment that 
promotes the development of efficient real-time application systems. 

The following managers are included in an RTEMS compliant executive: 

• task manager 

• message manager 

• event manager 


262 



























• signal manager 

• semaphore manager 

• time manager 

• interrupt handler 

• fatal error handler 

• region manager 

• partition manager 

• initialization manager 

• dual ported RAM manager 

• HO manager 

• debug manager 

The task manager provides control features that act upon a task or a set 
of tasks as defined by the eleven task manager directives specified by the RTEID 
specification. A task is simply a sequence of closely related computations. A task 
may execute concurrently with or independent of other tasks. 

In real-time multitasking applications, the ability for cooperating tasks/In- 
terrupt Service Routines (ISRs) to communicate and s^chronize with each 
other is imperative. A real-time executive should provide an application with 
the foUowing capabilities: 

• Data transfer between cooperating tasks 

• Data transfer between tasks and ISRs 

• Synchronization of cooperating tasks 

• Synchronization or tasks and ISRs 

RTEMS provides for communication and synchronization between tasks 
and between tasks and ISRs with the message, event, signal, and semaphore 
managers. The messi^ manager supports one type of inter-task communica¬ 
tion and s 3 aichronization as defined by the seven message manager RTEID direc¬ 
tives. The message manager supports communication and i^mchronization 
between multiple tasks as well as tasks and ISRs using a basic support 
mechanism called a message Queue. Messages are defined to be med length (16 
b 3 ^es) blocks of information. The event manager provides a second, higher per¬ 
formance method of inter-task communication and synchronization as defined by 
the two event manager directives. The event manager will support communica¬ 
tion and synchronization using a basic support mechanism called an event set. 
Event sets may only be directed at other tasks instead of queues. Events are 
defined to be bits encoded into an event mask. The signal manager supports a 
third t}^ of inter-task conununication and ^mchronization as defined oy the 
three signal manager directives. The signal manager provides directives that 
allow as 3 nichronous communication between tasks. The semaphore manager 


263 




supports a t 3 ^e of inter-task synchronization as defined by the five semaphore 
manager directives. These directives provide the ability to arbitrate access to a 
shared resource. 

The time manager provides timing features based on both calendar and 
elapsed time as defined by the eight time manager directives. This manager re¬ 
quires a periodic timer interrupt to perform its required functions. The board 
support package will inform this manager that a clock tick has occured. 

The interrupt handler provides the ability to preempt from an interrupt 
service routine whue still maintaining a fast interrupt response and satisfies the 
basic design goals to provide a zero latency time to enter an interrupt and to in¬ 
sure that the highest priority ready task ^ways executes. The fatal error hand¬ 
ler also provides the abihty to preempt from an interrupt service routine while 
still maintaining a fast intemmt response. Fatal errors can be detected firom 
three sources: the executive (RTEMS), user system code, or user application 
code. 


RTEMS provides two t 3 q)es of memory management; region management 
and partition man^ment. The region manner deals with the allocation and 
deallocation of variable size se^ents in a specified region. Whereas, the parti¬ 
tion manager deals with the allocation and deallocation of fixed (equal) size buf¬ 
fers in a specified partition. 

The RTEID specification allows executive developers to define their own 
initialization mechanism. The RTEMS initialization manager provides for the 
initialization of RTEMS and the initiation of multitasking. 

The dual ported memory manager provides a mechanism for converting 
addresses from internal to external representations. Dual ported memoiy can 
be accessed at two different address ranges. Typically, one of these ranges, the 
internal addresses, is used exclusively by the node which owns the memory. All 
other nodes in the system must use the external addresses to access the memory. 

The I/O device manaror provides a standard interface for accessing 
device drivers. This standara interface encourages the development of well- 
structured RTEID compliant device drivers. 

The debug manamr provides an interface between the executive and a 
debugger. This allows the development of debuggers that work efficiently and 
correctly with any implementation of an RTEID compliant executive. The 
debug manager provides three groups of features for; debugging tasks, debug¬ 
ging entire ^sterns, and monitoring a nmning system. 

To realize the goal of hardware independence, RTEMS makes no assump¬ 
tions about the ph}rsical media connecting the nodes, or the topology of the con¬ 
nection. To perform interprocessor commimication, RTEMS calls a user 
provided communication layer known as the Multiprocessor (Communications In¬ 
terface (MPCI). This MPCI routines enable the nodes in a multiprocessor as¬ 
tern to communicate with one another. 


264 









Remote procedure calls (RPC) are used in RTEMS to transcend the physi¬ 
cal boundaries of the set of processors included in the system. Conceptually an 
RPC can be viewed as a simple call to a procedure. The called procedure just 
happens to reside on another processor. 

The software developer uses the set of directives provided by RTEMS to 
be free from the problems of controUing and synchronizing multiple tasks and 
processors. This freedom allows the programmer to concentrate all creative ef¬ 
forts on the apphcation system. 

The system calls, including optional managers provided by the executive 
are shown in the following figure [10,11). 


Task Manager 

t.create Create a cask 

t Jdent Get id of task 

t^tart Start a task 

tjestart Restart a task 

t.delete Delete a task 

Uuspend Suspend a task 

tjesume Resume a task 

t^tpri Set task priority 

Unode Change task mode 

t.getreg Get value in tasks’s register 

t>etreg Set task's register to value 

Message Manager 

q.creace Create a message queue 

qjdent Get id of message queue 

q.delete Delete a message queue 

qjend Send message to message queue 

q.uTgent Put message at front of message queue 
q.broadcast Broadcast N messages to queue 

qjeceivt Receive message from message queue 

Event Manager 

evjend Send an event to a task 

evjcceive Receive an event i 

Signal Manager 

asxatch Esublish ASR 

as^nd Send a signal to a task 

asjetum Return from ASR 

Semaphore Manager 

smicreate Create a semaphore 

smjdent Get id of semaphore 

sm.delete Delete a semaphore 

snvp Get a semaphore 

sm.v Release a semaphore 

Time Manager 

tm^t Set synem date and time 

tntget Get system date and time 

tm.wkafter Wake up after tpedned interval 
tm.wkwhen Wake up at spedned date and lime 
tnuevafter Send event after specined interval 

tnt.evwhen Send event at speciried date and time 
tiit.cancet Cancel timer event 

tm.iick Announce dock tick 

Interrupt Processing 

i^tum Return (exit) from interrupt 

Paul Error Processing 

kJTatal Invoke the fatal error handler 


Region ManaMr 

m.create Create a region 

nudent Get id of region 

ncdelete Delete region 

m^etseg Get segment from region 
mjetseg Return segment from region 

Partition Manager 
pCcreate Create a partition 

ptjdent Get id of partition 

pt.delete Delete a partition 

pt^tbuf Get buffer from partition 

ptjetbof Retrun buffer to partition 

Initialization Manager 
ei(jnit Initialise RTEMS 

ex^tart Initiate multasking 

Dual Ported RAM Manager 

m.ext2int Convert external address to internal address 

mjac2ext Convert interna) address to externa) address 

I/O Manager 

dejnit Initialize device driver 

de.open Open derice for I/O 

de.close Close device 

dejead Read from device 

de.wrtie Write to device 

de.cntrt Special device services 

Debug Manager 

dbjrontrbl Control a task 

dbjemote Perform directive on remote epu 
db.block Prevent a task from running 
db.unblock Run a task under control 
db.getmem Get a task's memory 

db^tmem Set a task's memory 

db.getreg Get a task's register 

db^treg Set a task's register 

db^tem Control a ^tem 

dbj^l Set minimum processor mask level 
tfb^Ud Get identifier for an item 

^b^tjtem Gel information about an item 

MPa 

fflcjnit Initialize the MPQ 

mc^tpkt Obtain a packet buffer 

mcjretpkt Return a packet buffer 

mc.send Send a packet to another node 
mc.broadcast Send a packet to all other nodes 
mcjeceive Called to get an arrived packet 


Figure 9: RTEMS Directives. 


265 







CONCLUSION 


The primary purpose of this p^er is to summarize the impacts of Ada 
software development on current MICOM software development philosophies. 
The limitations of Ada in a distributed processing architecture and what the 
software development commimity was doing to complement the shortfalls of Ada 
was discussed. A brief discussion was given outlining how real-time software 
development is accomplished on Army missile systems. A detailed explanation of 
real-time executives in general was provided to give the reader an idea of the 
complexity of the task involved with developing an environment where Ada 
could be used in real-time systems. An example was then described showing 
how embedded computer software has been developed in the past at MICOM. 

Many of the S€mie events that lead to the development of the Ada 
programming language are also the same events that are mandating the develop¬ 
ment of a standardized real-time executive such as RTEMS. The need for 
developing a standard executive for use in embedded missile systems was then 
described. The Real Time Executive Interface Definition (RTEID) was intro¬ 
duced as the first attempt to develop a standard executive. And finally, the Real 
Time Executive for Missile Systems (RTEMS) was described as the MICOM solu¬ 
tion for sdl the Ada shortfalls and standardization thrusts described in the pre¬ 
vious sections. 

It is hoped that this paper will spawn interests in real-time executives and 
standardization within the Anny community. 


266 



REFERENCES 


[1] J.G.P. Baraes. Programming in Ada. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. 
London, England. 1984. 

[2] David Naiditch. Rendezvous With Ada: A Programmers Introduction. John 
Wiley & Sons. New York, NY. 1989. 

[3] Stephen J. Young. An Introduction to Ada. Ellis Norwood Limited. Halsted 
Press. New York, NY. 1983. 

[4] Narain Gehani. Ada: An Advanced Introduction. Prentice-Hall, Inc. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ. 1983. 

[5] Ready Systems, RTAda Real-Time Ada User’s Guide for VAX/VMS-to-68020. 
Ready Systems. Sunn 5 rvale, CA. 1989. 

[6] Peter D. Lawrence and Konrad Mauch. Real-Time Microcomputer System 
Design: An Introduction, pages 482-489. McGraw-Hill Book Company. 1987. 

[7] Gary Elfring. A Guide to Real-Time Executives. Computer Language, pages 
65-70. June 1986. 

[8] Transforming Software Design, From Art into Science. Software Components 
Group. Santa Clara, CA. 

[9] R Vanderhn, P. Raynoha, B. Hansche, and L. Dion, "RTIED: The Quest for 
Real Time Standards." Motorola Microcomputer Division. Tempo, AZ. 

[10] RTEMS-68020/C User’s Manual. G&C Internal Report. Redstone Arsenal, AL. 

[11] Real Time Elxecutive Interface Defmitiaon, Motorola Microcomputer Division. 
Tempo, AZ. 22 January 1988. 


267/(268 Blank) 





- SESSION IV - 


STRUCTURES 






AEROTHERMAL AND MATERIALS TESTING UTILIZING HYPERVELOCITY SLEDS 


by R. W. Nourse, C. D. Perry, 
and R. A. Reynolds 
Structures Directorate 

Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
U. S. Army Missile Command 


ABSTRACT 


The sled facility at Holloman Air Force Base, New Mexico, 
was utilized by MICOM to perform hypervelocity materials ablation 
tests and hypersonic aerothermal tests. Three Mach 5.5 sled 
tests were run to identify medium temperature ablative materials 
which can be used as thermal protection on current and future 
Army missile systems. Over 150 material candidates were screened 
using a plasma arc jet facility and 18 were were tested on the 
sleds. The heats of ablation vs. effective ablation temperature 
were determined and several materials recommended for further 
testing. Two hypersonic sled tests were performed to evaluate 
heating augmentation levels in the vicinity of simulated jet 
thruster ports or cavities on hypersonic missiles. Heating 
augmentation factors were measured and correlated with results 
from several analytical models. Models and treatment of the 
local flow fields were recommended for future predictions. 


INTRODUCTION 


The primary mission of the Research, Development, and 
Engineering Center at MICOM is to perform applied research in 
support of the development of advanced missile systems. In the 
area of aerothermodynamics and heat transfer, the sled facility 
at Holloman Air Force Base, New Mexico, has been an invaluable 
tool in support of this type of research. As modern missile 
systems attain higher velocities at lower altitudes, the 
aerodynamic heating of missile structures becomes very severe. 
The hypersonic sled facility provides a unique capability to 
reproduce aerothermal environments associated with actual 
hypervelocity flight. 


With this in mind, two test programs have recently been 
performed utilizing the sled facility. The first program. 
Hypervelocity Ablative Materials Tests, identified, tested, and 


269 






evaluated candidate materials for use as external thermal 
protection on hypervelocity missile systems. The second program, 
Thermal Augmentation Tests, evaluated the heating effects 
associated with the separation and reattachment of shear layers 
in the vicinity of cavities and ports. This paper summarizes the 
objectives, approach, and results of both of these test programs. 


HYPERVELOCITY ABLATIVE MATERIALS TESTS 


BACKGROUND 


Missiles which fly at velocities exceeding Mach 3 require 
some form of thermal protection to insulate the load-bearing 
structures from high temperatures caused by the aerothermal 
heating effects. Materials such as Duroid, slip cast fused 
silica, quartz phenolic, and silica phenolic have been 
extensively studied and their aerothermal and erosion properties 
characterized. However, many medium-temperature ablators which 
are inexpensive and easily applied have not been studied or 
characterized. To be used in thermal protection schemes these 
materials should: 

(1) be easily and quickly obtainable at reasonable cost, 

(2) be easily and quickly applied and formed, preferably 
in-house, 

(3) . have effective ablation temperatures between 450 and 
1088 K (350 and 1500 °F) , 

(4) have known thermal properties, so their performance can 
be accurately predicted with confidence, and 

(5) have densities less than 1360 kg/m^ (85 Ih/ft?) 


To fill this need and identify suitable medium-temperature 
ablators, a test program was developed and performed by the 
Structures Directorate, Research, Development, and Engineering 
Center, U.S. Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, Alabama. 

This program consisted of an initial screening process using an 
80kW plasma arc-jet at the Structures Directorate [1] and a more 
formal test process using the sled-track facility at Holloman Air 
Force Base, New Mexico [2,3]. The initial screening process 
identified potential candidates to be tested more completely and 
accurately using the sled facility. The sled tests provided a 


270 









means of correlating ablation depths with an aero-heating 
environment in the range of interest. This in turn allows the 
determination of an empirical relationship between heat of 
ablation and effective ablation temperature for each material 
tested. 


PLASMA TEST BED 


The test bed [4] consists of a Metco 80kW dc power supply 
with type 7MC control unit which controls the gas flow rates, 
power levels and cooling water flow to the plasma gun. The gun 
is a Metco type 7MB. A shielded, cold wall calorimeter was used 
to measure and calibrate the heat flux impinging on the sample. 
The plasma gun was mounted in a fixture and the impingement angle 
set at 45 degrees. The gun-to-sample distance was set by 
adjusting the test bed and then clamping the test bed down using 
small mounting brackets. The optimum gun-to sample distance for 
these tests was found to be 31.75 mm (1.25 inches). The 
calorimeter and sample are mounted on a movable carriage. A 
piston slides the sample into the plasma stream for a 
predetermined amount of time and then slides the calorimeter back 
into the stream. The heat flux is then rechecked. Figure 1 
shows the test bed and a sample in the plasma stream. Table I 
gives the standard operating conditions for the tests. 


Table I. Plasma Operating Conditions 


Heat Flux 

2930 kcal/m^-hr-K 


(600 Btu/ft2-sec-°F 

Nozzle-to-sample distance 

31.75 mm 


(1.25 inches) 

Impingement angle 

45 degrees 

Test duration 

5 seconds 

Plasma gas 

Nitrogen 


The materials were selected based on the requirements 
previously stated, and were obtained from commercial sources and 
by in-house formulations. The sample configuration used in these 
tests is illustrated in Figure 2. The materials were applied to 
the substrates and cured at room temperature. The coating 
thickess was 6.35 mm (0.25 inch). After the samples were 
completely cured, each sample was weighed, then measured with a 
point thickness gauge. The samples were tested at the conditions 
stated previously, unless otherwise noted, and the percent weight 
loss and erosion rate were calculated. 


271 





Of the 150 materials screened using the plasma arc-jet, the 
materials listed in Table II were identified as the more 
promising performers to be more thoroughly tested by the sled. 


Table II. Materials Selected for Sled Testing 


Material 

Description 

Duroid 5667MAZ 

ceramic fiber-reinforced teflon 

Chartek 3 

fiber-reinforced intumescent-epoxy 

Chartek 59 

fiber-reinforced intumescent-epoxy 

Avco 8039CX 

epoxy-polyimide w/5 percent cabosil 

DC 93-104 

organo-silica elastomer 

FMI 705 

ceramic fiber-reinforced polyimide 

FMI 605 

ceramic fiber-reinforced polyimide 

FMI CYC 5520.0 

epoxy-urethane w/7 percent cabosil 

FMI CY 5520.0 

epoxy-urethane 

FMI CZ 553.2 

epoxy-urethane 

FMI CZ 3714.3 

epoxy-urethane w/3.2 percent quartz 

FMI CT 7314.3 

epoxy-urethane 


It should be noted that the Duroid samples are included in all 
tests and analyses as a reference standard since it has been 
extensively tested in the past [5,6,7] and it's performance 
parameters are well known. 


SLED TESTS 


Test Facility . The sled tests were performed at the rocket 
sled track facility at Holloman Air Force Base, New Mexico [2,3J. 
The test vehicle was bolted to a two-stage sled system as shown 
in Figure 3. The rocket motors and stagings were selected such 
that peak velocities of approximately 1890 m/sec (6200 ft/sec) 
could be obtained. A series of three sled tests have been 
performed. The first sled of the series was not recovered and 
all data was lost; therefore only the results of Tests 2 and 3 
[9] are presented. 


Test Hardware . The MICOM seven-sting sled test vehicle, 
shown in Figure 4 was originally designed [6] for testing 
candidate radome materials on sleds at velocities up to 1980 
m/sec (6500 ft/sec). For this series of tests, the test vehicle 
was used for evaluating candidate ablation materials. This 
vehicle permits the testing of cone frusta with different 


272 










semi-vertex angles on the same sled. The semi-vertex angles for 
the tests were limited to 15 and 22.5 degrees. The cone frusta 
have been designed to allow the testing of two samples per cone 
at each position, which allows a maximum of 14 samples to be 
tested on each sled run. Sketches of these cone frusta are shown 
in Figures 5 and 6. Sample thicknesses are measured before and 
after a test, giving an accurate measure of total depth ablated. 


Aerothermal Test Environment . In order to evaluate ablation 
performance for these materials, it is necessary to determine the 
aero-heating environment, or test conditions. For the sake of 
simplicity and comparison, the aerothermal environments are 
presented with respect to the Duroid reference samples. The 
velocity profiles measured during Tests 2 and 3 are given in 
Figure 7. This figure shows that the peak velocity during Test 2 
was approximately 1890 m/sec (6200 ft/sec) and for Test 3 was 
about 1920 m/sec (6300 ft/sec). The altitude was a constant 
1219 m (4000 ft). These parameters allow one to calculate the 
recovery temperature, T^, given in Figure 8 and the heat transfer 
coefficient, h, given in Figure 9 for Test 2. The peak recovery 
temperature was approximately 1672 K (2550 °F) and the maximHx 
local heat transfer coefficient was 6592 kcal/m^-hr-K 
(1350 Btu/ft^-hr-'F) . These form the boundary conditions for the 
analyses and indicate the hot-wall heating rate, q, to the test 
cones: 

q - h(T^ - T^] (1) 

where T the heated surface temperature. During the interval 
where ablation occurs, the surface temperature of the Duroid 
reference sample was assumed to be represented by an effective 
ablation temperature, T^, of 950 K (1250 'F). The maximum 
hot-wall heating rate for Test 2 was 1302 kcal/m^-sec 
(480 Btu/ft^-sec) as indicated in Figure 10. The T^, h and q for 
Test 3 are approximately the same as those for Test 2 and are 
therefore omitted from this discussion. 


Test Measurements . Tables Ilia and Illb rank the tested 
materials from Tests 2 and 3 [9] according to ablation 
performance. Included in the table are typical measured surface 
recession depths, char-layer thicknesses (where applicable), and 
total ablation depths. Ablation depths were measured as the 
depth from the original, pre-test surface to the outer bounds of 
the virgin material (char layer scraped away). Examination of 
both the recovered test samples and the results given in 


273 










Tables Ilia and Illb indicates Chartek 3 and 59 were the best 
performers of the group, other than the reference 
material (Duroid). 


Table Illa^ Recession/Char/Ablation Depths Measured from Test 2 


Material 

Surface 

Recession 

(mm) 

Char Total Ablation 

Thickness Depth 

(mm) (mm) 

Duroid 5667MAZ 

0.584 


0.584 

Chartek 3 

1.016 

0.508 

1.524 

Chartek 59 

1.092 

0.635 

1.727 

Avco 8039CX 

2.540 


2.540 

DC 93-104 

1.778 

0.889 

2.667 

FMI 705 

2.540 

1.397 

3.937 

FMI 705 

with Kaowool 

3.048 

1.524 

4.572 

Avco Resin 
with Kaowool 

4.572 


4.572 

FMI 605 

partially 

removed (approx. 

5.334 mm) 

FMI 605 

with Kaowool 

partially 

removed (approx. 

5.080 mm) 

Korotherm 821 

completely 

removed (approx. 

5.334 mm) 

Epoxy Resin 

Completely 

removed {approx. 

6.350 mm) 


Table Illb. Recession/Char/Ablation Depths Measured From Test 3 


Material 

Surface 

Recession 

(mm) 

Char Total Ablation 

Thickness Depth 

(mm) (mm) 

Duroid 5650MAZ 

0.711 



0.711 


Chartek 3 

0.965 

0.406 


1.372 


Chartek 59 

0.813 

0.457 


1.270 


DC 93-104 

1.219 

0.279 


1.500 


FMI CYC 5520.0. 

1.500 



1.500 


Korotherm 

completely removed 

(approx. 

2.159 

mm) 

FMI CY 5520.0 

completely removed 

(approx. 

6.350 

mm) 

FMI CZ 553.2 

completely removed 

(approx. 

6.350 

mm) 

FMI CZ 3714.2 

completely removed 

(approx. 

6.350 

mm) 

FMI CT 7314.3 

completely removed 

(approx. 

6.350 

mm) 


Analytical Approach . Knowing the parameters of recovery 
temperature, given in Figure 8 and the heat transfer coefficient, 
h, given in Figure 9, the heating rate (see Figure 11), g, to the 
test cones can be calculated from Equation (2), where T^ is the 






















heated surface temperature. During the interval of the test 
where ablation occurs, the surface temperature is assumed to be 
represented by an effective ablation temperature, T^, which is 
constant during this interval and is characteristic of the 
particular material being examined. Then, during this interval, 

r, - (2) 


The relationship of ablation depth, a, to heat of ablation, H^, 
is shown in the following equation 


a - 





(3) 


It is convenient to rearrange Equation (2) such that is 
defined as 


H. 





( 4 ) 


Where p is the density of the material being tested, a and a are 
the ablation rate and total ablation depth, and the integral is 
for the time interval during ablation. Since p and a are known, 
measured values, and since h and T^ have been calculated for the 
test environment (Figures 8 and 9), one can numerically determine 
H as a function of T^. This relation should be correct for any 
flight regime having an environment (heating and shear) similar 
to that of the sled test. Extrapolation to a sufficiently 
different flight regime may require re-testing in the new regime. 


RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS 


Using the measured ablation depths from Tables Ilia and Illb 
and numerical aero-heating/ablation/conduction analyses as 
discussed above, the relationship of to T^ was determined for 
each of the materials after normalization with respect to the 


275 







Duroid standards. Typical results are shown in Figures 11 and 
12. In general, the further the curve for a material is from the 
origin in the figure, the better its ablation performance. 


While the curves in Figures 11 and 12 indicate only a 
relationship between effective and of the materials, single 
values of these parameters are needed for use in quantitative 
analyses to predict combined aero-heating, ablation, and 
conduction effects on the materials for thermal protection 
schemes on other flights. For this purpose, if was not 
previously known for a material, we quite arbitrarily picked a 
value for this parameter. These values were selected midway 
within the range of values possible for each material in an 
effort to minimize any errors which may result from the 
uncertainties in T . These choices are shown in Table IV along 
with the corresponding values of from Figures 11 and 12. 

These are considered the best values available for use in 
ablation analyses until further tests are performed for the 
purpose of more accurately establishing effective values of T^. 


Table IV. Recommended Effective Ablation Temperatures 

and Heats of Ablation 


Material 

3 

O 

H, (Btu/lb) 

Duroid 5667MAZ 

1250 

1500 

Duroid 5650MAZ 

1250 

1250 

Chartek 3 

1200* 

1450 

Chartek 59 

1200* 

1600 

Avco 8039CX 

1000* 

1250 

DC 93-104 

1150* 

1200 

FMI 705 

750* 

950 

FMI CYC 5520.0 

1000* 

1300 


THERMAL AUGMENTATION TESTS 


BACKGROUND 


Currently, there is a need for being able to predict the 
heating effects in regions of reattachment of separated shear 
layers associated with cavities or ports. Significant increases 
in heat transfer are caused by the separation of the local 


276 












boundary layer as it passes over the cavity and reattaches on the 
downstream surface. This augmented heating will attain a maximum 
at the reattachment point and guickly decay along the flow for 
both the inside and outside cavity surfaces. 


There are a variety of methods available for predicting 
heating augmentation. The predicted levels of heating 
augniantation associated with cavities varies significantly from 
one method to the next. This large variation in predicted values 
indicates the need for tests to determine the heating 
augmentation associated with the cavities and to identify methods 
that provide the best agreement with measured values. 


A hypervelocity sled, utilizing the sled track facility at 
Holloman Air Force Base (HAFB ), was chosen as the means to 
perform these tests. The heating augmentation levels were 
evaluated by comparing the ablation levels at various locations 
in and around the cavities to the ablation level at a location 
uninfluenced by the cavities. Since ablation depths (for a 
subliming material) can be directly related to the convective 
heat flux, the ratio of the ablation depths in the vicinity of 
the cavity to that of the unaugmented area will indicate the 
heating augmentation levels associated with the cavity. 


DISCUSSION 


Heating Augmentation . The local boundary layer will 
separate from the wall upon reaching the cavity and reattach on a 
downstream surface, causing heating rates to attain a maximum at 
the reattachment point and quickly decay with distance from this 
point. For this reattachment, only the lower portion of the 
shear or boundary layer reattaches to the back wall of the 
cavity, while the upper portion reattaches to the downstream 
external surface aft of the cavity (see Figure 13). Several 
procedures were considered in analytically predicting these 
augmented heating distributions. These methods include a 
theoretical model presented by Nestler [10], two empirical 
methods presented by Kim and Parkinson [10] and Weatherford and 
Sayano [11,12], and an engineering method modeling the 
reattachment region as a blunt wedge or cylinder in crossflow. 


The maximum heat transfer to the back wall of a cavity will 
depend on the properties of the limiting streamline as it 
reattaches to the back wall. For a cavity, the limiting 


277 



streamline corresponds to the dividing streamline of the 
separated shear layer (See Figure 13). Nestler assumes that the 
maximum heat flux (at the reattachment point) can be approximated 
by an expression for the stagnation point heat flux of an 
impinging jet on a flat plat, given by 




0.5X 

"ppri 


P iPdV- £>o 1° • ^ 


sinp 


(5) 


where A. is a free stream turbulence correction factor, Pr is the 
Prandtl number, is an effective shear layer width, p^, U^j, and 

are the density, velocity and total enthalpy at the dividing 
streamline, is the total enthalpy at the wall temperature, 
is the viscosity at the dividing streamline total temperature, 
and sinB is a correction for angle of the step or cavity wall. 


Nestler noted that maximum reattachment heating for 
turbulent separation was found to exceed the predictions of the 
jet impingement model given above. Additionally, he noted that a 
simple empirical expression based on the reattachment pressure 
ratio was found to yield more satisfactory predictions for the 
turbulent case. This alternate expression originally presented 
by Kim and Par)cinson is given by 




( 6 ) 


where q is the heat flux, P is the pressure, and the subscripts R 
and S refer to the reattachment zone and the undisturbed flow 
immediately upstream of the separation point, respectively. 


Two methods are considered for calculating the turbulent 
reattachment pressure ratio. Nestler recommends the ratio of the 
stagnation pressure behind a normal shock for the dividing 
streamline Mach number, Mp, to the static pressure just upstream 


278 







of separation. Weatherford and Sayano recominend an alternate 
empirical method given by: 


Pg _ 1 + 0 .eSATj 
^ ' 1 + 0 . 2M^ 


where is the local Mach number upstream of separation. 


The heat ,flux distribution along the rear surface within the 
cavity as presented by Nestler is given by: 




( 8 ) 


where Xj is the distance from the top of the cavity. 


For the external surface aft of the cavity, the reattached 
flow can be modeled as a boundary layer having its origin at the 
reattachment point [10]. Therefore, the turbulent heat flux 


• 

distribution is 

given 

as 



3 . - 

p3C^3f-® 

t P3^6f-" 



<76 



( 9 ) 


where subscripts 6 and 3 represent conditions upstream and 
downstream of the cavity, respectively. Also, is the distance 
as measured from the forward tip of the test vehicle and Xj is 
the distance downstream of the cavity as measured from the 
reattachment point. 


An alternate approach, resulting from this effort, is to 
treat the reattachment region as the leading edge of a blunt 
wedge, with the maximum heat flux at the reattachment point being 


279 





approximated by an expression for the stagnation line heat flux 
of a cylinder in cross flow [13], given by 


g^-0.54 




D 


P'U.DS 


.0.5 


(r, - Tj 


( 10 ) 


where D is the diameter of the cylinder, Uf^is the local 
velocity, S is the velocity gradient, and k*, p* and are 
thermal conductivity, density, and viscosity all evaluated at 
Eckert's reference temperature T* [14]. and are the 
recovery temperature and wall temperature, respectively. 


The procedures outlined above provide a variety of methods 
for predicting peak augmentation levels and methods for 
predicting the decay of these augmentation levels with distance 
from the reattachment point both inside and outside the cavity. 


Experimental Approach . The sled track facility at Holloman 
Air Force Base (HAFB), was chosen as the means to evaluate the 
heating augmentation levels in the vicinity of cavities. The 
augmentation can be evaluated by comparing the ablation levels at 
various locations in and around the cavities to the ablation 
level at a location just forward of a cavity. Since ablation 
depths can be directly related to the convective heat flux, the 
ratio of the ablation depths indicate the heating augmentation 
levels. 


For a subliming material such as teflon, a simple ablation 
model can be used where the ablation depth is given by: 


a 




( 11 ) 


where a is the ablation rate, p and H are the density and heat 
of ablation of the material, and the integrals are performed over 
the period of ablation. 


280 



since the augmentation factor is defined as 


F - 


^6 


( 12 ) 


Then the ratio of augmented ablation to unaugmented ablation 
yields an effective augmentation factor, F, for the sled flight 
given by: 


F - 


a 


f gdt J Fg^dt 
fg^dt fg^dt 


(13) 


Post-test measurements of the ablation in and around the 
cavity are compared to the unaugmented ablation just upstream of 
the cavity, establishing effective augmentation factors. These 
measured augmentation factors are compared to those calculated 
using the analytical and empirical methods given above to 
establish the degree of confidence with which these methods can 
be used to predict augmentation factors for hypersonic flights. 


In order to illustrate the coordinate system used in this 
report for presenting the ablation and augmentation profiles. 
Figure 14 shows an enlarged view of the pre- and post-test 
ablation profiles for the reattachment region of a cavity. As 
shown, the in-cavity coordinate axis lies along the original 
(pre-test) inside cavity surface, while the downstream coordinate 
axis lies along the original downstream surface. The origin for 
each of these coordinates moves as the reattachment point recedes 
and occurs at the intersection of the perpendicular projection of 
the reattachment point upon each of these axes. 


Test Configuration and Materials . Figure 15 provides a 
sketch of the sled test model. It consists of a cone 
configuration with a nose radius of 6.35 mm (0.25 inch), a cone 
half-angle of 15 degrees, and a base radius of 120.7 mm (4.75 
inches). Also, the test model contains three cavities equally 
spaced around the circumference. The nose tip is made of 
carbon-carbon, the main cone body is a silica-phenolic heat 
shield over a steel substructure; two of the three cavities are 
made of Teflon and the third of rubber-modified silica-phenolic. 
A sketch of the individual cavity geometry is provided in Figure 


281 









16. Figure 17 shows a picture of the sled test vehicle with an 
attached test cone and Figure 18 provides a close-up view of the 
a test cone. 


Test Environments . Figure 19, which provides the actual 
flight trajectory attained during the tests, shows that the test 
cones reached approximately a 2057 m/sec (6750 ft/sec) peak 
velocity. Figure 20 shows a sled vehicle and test cone at peak 
velocity. Corresponding calculated boundary conditions (recovery 
temperature, T^, and heat transfer coefficient, h), indicating 
the severity of the unaugmented aerothermal enivronment are shown 
in Figure 21. Local Mach numbers, calculated for a sharp-nosed 
cone using Herd's method [15], reach a maximum value of 4.4 and 
are shown in Figure 22. Predicted heating rates to Teflon 
(Figure 23) during the test peak at approximately 
1167 kcal/m^-sec (430 Btu/ft^-sec) . Given this thermal 
environment, the expected unaugmented ablation depth in Teflon 
(Figure 24) immediately forward of the port cavities was 
calculated to be 0.889 mm (0.035 inch) by the end of the ablation 
period. 


RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS 


Port cavity ablation profile measurements were made at MICOM 
using a state-of-the-art profilometer. For each port, profiles 
were obtained along five different paths as shown in Figure 25, 
with each path lying in a plane parallel to the port plane of 
symmetry. Actual pre- and post-test profiles for the Teflon 
ports are shown in Figures 26 and 27. It should be noted that, 
within an estimated uncertainty of 0.127 mm (0.005 inch) in the 
measurments, the measured Teflon unaugmented recession depths, 
a^, immediately upstream of the port cavities agrees with the 
pre-test calculations. Using Teflon recession depths measured 
versus location on each port, and the principles outlined above, 
an augmentation factor, F, was obtained for each port location by 
dividing the local augmented recession at that location by the 
unaugmented recession, a^. 


Figures 28 and 29 present measured recession depths for in¬ 
cavity and downstream locations along with "best-fit" curves 
which are considered to be representative of recession in each 
area. Recession depths on the side, bottom, and forward faces 
inside the cavities were small and are ignored in this report. 
Recession data from the fitted curves were then divided by the 
unaugmented value, a^, to obtain overall effective augmentation 


282 





factor distributions for the tests. These results are shown in 
Figure 30 for both the in-cavity and downstream locations and 
hereafter are referred to as the measured results. It is seen 
that these augmentation factors peak at the rear lip of the 
cavity (the reattachment point) with values of approximately 2.4 
and show most of their decay occuring within a distance of 2.5 mm 
(0.1 inch) from the reattachment point. 


The measured results inside the cavity are shown again in 
Figure 31 along with analytical predictions which were made by 
the different methods presented in the Discussion. It is seen 
for the reattachment region, Nestler's method gives values 
(approximately 1.0) which are much too low. Nestler's alternate 
recommendation, using a relation advanced by Kim and Parkinson, 
gives values much higher (2.0) but still too low. The 
Weatherford and Sayano value (2.4) agrees very well with the 
measured value. This may be only coincidence, however, as we 
shall later see. 


Lack of success and dissatisfaction with these correlations 
led to the realization that the reattachment point heating should 
be dependent on the "bluntness" of the reattachment region (i.e. 
near the rear lip of the cavity) and that this region should best 
be treated by modeling as one would the leading edge of a blunt 
wedge, by calculating heating to the stagnation line heating for 
a cylinder in crossflow. This leads to reasonable agreement with 
the test results; shows a variation which depends on bluntness of 
the rear lip; provides a more reasonable decay distance; and is 
good for both in-cavity and downstream predictions. Based on 
these tests, this is the recommended prediction model. 


During the tests, the radius of curvature of the 
reattachment region varied due the recession caused by the 
ablation of the Teflon. The initial diamter, Dj, of the 
reattachment region was estimated to be approximately 0.762 mm 
(0.030 inch). The final diameter, D^, was estimated to be about 
5.33 mm (0.21 inch). The average effective diameter, D, was 
calculated to be 2.51 mm (0.099 inch), where D is defined as the 
diameter which gives average effective values of F^ for the 
reattachment point. 


283 




It can be seen that the reattachment augmentation factor is 
proportional to the transformed reattachment point ablation 
depth: 


« <3^ « « 


1 


( 14 ) 


and the average augmentation factor is then dependent on Dj and 
as: 


fdD 


f 

D, _ 2 

/ dD 


- Dj 




( 15 ) 


This then implies 

B . (, v^ * f 


( 16 ) 


and 

^ . y/^ " 


( 17 ) 


From these relations we can see that initially, or with a 
non-receeding rear lip rounded off to a representative tolerance 
of 0.762 mm (0.030 inch) diameter, the augmentation factor can be 
1.8 times as large as the effective measured value. At the same 
time, the value at the end of ablation (when = 5.3 3 mm) could 
have been as low as 0.69 times the measured value. For 
convience, this is summarized in Table V. 


284 





Table V. Estimated Dependence of Reattachment Point on 
_Rearlip Bluntness_ 



D, 

D 

__ 



0.762 mm 
(0.030 in) 

5.33 mm 
(0.21 in) 

2.54 mm 
(0.099 in) 

B 

4.4 

1.6 


Using this line of reasoning, the approaches put forth by 
Weatherford and Sayano and by Kim and Parkinson, since they are 
independent of geometry, should probably be considered strictly 
"ball-park" solutions. Calculations using a cylinder in cross 
flow model (Equation 9) are also presented in Figure 31 based on 
average effective diameter, D, so as to correlate with the 
overall average effects of the test. Upon plotting these results 
using Nestler's recommended properties for the reattachment 
streamline equal it was realized that this value 
(approximately 1.2) is probably much too low and that in reality 
Mp probably lies somewhere between IL and M^. Based on this, 
augmentation values are also shown for = 4.4 and for a 

"best match" value of = Mg,, = 3.3, which was chosen to make the 
calculated value match the measured value. From this, we see 
that: 




3.3 


4.4 


0.75 


( 18 ) 


The decay of F as one moves away from the reattachment point 
is much faster for the measured data than for the data calculated 
with Nestler's methods. Using the coordinate system chosen, the 
decay of measured data can best be represented by Equation 19 and 
Table VI. 


The measured results downstream of the cavity are shown 
again in Figure 32 along with analytical predictions made by 
Nestler's method as presented in the Discussion. It can be seen 
that Nestler's method again does not provide a good match with 
the measured data. The cylinder in cross flow approach shows 
good agreement using = 3.3 as was done for the inside 

cavity face. The decay predicted by Nestler is again much too 


285 











slow and the measured data is best approximated by Equation 19 
and Table VI. 



F, - 2.4 


( 19 ) 


and 


Table VI. Constants for Cubic Decay Curvefits 


^ A- 

_1_2d_ 

A, 

A. 

A, 

In-cavity 

Downstream 

1.005 

1.002 

-1.31 

-1.15 

0.812 

0.717 

-0.169 

-0.150 


A second test was performed, with a trajectory almost 
identical to the that for the first, with the peak velocity being 
only slightly (1.5 percent) less. Ordinarily, this would lead to 
almost identical results for the two tests. However, the carbon- 
carbon nose-tip came off Test A2 at approximately the same time 
the Teflon inserts began ablating. This caused great interest, 
since the resulting bluntness of the test cone (see Figure 33) 
was expected to cause significant differences in the local 
unaugmented flow conditions. This is illustrated in Table VII, 
which compares several pertinent quantities as predicted for peak 
velocity using sharp-nosed cone (SNC) and blunt-nosed cone (BNC) 
.analytical models. 


Table VII. Some Pertinent Parameters for Test 2 as Calculated by 

SNC and BNC Models 



^tot 

(mm) 

2 

(kg/cm^) 

(m/sec) 


Md 

(kc/m^-hr-K) 

[11] 

SNC 

.889 

4.36 

1925 

4.4 

1.2 

— 

1050 

2.4 

BNC 

.711 

4.43 

1490 

2.1 

1.0 

910 

1.9 


Since was assumed to exert a major influence on and 
since the bluntness effects were expected to cause major 
differences in for the two tests as seen in Table VII above, 
augmentation factors measured from the two tests were expected to 
be quite different. This expectation was reinforced by the fact 
that unaugmented Teflon ablation measurments indicated the 


286 

















appropriate amount of decreased heating as expected from 
bluntness considerations. Augmentation factors, however, did not 
match any of the predicitons using BNC predictions and were only 
slightly different from Test Al. This leads to the conclusion 
that local Mach numbers were substaintially higher than those 
predicted from a BNC model and were probably transitioning back 
to higher SNC values in the region of interest. 


Since many of the flight regimes of interest have peak 
velocities much greater than the peak sled velocity, it is of 
utmost importance to be able to extrapolate the test results to 
the more severe flight environments. For this purpose, 
calculated reattachment point augmentation factors (based on a 
cylinder in cross flow and a non-receeding reattachment surface 
with a radius of curvature of 0.381 mm) are shown in Figure 34 as 
a function of flight velocity. The reattachment point streamline 
Mach number is chosen as 3/4 of M^. From this figure it is seen 
that, even for velocities up to 4570 m/sec (15,000 ft/sec), the 
augmentation factors are expected to be within 15 percent of 
values from the sled test results. It should be remembered that 
for a more blunt reattachment region or for a receeding surface, 
augmentation factors will be much less. 


REFERENCES 


1. Ormsby, P.A., Simulated Thermal Environments for Missile 
Materials Evaluation, Technical Report RS-TR-66-3, U.S. Army 
Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898, 31 Mar 66. 

2. Ehni, Friedrich P., Layout and Calibration of the Rain 
Simulation at the Holloman Test Track, 6585th Test Group (AFSC), 
Holloman Air Force Base, NM, ADTC--TR-75-83, 15 Nov 75. 

3. "The Holloman Track, Facilities and Capabilities", Air Force 
Special Weapons Center, 6585th Test Group, Test Track Division, 
Holloman Air Force Base, NM, 1974. 

4. Ingham, H.S., and Shepard, A.P., Flame Spray Handbook, Volume 
III, Plasma Flame Process, Metco Inc., Westbury, Long Island, New 
York, 1965. 

5. Burleson, William G., Letson, K.N., and Reynolds, R.A., 
Thermal Performance and Rain Erosion Behavior of Duroid Radome 
Materials for Conical Models on Mach 5 Sleds, Technical Report 
RL-84-2, U.S. Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898, 
Jan 84. 


287 




6. Letson, K.N., "Behavior of Ablative Radome Materials in 
Single Impact Rain Erosion Tests, Proceedings of the Sixth 
International Conference on Erosion by Liquid and Solid Impact, 
Cambridge, England, pp. 25-1 to 25-6, 5-8 Sep 83. 


7. McCord, B.N., Calculated Thermal Effects on Reinforced Teflon 
Radome Samples for Cones and Wedges at Mach 3.9, 4.6, 5.4, 
Technical Report RL-85-3, U.S. Army Missile Command, Redstone 
Arsenal, AL 35898, Aug 85. 

8. Perry, C.D., Plasma Simulated Aerothermal Heating Effects on 
Selected Low Temperature Ablators, Technical Report RD-ST-89-1, 
U.S. Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898. 

9. Nourse, R.W. and Reynolds, R.A., Aerothermal Ablation 
Performance of Candidate Materials on Conical Models for Mach 5.6 
Sleds, Technical Report RD-ST-89-4, U.S. Army Missile Command, 
Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898. 

10. Nestler, D.E,, An Engineering Analysis of Reattaching Shear 
Layer Heat Transfer, AIAA Paper No. 72-717, AIAA 5th Fluid and 
Plasma Dynamics Conference, Boston, MA, June 26-28, 1972. 

11. Weatherford, R.H. and Sayano, S., Techniques for Rapid 
Aerodynamic Heat Transfer Calculations, Douglas Missile and Space 
Systems Division, Report No. SM-45932, May, 1964. 

12. Sherman, M.M., Heating Augmentation Levels Around Thruster 
Exhaust Port Frames, Technical Memorandum TM 1016-02, Aerothermal 
Systems and Structures, Mission Viejo, CA 92691, March 27, 1989 

13. Kays, W.M., and Crawford, M.E., Convective Heat and Mass 
Transfer, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1980. 

14. Eckert, Ernest R.G., Survey on Heat Transfer at High Speeds, 
WADC Technical Report 54-70, Wright Patterson Air Development 
Center, April 1954. 

15. Hord, R.A., An Approximate Solution for Axially Symmetric 
Flow Over a Cone with Attached Shock Wave, NACA TN 3485, October 
1955. 


288 



















290 





291 


















Figure 5. Sample subassembly. 22.5 degrees 









SILICONE 
RUBBER GASKET 



Figure 6. Sample Subassembly. 15 degrees 









E*2 



Figure 8. Calculated recover y temperature for Test 2. 


296 









E+5 MATERIAL: DURIOD 5650 



Figure 10. Calculated hot-wall heating rate for DUROID 
samples on Test 2 . 


298 











EFFECTIVE flBLRTION TEMPERATURE 





























5 


Figure 17. Sled vehicle with test cone 






306 


Figure 18. Close-up of test cone on sled vehicle 





TEST A1 
21 Nov 1989 



0-00 2.00 4.00 6.00 8.00 10.00 

TIME • SEC 


Figure 19. Measured sled velocity profile . 


307 





308 


eak velocity 











TEST A1 


H 

E 

A 

T 

T 

R 

A 

N 

S 

r 

E 

R 

C 

0 

E 

F 

F 

I 

C 

I 

E 

N 


1 

K 

C 

A 

L 

/ 

M 

2 

I 

H 


E+2 
48.00 -I 


42.00 i 


38.00 H 


30.00 i 


24.00 


18.00 


12.00 


6.00 


0.00 


Material: Teflon 



Figure 21. £algmated_recoverv temperat ure and unaucnnented local 
heat transfer coeffici ent associated with Test Ai . 


\ 


309 


















TEST A1 


Material: Teflon 
Tj! = 950 K 



Figure 24, Calculated unaucnn ented ablation depth for Test AX. 


312 












3 








315 









ea 






(uiui) «‘HidHa NOLLViav aaansvaw 


316 





TEST A1 



317 





TEST A1 



318 


Figure 30. Measured in-cavitv and downstream,giucp nentation 
distributions for Test Al. 






TEST A1 



i *H0X3VA HOLLVXNHIfOaV 


319 















Figure 33. Teet A2 at peak velocity showing nose-tip mlsslti] 















EVOLUTION OF HIGH PERFORMANCE 
SMALL ROCKET MOTORS 

Robert N. Evans and David W. McNeill 
U.S Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 

INTRODUCTION 

This paper presents the in-house evolution of high 
performance composite rocket motorcases at the U.S. Army 
Missile Command. The rocket motors identified in this 
article will include SPIKE (Single Penetrator Kinetic Energy 
Missile), Improved SPIKE, Super SPIKE, Killer Bee, and the 
ADKEM (Advanced Kinetic Energy Missile) 3.75--inch diameter 
booster. All of the hypervelocity rocket motors listed 
above are high strength filament wound composite structures 
fabricated in-house at the U.S. Army Missile Command. 
Evolution of the rocket motors as evidenced primarily 
through substantial increases in propellant mass fraction 
ratios will be illustrated. Propellant mass fraction ratios 
are used in determining motorcase design efficiency. These 
increases were obtained through utilization of emerging 
fiber technology, integrally wound nozzles, and elimination 
of the forward head closure and pin joint. This paper will 
also discuss advantages of composite motorcase technology 
over conventional motorcase design techniques. These 
advantages include the ability to integrally wind the nozzle 
which permits highly accurate alignment of the throat with 
the centerline of the motor, installation of motorcase 
insulation prior to filament winding, and consistent 
motorcase geometry with minimum machining. 


THE SPIKE COMPOSITE MOTORCASE 

The initial SPIKE motorcase design consisted of a 
maraging steel motorcase with a head closure and nozzle that 
were bonded to the case. This particular motorcase design 
had numerous problem areas. Approximately one-half of the 
maraging steel motorcases failed proof testing due to 
difficulties in machining the very thin 0.012-inch thick 
case wall. Variations in the wall thickness due to 
concentricity problems when machining resulted in missile 
curvature when the case was pressurized. The variations in 
thickness also caused critical flaw size issues to surface. 
Other problem areas included nozzle misalignment, 
application of motorcase insulation, and difficulties in 
obtaining a reliable bond between the head closure and 
nozzle with the motorcase. 

The development of the SPIKE composite motorcase began 
in FY 82. The design requirements for the SPIKE motorcase 
are listed in table 1. 


323 




Table 1. SPIKE Motorcase Design Requirements 


Overall Length.32.052 in 

Inside Diameter.1.754 in 

Outside Diameter (Max).1.920 in 

Propellant Grain Length.28.500 in 

Nozzle Throat Diameter..1.000 in 

MEOP.2400 psi 

Design Burst Pressure.4000 psi 


Utilizing these design criteria, the Composite 
Structures/Materials Function of Structures Direct ate 
developed a filament wound composite motorcase. Uie 
motorcase utilized an integrally wound glass phenolic nozzle 
insert which eliminated the nozzle misalignment problems. A 
full diameter opening on the forward end of the motor to 
facilitate propellant loading was also implemented. 

However, the full diameter opening required a head closure 
and pin joint to seal the forward end of the motorcase. The 
pin joint eliminated the bonding problems that were 
encountered with the maraging steel case. The winding 
mandrel was configured to allow the installation of 
insulation on the aft end of the case prior to filament 
winding. This eliminated a tedious hand operation required 
on the maraging steel case. The winding mandrel was also 
designed to allow the borerider surfaces to be machined 
between centers while the motorcase was still on the 
mandrel. This guaranteed nozzle alignment with the 
centerline of the motor. 

The filament wound motorcase was fabricated with AS4 
graphite and Kevlar 49 aramid fiber. The pin joint on the 
forward end of the case was reinforced with two layers of E- 
Glass cloth and AS4 graphite hoop winding*?. The pin joint 
build up area also served as the front borerider. Figure 1 
shows the SPIKE composite motorcase along with the maraging 
steel counterpart. Table 2 lists the SPIKE composite 
motorcase physical characteristics. 

Table 2. SPIKE Composite Motorcase Physical Characteristics 


Overall Length.32.052 in 

Borerider Diameter.1.920 in 

Inside Diameter.1.754 in 

Case Body Diameter.1.830 in 

Wall Thiclcness.0.038 in 

Composite Case Weight.266.0 g 

Head Closure Weight.46.8 g 

Propellant Weight.1008.0 g 

Propellant Mass Fraction.0.76 


324 





















Figure 1. Composite and Maraging Steel SPIKE Motorcases 

To verify structural integrity, all of the SPIKE 
motorcases fabricated were proof tested to 3000 psi. Figure 
2 illustrates a pressure versus time curve for a SPIKE 
static test, and Figure 3 is the thrust versus time curve 
for the same test. Table 3 provides a summary of the SPIKE 
composite motorcase performance. 

Table 3. SPIKE Composite Motorcase Performance Summary 


Design Burst Pressure.4000 psi 

MEOP.2400 psi 

Proof Test Pressure.3000 psi 

Thrust.2200 lbs 

Burn Time.0.25 sec 

Specific Impulse (Isp).228 sec 


325 



















The SPIKE composite motorcase performance was highly 
successful. Th^ U.S. Army Missile Command has fabricated 
over 600 SPIKE motorcases. There has never been a failure 
during proof, static, or flight testing. The SPIKE 
composite motorcase program demonstrated the advantages of 
modern composite materials in future Army missile systems. 
The composite case proved to be lighter, stronger, stiffer, 
and more reliable than the maraging steel counterpart. 
Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the composite case was 
readily producible and substantially lower in cost than the 
maraging steel case. 


THE IMPROVED SPIKE MOTORCASE 

The design criteria for the Improved SPIKE motorcase 
were identical to that of the original SPIKE motor. With 
the emergence of new high strength graphite fibers, MICOM 
performed a materials characterization program to find a new 
high performance fiber to use in the fabrication of the 
Improved SPIKE motorcase. AMOCO T-40 graphite was selected 
to replace the AS4 graphite fiber on the original SPIKE. 

The T-40 graphite is much stronger and stiffer than the AS4 
fiber. The Kevlar 49 hoop layer was also replaced with the 
T-40 fiber. Utilizing the T-40 graphite fiber allowed the 
motorcase wall thickness to be reduced, thus reducing case 
weight. 

Another improvement to the SPIKE motorcase was the 
nozzle insert. The SPIKE motorcase utilizes a machined 
glass phenolic throat insert. These inserts were complex in 
shape and were difficult and expensive to machine. The 
Improved SPIKE motorcase utilized a compression molded glass 
phenolic throat insert that is readily producible and has a 
consistent geometry between parts. These molded inserts not 
only performed as well as the machined inserts, but were 
less expensive to produce. Figure 4 shows the Improved 
SPIKE motorcase. Table 4 lists the Improved SPIKE motorcase 
physical characteristics. 


Table 4. Improved SPIKE Motorcase Physical Characteristics 


Overall Length.32.052 in 

Borerider Diameter.1.920 in 

Inside Diameter.1.754 in 

Case Body Diameter.1.812 in 

Wall Thickness.0.029 in 

Composite Case Weight.230.0 g 

Head Closure Weight.46.8 g 

Propellant Weight.1008.0 g 

Propellant Mass Fraction.0.78 


327 














Figure A . Improved SPIKE Motorcase 


The Improved SPIKE motorcase and the SPIKE motorcase 
had identical motor performance characteristics. The 
Improved SPIKE motorcase had a greater propellant mass 
fraction, was easier to fabricate, and lower in cost than 
the original SPIKE composite motorcase. 


THE SUPER SPIKE MOTORCASE 

In an effort to increase the propellant mass fraction 
of the Improved SPIKE, the Super SPIKE motorcase was 
developed. Super SPIKE utilized a compression molded glass 
phenolic nozzle insert that had a throat diameter of 
0.900 inches. The port of the propellant grain was also 
decreased to 0.900 inches. This allowed an additional 
227 grams of propellant to be cast in the motor. The only 
other changes to the Improved SPIKE motorcase were the 
filament winding parameters. 

The change in the throat diameter of the nozzle insert, 
and changes in the winding parameters resulted in an 
increase in weight of the Super SPIKE motorcase. However, 
this small increase in weight allowed an additional 
227 grams of propellant to be added to the motor. This 
trade off increased the propellant mass fraction of Super 
SPIKE by 2.0% over that of Improved SPIKE. A summary of the 
Super SPIKE physical characteristics is listed in table 5. 




Table 5. Super SPIKE Motorcase Physical Characteristics 


Overall Length.32.052 in 

Borerider Diameter.1.920 in 

Inside Diameter.1.754 in 

Case Body Diameter.1.814 in 

Wall Thickness.0.030 in 

Composite Case Weight.260.0 g 

Head Closure Weight.46.8 g 

Propellant Weight.1235.0 g 

Propellant Mass Fraction.0.80 


The pressure versus time and thrust versus time curves 
for a Super SPIKE motorcase static firing can be seen in 
figures 5 and 6, respectively. A summary of the Super SPIKE 
motorcase performance is listed in table 6. 

Table 6. Super SPIKE Motorcase Performance Summary 


Design Burst Pressure.4000 psi 

MEOP.2400 psi 

Proof Test Pressure.3000 psi 

Thrust.2400 lbs 

Burn Time.0.29 sec 

Specific Impulse (Isp).238 sec 



Time (seconds) 


Super SPIKE Pressure versus Time Curve 




























Figure 6. Super SPIKE Thrust versus Time curve 

The Super SPIKE program yielded a motor that had an 
increase in thrust, specific impulse, and propellant mass 
fraction over that found in SPIKE. As shown above, the 
propellant mass fraction was increased from 0.76 for SPIKE 
to 0.80 for Super SPIKE. 


THE KILLER BEE MOTORCASE 

The objective of the Killer Bee composite motorcase 
development program was to fabricate a hypervelocity 
composite motorcase version of the 2.75 rocket. It was 
later determined that Killer Bee would be used as a 90% 
scale demonstration of the ADKEM (Advanced Kinetic Energy 
Missile). 

The development of the Killer Bee motorcase began in 
the fourth quarter of FY 88. The design requirements for 
the Killer Bee motorcase is listed in table 7. 


330 













Table 7■ Killer Bee Motorcase Design Requirements 


Overall Length.45.000 in 

Inside Diameter.2.606 in 

Outside Diameter (Max).2.885 in 

Propellant Grain Length.37.000 in 

Nozzle Throat Diameter.1.106 in 

MEOP.5000 psi 

Design Burst Pressure. 7500 psi 


By utilizing these design criteria, the Composite 
Structures/Materials Function of Structures Directorate 
designed a motorcase very similar to that of SPIKE. Like 
SPIKE, Killer Bee utilized an integrally wound nozzle and a 
full diameter opening on the forward end of the motor. Once 
again the full diameter opening required a pin joint and 
head closure to seal the front end of the motorcase. Since 
Killer Bee was fabricated with the same techniques as SPIKE, 
the problems of nozzle misalignment and inconsistent bonding 
procedures were again avoided. One significant difference 
between SPIKE and Killer Bee is that Killer Bee required 
insulation over the entire length of the motorcase. 

However, it was applied directly to the winding mandrel 
before filament winding began. 

The Killer Bee motorcase utilized a compression molded 
ceramic phenolic throat insert and was filament wound with 
AMOCO T-40 graphite fiber. The pin joint on the forward end 
of the case was reinforced with four layers of S-glass cloth 
and T-40 graphite hoop windings. The pin joint area also 
served as a front borerider. Figure 7 shows the Killer Bee 
and Improved SPIKE motorcases. Table 8 lists the Killer Bee 
motorcase physical characteristics. 

Table 8. Killer Bee Motorcase Physical Characteristics 


Overall Length.45.000 in 

Borerider Diameter.2.885 in 

Inside Diameter.2.606 in 

Case Body Diameter.2.764 in 

Wall Thickness.(not including 

insulation).0.049 in 

Composite Case Weight.1050.0 g 

Head Closure Weight.180.0 g 

Propellant Weight.4313.0 g 

Propellant Mass Fraction.0.78 


331 






















Figure 7. Killer Bee and Improved SPIKE Motorcases 

The pressure versus time and thrust versus time curves 
for a Killer Bee motorcase static firing can be seen in 
Figures 8 and 9, respectively. A summary of the Killer Bee 
motorcase performance is listed in Table 9. 

Table 9. Killer Bee Motorcase Performance Summary 


Design Burst Pressure.7500 psi 

MEOP.5000 psi 

Proof Test Pressure.6250 psi 

Thrust.8900 lbs 

Burn Time.0.40 sec 

Specific Impulse (Isp).251 sec 


The Killer Bee motorcase is virtually a scaled up SPIKE 
motorcase. Requirements for increased velocity with larger 
payloads have driven the size of these motors to become much 
larger. As mentioned before. Killer Bee was utilized as a 
90% scale version of the ADKEM missile (see figure 10). The 
propellant mass fraction for Killer Bee is high, but future 
requirements (ADKEM) will need propellant mass fractions of 
greater than 0.80. In order to meet these requirements the 
ADKEM 3.75-inch diameter booster is in the process of being 
developed. 


332 





























Time (seconds) 

Figure 8. Killer Bee Pressure versus Time Curve 



Time (seconds) 

Figure 9. Killer Bee Thrust versus Time Curve 


333 










Figure 10. ADKEM Missile (90% Scale) 


The ADKEM 3.75“Inch Diameter Booster 

The Advanced Kinetic Energy Missile (ADKEM) is a U.S. 
Army Missile Command in-house missile design. The main 
objective of this missile system is to defeat the heavy 
armor threat of today. The reguirements for this missile 
include an increase in penetration mass and velocity. In 
order to meet the velocity criteria, a lightweight, high 
performance, short action time booster is required. The 
ADKEM 3.75-inch diameter booster is being developed to meet 
these criteria. 

The development of the ADKEM booster began in FY 89. 
The design requirements for the ADKEM booster is listed in 
table 10. 

Table 10. ADKEM Booster Design Requirements 


Overall Length.43.180 in 

Inside Diameter.3.600 in 

Outside Diameter (Max).3.870 in 

Propellant Grain Length.37.500 in 

Nozzle Throat Diameter.1.660 in 

MEOP.4940 psi 

Design Burst Pressure.7400 psi 

Propellant Hass Fraction.0.85 


By utilizing these design criteria, the Composite 
Structures/Materials Function of Structures Directorate has 
designed a motorcase similar to Killer Bee in the nozzle 
area. However, in order to meet the propellant mass 


334 











fraction requirement of 0.85, the head end configuration of 
the motorcase had to be modified. The SPIKE and Killer Bee 
motorcases utilized a full diameter opening on the head end 
of the case. This configuration requires a pin joint build¬ 
up area, and an aluminum head closure to seal the end of the 
motor. This design is very inefficient and only adds to the 
weight of the motorcase. The ADKEM booster is designed with 
an integrally wound dome and po3e piece which will 
significantly reduce the weight of the motorcase. A drawing 
of the head end of the ADKEM booster with the integrally 
wound dome can be seen in figure 11. A parametric study to 
determine the motorcase weight savings was performed. A 
drawing of the head end of the ADKEM booster with a full 
diameter opening and head closure is listed in figure 12. 
Table 11 summarizes the component weights of the two ADKEM 
motor concepts. 



44.in 

UOrONDkK UMTM 


Ficmre 11. ADKEM Booster with Integrally Wound Dome 


335 









GRAPMTE/EPOXY UOTORCASE 



) — 


4S^ 

UOTORCAK LENGTH 


ADKEM Booster with Full Diameter Opening 


ADKEM Booster Component Weights 


Graphite/Epoxy Case 
Rubber Insulation 
Throat Insert 
Head Closure/Pole Piece 


971.6 g 

254.2 g 

263.3 g 



Total Case Weight 1902.2 g 


Integrally 


826.3 g 

254.2 g 

263.3 g 


L09.0 


1452.8 g 


As can be seen in the above table, the integrally wound 
dome design saves 449.4 grams of weight. However, this 
design requires complex collapsible winding tooling and 
propellant casting tooling. The Composite 

Structures/Materials Function of Structures Directorate has 
designed the collapsible winding tooling, and fabrication of 
the tooling is in process. 


The current motorcase design calls for AMOCO T-40 
graphite fiber. The integrally wound throat insert is 
currently a compression molded glass phenolic. However, 
investigation into a non-eroding throat is currently in 
progress. Table 12 lists the predicted ADKEM booster 
physical characteristics. 


336 








Table 12. ADKEM Booster Physical Characteristics 


Overall Length.43.180 in 

Borerider Diameter.3.870 in 

Inside Diameter.3.600 in 

Case Body Diameter.3.772 in 

Wall Thickness (not including 

insulation).0.056 in 

Composite Case Weight.1343.8 g 

Forward Pole Piece.109.0 g 

Propellant Weight.7831.5 g 

Propellant Mass Fraction.0.84 


Since fabrication of tooling and other hardware is in 
progress, there is no experimental data to present on the 
ADKEM booster. However, table 13 illustrates the predicted 
performance characteristics of the ADKEM booster. 

Table 13. ADKEM Booster Predicted Performance 


Design Burst Pressure.7400 psi 

MEOP. 4940 psi 

Proof Test Pressure.6175 psi 

Thrust.14000 psi 

Burn Time.0.35 sec 

Specific Impulse (Isp).251 sec 


Of the motorcases discussed in this report, the ADKEM 
booster is the most efficient. This is the result ^f 
improvements in manufacturing, fiber technology, and tooling 
design. The ADKEM booster's propellant mass fraction of 0.84 
is very high. Improvements to this case could only come 
through the emergence of higher strength fiber and matrix 
technology. 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

This paper has illustrated the evolution of high 
performance composite rocket motorcases at the U.S. Army 
Missile Command since FY 82. Systems requirements have 
driven these motorcases to produce more thrust, be lighter 
in weight, and develop an increase in the overall motorcase 
efficiency. A svimmary of propellant mass fraction and 
thrust for each motor discussed is listed in table 14. 


337 



















Table 14. Propellant Mass Fraction And Thrust 
Summary 

Propellant Mass 


Motorcase 

Fraction 

Thrust 

SPIKE 

0.76 

2200 lbs 

Improved SPIKE 

0.78 

2200 lbs 

Super SPIKE 

0.80 

2400 lbs 

Killer Bee 

0.78 

8900 lbs 

ADKEM 

0.84 

14000 lbs 


A graphical representation of the thrust versus time 
curve for all of the motorcases can be seen in figure 13. 

All curves depict experimental data except the AdKEM booster 
which illustrates the predicted performance. Increases in 
propellant mass fraction have been obtained through 
utilization of emerging fiber technology, and integrally 
wound nozzles, and elimination of the forward head closure 
and pin joint. 


EVOLUTION 


THRUST 

(lbs) 



Figure 13. Motorcase Thrust versus Time Curve Summary 


338 




This paper has also discussed some of the advantages of 
composite motorcase technology over conventional motorcase 
design techniques. One of these advantages is the ability 
to integrally wind the nozzle which permits highly accurate 
alignment of the nozzle throat to the center line of the 
motor. Other advantages include installation of motorcase 
insulation prior to filament winding, reproducible motorcase 
geometry with minimum machining, low cost, and better 
performance. The high performance composite rocket 
motorcases discussed in this paper demonstrate the 
advantages of modern composite materials in future Army 
missile systems. 


339/(340 Blank) 



CLUSTERED HIGH PERFORMANCE ROCKET MOTOR FLIGHT DEMONSTRATION 

George W. Snyder 
Robert N. Evans 
David W. McNeill 
♦Gregory L. Johnson 
U. S. Army Missile Command 
Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
Structures Directorate 

ABSTRACT 

The Clustered High Performance Rocket Motor Flight Test 
Program was initiated to demonstrate the feasibility of flight 
testing a scaled model hypervelocity kinetic energy missile 
concept. Four Super SPIKE motors were clustered around a payload 
carrying centerbody to demonstrate the proof of principle to 
achieve a peak velocity of almost MACH 6. This velocity 
requirement is critical in the development of future advanced 
missile systems which may rely on a Kinetic Energy (KE) 
penetrator as the primary defeat mechanism. The flight 
demonstration program conducted at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, 
validated the clustered booster concept to achieve a burnout 
velocity of 1950 meters per second in a distance of less than 
300 meters. This achievement of the peak velocity will allow the 
implementation of an advanced KE penetrator design for the 
Advanced Kinetic Energy Missile (ADKEM) Technology Demonstration 
Program. Additionally, development of missile systems similar to 
the tested concept should allow for a shorter, lighter KE missile 
that will ease vehicle integration and increase stowed kills. 

INTRODUCTION 

The primary purpose of the flight demonstration was to 
provide the initial technology thrust for the development of an 
advancement in hypersonic kinetic energy missile concepts. 
Performance goals in the development of a kinetic energy (KE) 
penetrator missile concept should require achieving peak impact 
velocities of greater than 2 kilometers per second (km/s), since 
theoretical and experimental analysis indicate the maximum 
penetration performance of continuous long rod KE penetrators 
occurs in the 2-2.2 km/s impact velocity regime. Other desirable 
weapon system features require the capabilities to achieve peak 
lethality characteristics against threat armors at a minimum 
range (<300 meters) for the close-in antiarmor application as 
well as up to a range of 5000 meters and also be effective at 
ranges of 6 to 10 kilometers (KM) for an air defense mission 
role. Previous hypervelocity missile concept studies indicate a 
clustered booster concept, which discards the boosters after 
burnout (min. range approx. 500 meters) and allows the penetrator 
carrying, low drag centerbody to be guided to the target during 
the coast phase is a viable hypervelocity antiarmor missile 
approach. 


341 





The flight test program provided early demonstration of the 
clustered booster configuration concept, demonstrated aerodynamic 
stability of the unguided clustered booster geometry, established 
boost error budget and narrowly missed the 2000 meter per second 
peak velocity objective. A lightweight graphite epoxy 
cylindrical shroud encased the previously proven SPIKE rocket 
motors propulsion system to provide a comparative rocket 
aerodynamic geometric shape. The four foot long Clustered Super 
SPIKE configuration launch weight was 18.4 pounds, including 11 
pounds of propellant. The peak burnout velocity of 1950 m/s was 
achieved in less than 350 meters. Attempts have been made to 
achieve this goal in previous programs, but were never obtained. 
This is the first known success to achieve the 1950 m/s in the 
minimum range with an unguided missile of comparable payloads. 
The technology is essential in the development of future 
hypervelocity kinetic energy missile concepts. 

The success of the unguided clustered booster flight test is 
only a portion of the effort to develop the next generation of 
technology for possible use by the Army in various mission roles 
and systems. Future required key technologies necessary to 
develop a clustered booster hypersonic kinetic energy missile 
include guidance system developments and integration, rocket 
motors development, design of time sensitive booster ignition and 
termination schemes, demonstration of separation technique, 
development of deployable aerodynamic stability devices, design 
of new launchers, and aerothermal protection material 
development. 

The conduct of the near Mach 6 burnout velocity required 
advancements in the rocket motor propellant to achieve the 
required additional total impulse, use of ultra high strength 
composite technology for the booster motor design, use of high 
strength lightweight composites for the structural attachment 
hardware to achieve weight budget requirements, and modifications 
to an existing launcher to induce missile spin for aerodynamic 
stability. This paper addresses the design efforts to develop 
the Super SPIKE motors, the technical design issues associated 
with structurally clustering the configuration to withstand the 
launch environment, and the design requirements to conduct a 
stable free flight Mach 6 missile within the safety range 
boundaries of Redston*^ Arsenal. 

FLIGHT MISSILE CONFIGURATION DESIGN 


Missile 

The flight demonstration program consisted of conducting two 
flight tests at Test Area #1, Test and Evaluation Directorate. 
The basic design of the clustered high performance locket motor 
configuration consisted of four SPIKE motors tethered together 
and encased in a graphite/epoxy shroud with a penetrator simulate 
centerbody extending from the front of the missile as shown in 
Figure 1. 


342 











COMPONENT 

WEIGHT 

C.G. 

PENETRATOR 

1.316 lbs 

2.77 in 

EXTENSION TUBE 

0.272 lbs 

10.70 in 

FORWARD SPACER 

0.073 lbs 

17.27 in 

NOSE CONE 

0.300 lbs 

12.52 in 

SKIN WITH FLARE 

1.100 lbs 

32.87 in 

AFT SPACER 

0.073 lbs 

43.24 in 

SUPER SPIKE - LOADED 

4 X 3.353 lbs 

30.36 in 

- INERT 

4 X 0.635 lbs 

28.20 in 

CHARTEK 

2.054 lbs 

28.45 in 

BEFORE BURNOUT 

18.600 lbs 

28.63 in 

AFTER BURNOUT 

7.724 lbs 

21.89 in 


Figure ]. The clustered SPIKE configuration . 

The graphite epoxy shroud encases the SPIKE rocket motors and 
has a 10" diameter base flare to provide aerodynamic stability. 
A chartec thermal ablative protective coating (0.005") was 
applied to the shroud to prevent aerothermal heating of the 
epoxy. Excessive heating would reduce the strength of the 
graphite/epoxy structure assembly and the aerodynamic geometry of 
the rocket would be destroyed, thus aerodynamic instability would 
occur. 


The clustered SPIKE configuration (Figure 1) weighs 
approximately 16.4 pounds, is 48" in length, propellant weight is 
8.87 pounds, major diameter is 5.4" (flare 10"), and the average 
thrust is approximately 8000 lbs. The second flight test 
configuration was identical with the exception of using Super 
SPIKE motors as the boost phase rather than the SPIKE motors. 
The Super SPIKE motors contain 25% more propellant and produce 
25% more total impulse than the SPIKE motors. The 25% increase 
in propellant mass increased the launch weight to 18.4 pounds. 

Propulsion 

The first four cluster high performance rocket motor flight 
test used the baseline SPIKE motors as the propulsion system 
boost phase. The second flight test used the Super SPIKE motors. 
The propellant formulation is identical for both the SPIKE and 
the Super SPIKE rocket motors. The single Super SPIKE motor 
simply has a lower port-to-throat ratio and 227 grams more 
propellant than the SPIKE. This provides for the 25% impulse 


343 







increase, which contributes to the approximate 15% velocity 
increase of the Clustered Super SPIKE over the Clustered SPIKE 
flight test. 

The propellant used in the SPIKE and Super SPIKE is a HTPB 
ammonium perchlorate mix. The ammonium perchlorate is well 
characterized, provides high performance and good ballistics, as 
well as a short burn time. This is not a very good tactical 
propellant because of the contrail produced due to the 
sensitivity in the humidity and temperature conditions and by the 
highly erosive properties of the 15-16% aluminum present in the 
mix. The performance characteristics of the single SPIKE and 
Super SPIKE motors are provided in Table 2 and the single Super 
SPIKE thrust vs. time curve is shown in Figure 2. 


3000 


2300 

^ 2000 

^ 1S00 

3 

w 

jC 

1000 

soo 


Timo (a«conds^ 

Figure 2. T he single Super SPITC E thrus t vs >_time cur ve . 

The squib used to ignite the motor propellent uses a 
IW-lAMP-no fire detonator. To eliminate detrimental ignition 
delays between motors in the four cluster confi<. iration the 
propellant was intentionally abraded. This was necessary to 
reduce thrust misalignment effects during the boost phase. 

Motorcase 

The SPIKE motorcase is a high strength filament wound 
composite structure developed and fabricated in-house at the U.S. 
Army Missile Command. The filament wound SPIKE motorcase is 
fabricated with Amoco T-40 graphite and a 350°F cure epoxy resin. 


Length.32.052 in 

Inside Diameter.1.754 in 

Outside Diameter.1.812 in 

Borerider Diameter.1.920 in 

Nozzle Throat Diameter.1.000 in 

Propellant Grain Length.28.000 in 

Port-to-Throat Ratio. 1.1 

Motorcase Weight.276.8 g 

Propellant Weight.1008.0 g 

Propellant Mass Fraction Ratio.0.78 


Table 1. SPIKE flotorcase Physical Characteristics. 



344 














The motorcase utilizes a compression molded glass phenolic nozzle 
insert which is integrally wound with the case. The physical 
characteristics of the SPIKE motorcase are shown in Table 1. 

The design and proof test performance capabilities for the 
SPIKE motorcase are provided in Table 2. The performance 
characteristics are based on numerous static and flight tests of 
the single SPIKE rocket motor. 


Design Burst Pressure 

MEOP. 

Proof Test Pressure.. 

Ave. Thrust. 

Peak Thrust. 

Burn Time. 

Specific Impulse(Igp) 
Total Impulse(I-t) .... 


4000 psi 
2400 psi 
3000 psi 
2200 lbs 
2350 lbs 
0.25 sec 
.228 sec 
.500 Ibs-sec 


Table 2. SPIKE Motor/Motorcase Performance Summary. 


In an effort to increase the SPIKE motor efficiency, total 
impulse and burnout velocity for the Four Cluster Demonstration, 
the Super SPIKE motorcase was developed. Super SPIKE utilizes a 
compression molded glass phenolic nozzle insert that has a throat 
diameter of 0.900 inches. The port diameter of the propellant 
grain was also decreased from 1.0" to 0.900". The smaller port 
diameter allows for an additional 227 grams of propellant to be 
cast into the motor. The approximate 25% increase in propellant 
mass and modification of the port-to-throat ratio to 1:1 provides 
the Super SPIKE motor with an approximate 25% increase in total 
impulse over the SPIKE motor, which in-turn produces an increase 
in velocity capability. The physical characteristics of the 
Super SPIKE motorcase are shown in Table 3. 


Length.32.052 in 

Inside Diameter.1.754 in 

Outside Diameter.1.814 in 

Borerider Diameter.1.920 in 

Nozzle Throat Diameter.0.900 in 

Propellant Grain Length.28.500 in 

Port-to-Throat Ratio.1:1 

Motorcase Weight. 306.8 g 

Propellant Weight.....1235.0 g 

Propellant Mass Fraction Ratio.0.80 


Table 3. Super SPIKE Motorcase Physical Characteristics. 


The performance characteristics of the Super SPIKE motorcase 
have been validated through burst tests, static tests and flight 
tests. The thrust vs. time curve shown in Figure 2 verified the 
predicted capability to achieve the 25% increase in total 
impulse, which is the area under the thrust vs. time curve. 


345 





















The single Super SPIKE flight tests revealed a 21% increase 
in velocity over the single SPIKE motor and was obtained by the 
added propellant mass, reduced port-to-throat ratio, and 
increased total impulse. A summary of the performance 
capabilities of the Super SPIKE motor/motorcase burst and static 
tests are provided in Table 4. 

Design Burst Pressure.4000 psi 

MEOP. 2400 psi 

Proof Test Pressure..3000 psi 

Ave. Thrust.2400 psi 

Peak Thrust.2800 psi 

Burn Time.0.28 sec 

Specific Impulse (Isp).238 sec 

Total Impulse (1^). 630 lb-sec 

Table 4. Super SPIKE Motor/Motorcase Performance Summary- 
Attachment Hardware 

The Four Cluster rocket was required to withstand 1600 g's of 
acceleration. In order to meet the velocity requirements of the 
Demonstration program, a very lightweight method for attaching 
the SPIKE motors was required to be within the weight budget and 
the performance capabilities of the propulsion system. The 
attachment hardware included a 7075-T6 aluminum forward spacer 
which also served as the kinetic energy penetrator load carrying 
structure. The aft spacer was fabricated from E-glass epoxy 
plate and also served as support for the shroud. The motors had 
grooves machined into the bore riders that interfaced with the 
forward and aft spacers. 





















Figure 3 shows the four SPIKE motors, forward and aft spacers, 
and the fixture used to attach the motors. After assembly, the 
motors were strapped together with T-40 graphite hoop winding in 
the forward and aft borerider grooves. 






















Figure 4. Wrapping motors . 

Figure 4 illustrates the cluster being strapped together on a 
filament winding machine. Figure 5 is a closeup of the hoop 
windings being filament wound on the forward end of the motors. 










Figure 5. Closeup of Figure 4 


347 





The centerbody/ nonseparating penetrator consisted of a 15” 
long, 1.4” diameter 6061-T6 aluminum tube with a steel tip mass 
(Figure 6). 




Figure 6. Disassembled missile. 


The initial design of the centerbody and attachment hardware 
extended from the aft spacer plate to 15” forward of the front 
spacer plate. However, the aerodynamic stability margin was not 
sufficient and the total weight was above the weight budget to 
achieve the velocity performance goals. The reduced length of 
the payload/centerbody provided the required aerodynamic 
stability margin and also reduced the total rocket weight. The 
front spacer provided the aft attachment point of the aluminum 
centerbody and absorbed the launch environment acceleration 
loads. 


348 




Shroud 


Stability requirements and the difficulties in analyzing the 
aerodynamic effects of a cluster motor configuration 
(non-circular) forced the clustered rocket to utilize an 
aerodynamic shroud in combination with a launcher induced spin 
rate of 12 RPS. The design requirements included the ability to 
withstand 1600 g's of acceleration and 3800 pounds of drag. The 
shroud was a filament wound graphite epoxy structure. 



MATERIAL: AMOCO T-40 CRAPHtTE/EPOXY 
(anhydride resin system 3S0* CURE) 

SHROUD 

WIND ANCLE: HEUCAU 22.0* - 4S.0* 
BANDWIDTH: HEUCAL(0.10 IN) 

STIFFFNIMC RINGS 
WIND ANCLE: HOOP 90.0* 

BANDWIDTH: H0OP(0.t0 IN) 


Figure 7, Shroud geometry with inateriai selection and 
filament winding parameters. 


Figure 7 illustrates the shroud geometry along with material 
selection and filament winding parameters. Figure 8 shows the 
shroud being filament wound. 



Figure 8. View of shroud being filament wound . 

The requirement for the flare to withstand 3800 pounds of drag 
resulted in the requirement for stiffeners in the radial 
direction, since the 22° wrap angle was insufficient to withstand 
the loading conditions. A nose cone windshield that tapered from 


349 








the kinetic energy penetrator centerbody to the cylindrical 
section for the shroud was also required. The nose cone 
windshield was also a wound filament graphite epoxy structure. 

Figure 9 illustrates the nose cone geometry along with material 
selection and filament winding parameters. The radial stiffeners 
in the nose cone were filament wound with the cone. An aluminum 
tip that interfaced with the composite nose cone windshield and 
centerbody was bonded into place during missile assembly. 



MATERIAL: AMOCO T-40 GRAPHITE/EPOXY 
(ANHYDRIDE RESIN SYSTEM 350* CURE) 

NOSE CONE 

WIND ANGLE: HELICAL 15.0* - 38.5* 
BANDWIDTH: HELICAL(0.1D IN) 

STIFFENING RINGS 
WIND ANGLE: H00P(90.D*) 

BANDWIDTH: HOOP(0.1O IN) 

STIFFENER WIDTH: 0.50 IN 


Figure 9. Nose cone geometry and materials . 




• / 





Of. 


1 1 



!«■ Pi fi i»i (»T i>i r. 


Figure 10. Sabot. 


350 







The 10" diameter stabilization flare on the aft end of the 
shroud forced the launch tube to a 10" inside diameter. The 
major diameter of the shroud was 5.4", thus a bore rider had to 
be designed to support the front of the rocket in the tube. The 
bore rider design relied on aerodynamics to 'lift' it from the 
rocket body after tube exit without striking the aft flare, 
similar to the technique used with sabots in gun launched 
projectiles. 

Compression springs were installed between each quarter 
section to help release the bore rider (Figure 10) upon tube 
exit. The bore rider was machined from syntactic foam with 
Teflon strips on the tube contact surfaces to reduce sliding 
friction. 

The launcher was a modified SPARK launcher, a platform which 
supports a rotating launch tube. The 10' long fiberglass launch 
tube is suspended between two bearing rings and rotated through 
twin belts attached to a side mounted electric motor (Figure 11). 
The launcher induced spin of 12 rps to the rocket provided 
aerodynamic flight stability and reduced the effects of thrust 
misalignment. 



Figure 11. Launcher. 


Connecting the squibs to the firing line was difficult 
because the spinning launch tube assembly would twist the squib 
firing wires, and cause a possible misfire of one or more of the 
motors. This problem was solved on the Clustered SPIKE flight by 
using a commercially available commutator. A commutator is a 
devise that allows the input (or output) wires to spin with 
respect to the mounting surface without twisting. Due to 
scheduling and delivery problems, no commercial commutators were 
available for the Clustered Super SPIKE test. Therefore, a new 
commutator design was engineered and fabricated to meet the 
specific requirements of this system. This design used a 


351 






rotating copper disk as one output pole and the attached shaft as 
the other. 


TEST SETUP & CONDUCTED TESTS 


Full metrology data was recorded for each rocket before being 
transported to the flight range. This included weight (mass), 
center of gravity (from the nose), roll center of gravity, total 
length, roll moment of inertia, pitch moment of inertia, and yaw 
moment of inertia. This data is provided in Table 5 for both the 
Super SPIKE and SPIKE Clustered rocket configurations. 


Weight 

Cg (from nose) 
Roll Cg 
Length 
Roll Moment 
Pitch Moment 
Yaw Moment 


Clustered 
SPIKE 
16.4 lbs 
27.99 in 
0.005” § 0° 
47.74 in 
69.8 lb in^ 
2425.9 lb in^ 
2441.6 lb in^ 


Clustered 
Super SPIKE 
18.6 lbs 
28.63 in 
0.009” @ 135° 
47.80 in 
73.984 lb in‘ 
2608.2 lb in^ 
2615.1 lb in^ 


Table 5. Metrology Data for Both Rockets. 

The target consisted of a 12'x 12'x 2” steel plate located at 
750' downrange for the Clustered SPIKE flight and 1150' downrange 
for the Clustered Super SPIKE flight. This target was used 
primarily as a backstop to terminate the flight, but it also 
provided accuracy data. According to the trajectory predictions, 
the aim point was chosen as 6' above the center of the target, 
approximately at the top of the target. 

Flight data was recorded by several methods. An 
accelerometer was located on the launcher to provide first motion 
and launch tube exit data. An image motion compensation (IMC) 
camera was located 10' downrange of tube exit to provide tube 
exit spin rate, muzzle velocity, and verification of bore rider 
release. High speed (3000 frames per second) framing cameras 
were located approximately every 100' downrange to document the 
flight trajectory. A high speed framing camera was located 
behind the launcher to verify all four motors ignited and 
document plume size and plume interaction with surrounding 
structure. For the Clustered SPIKE flight, microphones were 
located at stations 100, 300, 500, and 700 feet downrange, one on 
the centerline and one 30' to each side of the centerline. The 
microphones were oriented in this fashion so the deviation of the 
rocket from the centerline could be calculated. For the 
Clustered Super SPIKE flight, the microphones were located at 
stations 100, 175, 350, 525, 700, 875, and 1000 feet downrange. 
At the first two stations, only one microphone was located on the 
centerline. On the subsequent stations, the microphones were 
located 15' to each side of the centerline to provide some data 
on the deviation of the missile from the centerline. The 


352 



Clustered Super Spike was also tracked with Doppler radar, which 
provided a velocity/time history for the flight. 

Two flight tests were conducted between Oct 88 and Apr 89. 
The first test was with the Clustered SPIKE rocket motor 
configuration. This test was primarily a proof of concept 
demonstration, since this configuration could not provide the 
objective velocity of 2000 m/s. The Clustered Super SPIKE rocket 
motor configuration velocity goal was 1950 m/s. To provide the 
program objective goal of achieving 2000 m/s the development of 
larger rocket motors is required, since the additional weight 
(shroud) has been added to the configuration to insure flight 
safety in conducting the test at Redstone Arsenal. 

TEST RESULTS 

The Clustered SPIKE rocket achieved a maximum velocity of 
1700-1725 m/s, which was calculated from the microphone data. 
The initial predicted velocity was 1850 m/s, however an 
additional 2.4 pounds for the aerodynamic stabilization shroud 
and the chartec thermal protection material reduced the predicted 
velocity to 1700-1750 m/s. 

In the Clustered SPIKE, the launcher frame mounted 
accelerometer provided a first motion reference point, an 
ignition delay of approximately 6 milliseconds, and approximately 
57 milliseconds time in the tube. The framing camera behind the 
launcher verified that all four motors fired simultaneously. The 
IMC camera verified the 12 RPS spin rate and that the bore rider 
released without striking the aft flare. The high speed framing 
cameras provided coverage of the flight, showing a straight 
flight line and an extremely underexpanded nozzle condition. 
The microphones provided very good time of shock front arrival 
data, showing that the missile flew slightly off to the right of 
centerline (approximately 1' at the target). This equates to an 
accuracy of approximately 1.33 mils. 

The predicted peak velocity for the Super SPIKE configuration 
was approximately 2150 m/s at a burnout distance of 320 meters 
and an assumed burn time of 0.321 seconds. The Clustered Super 
SPIKE rocket achieved a maximum velocity of 1950 m/s, calculated 
from microphone data and Doppler data. The Doppler radar data is 
provided in Figure 12. 

The achieved velocity is only 90 percent of the predicted 
velocity, however the predicted velocity calculation is ideal 
velocity, which is based on negligible drag effects and contains 
no mass imbalance calculations. Therefore, an obtained velocity 
of 90 percent of the predicted ideal velocity represents a very 
good data point and is within the rule of thumb predictions for 
loss of velocity due to drag. 


353 




Figure 12. Doppler radar data . 

The accelerometer received enough noise from the spinning 
launcher bearing rings in the Clustered Super SPIKE to 
wash-out the first motion and ignition delay data, but the firing 
signal was recorded, which gave a zero point to calculate 
velocities. Once again the framing camera behind the launcher 
verifie.d that all four motors fired simultaneously. 

The IMC camera located 10' downrange provided verification of 
the 12RPS spin rate (Figure 14), the bore rider released without 
striking the aft flare, and the muzzle velocity was about 200 
m/s. The firing sequence of photos in Figure 13 (following page) 
show this phenomena. The downrange IMC camera (at station 650' - 
Figure 15) captured the rocket in flight, showing two very 
distinct shock waves extending from the tip and windshield. The 
velocity at this point was approximately 1300 m/s. 

The high speed framing cameras provided coverage of the flight, 
showing a straight flight line and an extremely under expanded 
plume. The microphones provided very good time of shock front 
arrival data, showing the rocket flew slightly off to the left of 
centerline. The top of target impact point was once again within 
1' of the aim point, which is better than 1 mil accuracy at 
1150'. 


354 

























































Figure 14 












Figure 15. Six-hundred and fifty feet IMC . 


CONCLUSIONS 

The effort required to coordinate these two tests, design and 
fabricate the hardware, and conduct the tests was performed in a 
relatively short period of time in comparison to similar efforts. 
The peak velocity goal of 1950 m/s was achieved in a burnout 
distance less than 1000' with better than 1 mil accuracy. This 
was possible because of revised rocket motor case and propellant 
designs to provide short burn times, and the combined thrust of 
four motors. These tests proved the clustered high performance 
rocket motor concept is a viable concept capable of leading 
technology into a full scale concept demonstration program. 

The development of high performance rocket motors similar to 
the ones used in the Clustered Super SPIKE demonstration offers 
the capability to limit the accelerations to under 1600 g's which 
will permit the use of proven state-of-the-art guidance 
components. Mass fraction ratios of 0.8 to 0.9 can be achieved 
using the ultra high strength lightweight composite material 
technology. Additionally, maximum latitude is allowed for the 
missile configuration to optimally position KE penetrators within 
the airframe configuration to achieve maximum warhead lethality. 


358 





Development of Full Scale Hypersonic Kinetic Energy 
Missile/Penetrator Sled Testing Technigues 


George W. Snyder 
*J. Frank Wlodarski 
Gregory S. Parton 
Donald W. Sandidge 
U. S. Army Missile Command 
Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
Redstone Arsenal, A1 35898-5147 


ABSTRACT 

This study involves the development of a hypersonic sled test 
technique to investigate the penetration performance of Kinetic 
Energy (KE) penetrator missile airframe configurations against 
monolithic rolled homogeneous armor (RHA) and full up-armored 
tank targets. Sled tests have been used to propel full scale KE 
penetrator missile airframe simulates to target impact velocities 
as high as MACH 5. This paper addresses the sled test techniques 
developed to determine penetration and total system lethality 
characteristics of full scale KE missile systems at velocities 
sufficient to duplicate hydrodynamic penetration theory. 

Extensive impact dynamic analysis has been compared with the 
experimental data collected by MICOM and the Holloman Air Force 
Base, NM in an effort to validate hydrocode analysis for KE 
penetrator, guidance components, and total missile airframe 
configurations. This effort has helped optimize the design, 
attachment, and placement of KE penetrators within the missile 
airframe to provide a combined effect in providing the most 
efficient method of defeating advanced armors. 

The benefit of developing these hypervelocity full scale 
missile sled testing techniques is to provide experimental data 
at lower costs than full scale flight tests and be performed in a 
more timely manner. Success in these testing techniques should 
significantly enhance the capability to predict total KE 
penetrator missile concept lethality characteristics against 
threat armor targets. 

INTRODUCTION 

The interaction between Kinetic Energy (KE) penetrator 
missile systems and heavy advanced armor targets at impact 
velocities sufficient to duplicate hydrodynamic penetration 
theory is an area of great interest. Particular interest is in 
the military application of KE penetrators as the primary defeat 
mechanism of threat armors. The KE penetrator/missile terminal 
ballistic efficiency and lethality characteristics are measurable 
values associated with determining their effectiveness against 
specified threat armors. Adequate performance evaluation of the 


359 





KE penetrator and armor capabilities requires an understanding of 
the interaction to include total armor penetration, momentum 
transfer, and the effects of Behind Armor Debris (BAD). The 
challenge to test full-scale penetrator concepts as part of a 
hypersonic missile airframe, to determine the total terminal 
effects/impact interaction, is presently beyond current available 
technology without first developing the complete missile system 
(including guidance & tracking). Therefore, the total system 
lethality of a KE penetrator missile is not only uncertain but 
ignored in computer modeling lethality codes. 

The high launch accelerations produced by guns and launch 
mass limitations have reduced the experimental testing 
capabilities of full-scale high L/D ratio KE penetrators and some 
novel penetrator concepts. These limitations have increased the 
value of conducting sub-scale and reverse ballistic tests to 
validate theoretical assumptions. However, sub-scale testing can 
create problems in completely validating (understanding) the 
terminal effects, especially against the advanced armor targets. 

This paper describes the development of a full-scale KE 
missile concept lethality sled testing technique and provides the 
terminal effects results of the KE missile/airframe against heavy 
armor targets. 


SLED TEST DESIGN 

The full-scale kinetic energy penetrator/missile airframe 
configuration lethality tests are being conducted by the U. S. 
Army Missile Command, Research, Development, and Engineering 
Center at Holloman Air Force Base, NM, High Speed Test Track 
Facility. The sled track consists of over 50,770 linear feet of 
continuous straight rail. 

Two series of impact tests are being conducted to evaluate 
the lethality and penetration performance characteristics of 
candidate full-scale kinetic energy missile concepts against 
rolled homogeneous armor and advanced armor target arrays. The 
first technique, which is the concept addressed in this paper, 
was developed to provide the capability to test full-scale 
missile concepts with an integral KE penetrator and guidance 
components, and a total impact mass on the target of greater than 
25 kilograms. The second approach provides the ability to test 
smaller missile configurations less than 3 in diameter. The 
latter technique can also be used to test full-scale alternate 
(novel) penetrator concepts within missile airframes. 

A sled train (Figure 1) composed of several pusher sleds is 
used to accelerate the full-scale missile body to the required 
terminal velocity. After achieving peak velocity, the 
missile/sled (slipper) release mechanisms allow the missile to 
separate from the sled train and free flight until target impact. 
At the North end of the track, an 80 ft long - 1281 ft radius 
rail pulls down and/or diverts any pusher sled or carriage sled 


360 






debris away from the missile free-flight or target impact area. 
Photo-optics are used to record missile separation, free-flight 
and missile impact attitude (Figure 2). 



Figure 1. Sled Train Assembled on the Rail 



Figure 2. Rail Pull-Down Facility, IMC's, & Target Impact Area 


The main program objective is to validate the penetration 
performance theory of the KE penetrator missile concepts against 


361 






specified armors. The other program objectives are associated 
with designing a test technique to provide the required 
missile/target impact conditions. Specific program requirements 
are to impact the target with only the KE penetrator missile at 
velocities ranging from MACH 4 to MACH 6, and impact the target 
with a pitch and yaw of less than ± 1°. This required: 1) the 
design of a release/launch mechanism to insure aerodynamically 
stable free flight of the missile to target impact, 2) designing 
missile structures representative of tactical missile concepts 
capable of withstanding the track induced dynamic leads and 3) 
designing the diverter mechanism to prevent pusher debris from 
entering the target area. 

Missile Structure 

After conducting several developmental sled tests, it was 
discovered that the engineering challenges of a missile sled 
train surviving the ride to peak velocity, achieving proper 
missile separation and free flight, and diverting sled train 
hardware away from the target area were as significant as the 
task of investigating the interaction of the KE penetrator at 
target impact. The missile sled train design requires allowing 
for the application of both quasi-steady state loads and dynamic 
loads. The quasi-steady state loads consist of aerodynamic lift 
and drag, thrust, braking and inertial loads in the down track 
direction. The vertical and lateral dynamic loads are comprised 
of inertial forces caused by the slippers slapping the rail. 
Figures 3 and 4 represent the load cases for 1700 ft/sec and 5000 
ft/sec, respectively. The loads are based on analysis performed 
by Holloman Air Force Base and are dependent on the aerodynamic 
configuration of the missile, the sled train, stages in the sled 
train, velocity and acceleration profiles, and release 
mechanisms. The lower velocity has an aerodynamic uplift load 
that is not present at the higher velocity. 



TAMGCNT UNC 


Figure 3. Applied Loads - Case 1 1700 ft/sec 


362 






"Xj- »»a 


*34 



M 

1^—TT > I.S 


TANCCNT LINC 


Figure 4. Applied Loads - Case 2 5000 ft/sec 


The missile body is designed as part of the sled train with 
the front slipper just behind the ogive and the rear slipper 
bolted to the rear of the missile as depicted in Figure 5. The 
front slipper is attached to the missile with a band that secures 
the missile to the slipper, the rear slipper is attached by means 
of a chamfered surface to the rear face of the missile with an 
explosive bolt compressing the two together to prevent the 
bending moment at the interface from causing a gap to form 
between the two surfaces. The loads developed for this 
configuration are calculated in the missile body and the 
attachment points for each load case. The calculated loads were 
then used to design the missile body. 



■rasiisiiililvn 
■MJisiisniifH 







iSSi 

M! 


Figure 5. Sled Train Assembly, Front Attachment, Rear Attachment 


The iuiabile body was designed around several parameters in 
addition to loads such as weight, overall length, diameter, the 
KE penetrator it would have to carry, attachment points, loads, 
moments of inertia, center of gravity, and aerodynamic stability. 











Internal simulants had to simulate the flight missile components 
as close as possible with the same materials and configurations 
as state-of-the-art guidance packages, nozzles, etc. The 
simulants served several purposes such as providing the same 
configuration as missile flight hardware, holding the KE 

penetrator, and providing attachment points for the slippers. 
The internal simulants were designed so that they could be bonded 
inside the missile skin without any mechanical fasteners, which 
may may penetrate the skin and break the fiberglass fibers thus 
reducing the strength of the missile airframe. Bonding the 
internal simulants is a key element in providing a strong and 
rigid missile body capable of surviving the sled track 

environment. The design also allows for the internal simulants 
to be assembled from the rear of the missile skin and house the 
KE penetrator as an integral part of the internal missile 

structure. Figure 6 shows a schematic of the overall 

configuration with the simulants installed. 

The missile skin was fabricated by filament winding with 
fiberglass over an aluminum mandrel. The skin lay-up consists of 
low angle helical windings which provide bending and axial 
strength plus stiffness to the structure while the material has a 
high degree of toughness and fatigue resistance suitable for a 
sled test. After filament winding the missile, it was cured and 
machined to the final outside contour. Removal from the mandrel 
and bonding of internal simulants are the final steps to prepare 
the structure for the sled test. The missile is shipped as a 
complete assembly to HAFB, NM where it is ready for attachment to 
the sled train hardware. 


Jll ^ 

MJ7S 

1 .. 

- 

-_LJJ_ 

- 1 - 

\ 


0.000 N.038 M.t1« 


iKV 

!»■ 

iW 

m 

w 

m 

u 


- 

— 

f-1 

<>ai 

(•Bl 

1>BI 

{•Bl 

y ■ 

!•>« 

!!■ 

MB 

■IK 

■SK 

BB .BB. 

m»:m 

’T ; . 

«( 

■Bl 

•Bl 

•Bl 

Bl 

IIH! 

iiili 

s 

NOWCNCLATURE 

e 

u 

0-1 

E 

1*01 

i'.*; M 

m 

1 1 "l.lli i\il 

i 1 ,'i' fiJl* 1 


Figure 6. Composite Missile Simulant 


364 












Front Attachment Band 


The front slipper attachment band design is based on loads 
analysis and has a 1.5 safety factor to yield or 2.25 safety 
factor to ultimate strength, whichever is greater. The front 
attachment band has to transfer inertial loads, vertical and 
horizontal, drag loads, and up lift loads due to aerodynamics 
between the front slipper and missile. A shear pin is on the top 
of the slipper and interfaces with the bottom of the missile skin 
to carry the down track inertia loads. Bending moments are 
transferred by the attachment band between the front slipper and 
missile skin. This is in addition to the tension loads placed in 
the band by the slipper slapping the rail. Because of the 
combined loading, a triangular load distribution is present in 
the band instead of the pure tension condition that is desirable 
for a band of this type. The original band was stainless steel 
.060 in thick and 3.5 in wide and long enough to wrap over the 
top of the missile and attach to the canards on the slipper. 
This band was later increased to .125 in thick with the same 
length and width but made out of 4130 steel due to better heat 
resistance. A block of steel with a slit cut wide enough for the 
band to fit in was welded to the band with three tapped holes in 
the underside for screws to attach the band to the canards 
(Figure 7). 





Figure 7. Front Slipper Assembly - Band Attachment 


365 





The front slipper and missile were assembled with calibrated 
strain gages on the band and the screws tightened to clamp the 
missile to the slipper with a predetermined amount of pre-tension 
equal to the uplift inertial loads placed on the slipper by the 
missile. Once the correct amount of pre-tension is in the band 
the screws and band assembly are welded to the canards to prevent 
track vibration from loosening the screws and thereby reducing 
the pre-tension. A loads analysis was performed on the missile 
structure, internal simulants and '-.lipper attachment hardware 
before loads validation tests were perfoinmed (Figure 8) at 
Holloman Air Force Base. 



Figure 8. Loads Validation Static Test Set-up 


Rear Slipper Attachment/Explosive Bolt 

The rear slipper is attached to the rear of the missile by 
means of an explosive bolt. A nozzle simulant is bonded to the 
rear of the missile and interfaces to the slipper face with a 
chamfer to take out shear loads between the missile and slipper, 
the bolt takes out the bending loads in the structure through 
tension (Figure 9) . The explosive bolt is pre-tensioned to an 
amount equal to the maximum bending load expected during test. 
Load validation tests were performed on the interface by lifting 
up on the front of the missile to generate a bending moment at 
the missile-rear slipper interface. 


366 






Figure 9. Missile/Rear Slipper Interface - Explosive Bolt 


The explosive bolt is initiated with the proper current 
provided by trackside screen boxes. The trackside screen boxes 
are strategically located to insure the rear knife blades 
simultaneously contact the screen boxes at the instant the front 
attachment band contacts the trackside cutter bars. This timing 
is critical to provide a clean release of the missile body from 
the sled train assembly. 

Static Load Tests 

Complete loads validation static tests were performed on the 
missile/slipper assembly. The combined loading conditions are 
represented along with the applied loads and measured deflections 
in Figure 10. No failures were recorded in any of the loads 
validation tests and the static load deflection measurements were 
in agreement with the theoretical analysis values. Therefore, 
the load conditions and stress distribution within the missile 
structure and attachment hardware were calculated and the design 
assumed to be adequate for the missile to survive the sled 
environment loading conditions. 

CONDUCTED TESTS 

The release mechanism for this full-scale missile test 
technique consists of severing (hydrodynamic penetration) the 
front attachment band with trackside cutter bars (Figure 11) and 
simultaneously initiating the aft slipper explosive bolt (Figure 
12) . The aft slipper is bolted behind the missile to prevent 
shock waves from impinging excessive pitch and yaw on the free 
flight missile. In the sled train design, the pull-down facility 
is used to divert any pusher sled debris or carriage sled 
hardware away from the target. All the pusher sleds can 
withstand the forces while travelling down the rail. However 
the loads induced by the 1281 ft radius rail at greater than 4800 
ft/sec, will gouge or fail the rail itself. 


367 





780 LBS 


station 5.0 
TANcrr I 

, STAnoti is.o 
TANcrr 2 


STATKNt 50.0 
TAITCCT 3 


STATION 50.0 
TANCCT A 


STATION 75.0 
TAROET 5 


STATION tOO.O 
TANCCT 6 











Figure 12. Explosive Bolt 


The significance of developing the sled test techniques to 
propel the full-scale kinetic energy missile configurations to 
target impact, at the required impact velocity and pitch 
attitude, includes addressing the associated technical design 
issues of the test configuration and set-up. The missile 
forebody carriage sled concept identified various design areas 
which may have contributed to early failures. The carriage sled 
concept for the missile centerbody (penetrator) also identified 
several critical design areas. These unpredicted failures 
indicated the sled track environment induced quasi-steady state 
and dynamic loads much more severe than predicted in the original 
designs. 

Front Band Modifications/Failure 

The stress distribution in the front attachment band, the 
fixity condition of the joint, and the load distribution of the 
quasi-steady state and dynamic loads through the missile body 
were determined through extensive analysis and experiment. The 
initial analysis considered the front band attachment as a 
classical pre-stressed bolted connection. This assumed the band 
prestress load was greater than the combination of the 
aerodynamic uplift loads and the sled dynamic loads. As long as 
a gap did not occur between the slipper cradle and the missile 
ogive this phenomena would remain true; however, once the sled 
loads overcome the joint prestress load the band is no longer 
uniformly loaded and is subject to failure. Fortunately, the 
Image Motion Camera (IMC) photo-optical coverage for one 
calibration run captured a view of the missile at 4300 ft/sec 
just milliseconds prior to the band failure (Figure 13). 

The combination of the extreme loading conditions induced by 
the sled environment and the assembly procedure prevent 
achieving a totally pretensioned joint connection between the 
missile and front slipper cradle. Therefore, the band does not 
remain in uniform tension and accepts a bending moment. The sled 


369 




environment induces two types of fixity conditions on the joint 
during a sled test. The clearance between the slipper and the 
rail allows the missile/slipper to bounce while riding the rail. 
At the instance the slipper bottoms out on the rail the front of 
the missile represents a cantilever beam fixed joint. In this 
case the connection does not represent the pretensioned bolted 
joint and carries a non-linear load distribution and moment into 
the slipper. Also, once a gap occurs between the ogive and 
slipper cradle the sled induced dynamic lambda loads can increase 
by an order of magnitude and fail the band. Figure 13 is a 
prime example of the development of a gap, which occurred prior 
to the band failure. 





Figure 13. IMC Capturing Gap between Missile & Front Slipper 


When the slipper is not bottomed out on the rail, the joint 
between the missile, slipper cradle, and attachment band 
represents a pinned connection. The moment load will be carried 
by the missile and not the band. Static load tests to represent 
both tne pinned and fixed joint conditions verified adet^ate 
strength of the missile and attachment band redesign as mentioned 
previously. 

Checkout Tests 

The first checkout run investigated the performance of the 
foam braking technique to slow down the pusher sled and prevent 
interference with the free-flight missile. Other checkout runs 
ere conducted to validate the band "cutting" technique and 
initiation of the explosive bolt at velocities in excess of 5000 
ft/sec. These events were then combined and a calibration test 
was conducted to observe the interaction of the braking, band 
cutting, initiation of the explosive bolt, functioning of the 


370 








pull-down/diverter assembly, and to record the free-flight 
trajectory of the missile after release from the sled assembly. 

Preliminary band cutting tests were performed at 5000 ft/sec 
to determine whether or not it was possible to cut a band at the 
high velocity, previously bands had only been cut at velocities 
up to 1500 ft/sec. Image Motion Cameras (IMC) positioned at the 
event location captured and verified the capability to cleanly 
cut the front attachment band (Figure 14). Even though for this 
test the missile body was bolted to the front slipper assembly, 
the cutting technique was proven adequate to release the front 
slipper from the missile. 




Figure 14. Band Cutting Verification 


Approximately 26 ft after the band cutting and the explosive 
bolt initiation the sled train enters the pull-down and the 
missile begins separation from the front and rear slipper 
assemblies. The band and front slipper assembly cleanly separate 
from the missile and begin to follow the pull-down as shown in 
Figure 15, which is 20 ft after entering the pull-down. 
Separation is also evident between the rear of the missile and 
the rear slipper assembly, due to foam braking slowing down the 
rear slipper. The missile is now flying cleanly away from the 
sled train assembly and not subject to any induced loads causing 
excessive tip off. 

Figure 16 records the missile and sled train at the end of 
the 80 ft long pull-down facility just before the slipper 
assembly goes into a pit. The pit insures that no sled train 
debris/hardware impacts the target area. A slight upward pitch 
is in the missile at this point, however the missile has 
aerodynamically stabilized itself over the 300"'’ ft free flight 
distance just prior to target impact and has negligible pitch and 
yaw (Figure 17) . The yaw measurements were made by placing a 
mirror at 4 5° to the cameras thereby getting both pitch and yaw 
recordings in one frame. 


371 












Figure 17. IMC Recorded Pitch & Yaw 


Cameras and witness screens were placed at 25 ft intervals 
over the free flight distance before target impact to record the 
free flight trajectory (Figure 18) . This data provides the 
information on aerodynamic damping frequency of the missile and 
its associated pitch and yaw and is plotted in Figure 19 to fit a 
sinusoidal curve. The damping frequency cycle should be 
repetitive between tests which provides the capability to 
accurately position the target to insure less than the ± 1° 
impact angle requirement. 






'<> 1 ^ 




-- _ ^ 




- / 












































Figure 19. Flight Trajectory Curve Fit 


CONCLUSIONS 

The full-scale kinetic energy missile sled testing techniques 
developed provide the only capability to experimentally determine 
the significance of missile airframe configurations, internal 
guidance components, integral KE penetrator, and other missile 
support structures in contributing to the defeat of rolled 
homogeneous armor (RHA) and advanced threat armor targets. The 
full-scale KE missile concept can achieve the required velocity 
for optimum KE penetrator performance, and impact the target at a 
controlled angle of less than ± 1". The tests have helped 
optimize the design, attachment, and placement of KE penetrators 
within the missile airframe to provide a combined effect to 
defeat threat airmor concepts as well as provide a method for 
testing future penetrator materials, geometries and designs. The 
sled test costs have proven to be one-tenth to one-twentieth the 
cost of a full-up missile flight test. 

These test results should improve hydrocode modelling 
capabilities for predicting KE penetration and supporting missile 
system lethality. Presently, hydrocodes primarily rely on the KE 
penetration and the associated spall effects and neglect other 
structural damage. These tests verified that the additional 
missile kinetic energy delivered on the target may enhance the 
system lethality. 

The results allow direct comparisons between full-scale 
single KE penetrator theoretical perfoxrmance predictions and 
full-scale KE missile/airframe configurations. Comparisons 
between total penetration, total energy on target, hole profile 
and spallation verify an obvious difference in the terminal 
effects of a KE penetrator and a KE penetrator/missile airframe 
configuration. 


374 









Metallurgical Failure Analyses of 
Maraging Steel Missile Motorcases 

Albert S. Ingrain 
Structures Directorate 
Composite Structures and Materials Function 
U.S. Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 


Abstract 

The U.S. Army Missile Command is using 18% nickel maraging 
steels in critical applications such as pressure vessels and 
motorcases. Investigations into past failures of missile 
motorcases have shown that stress corrosion susceptibility of C- 
300 and T-250 maraging steel is dramatically influenced by 
fabrication method and heat treatment. In particular, the shear 
forming method has been shown to impart lower stress corrosion 
properties to TOW motorcases when compared to motorcases 
fabricated using the deep draw method. Also, a moderate 
underaging heat treatment of STINGER motorcases has been shown to 
impart lower stress corrosion properties with no degradation of 
tensile properties. 

Introduction 

Maraging steels are a unique group of iron alloys which 
combine high mechanical properties with relatively easy 
fabrication and heat treatment characteristics as compared to 
many other high strength steels. For this reason, maraging 
steels are being utilized for many missile structure and 
substructure applications. In particular, maraging steel is 
being used for several MICOM motorcases including the TOW launch 
motorcase and the STINGER flight motorcases (see figures 1 and 
2). These motorcases are fabricated by using either the deep 
draw or the shear form methods, both of which increase the 
mechanical properties of the steel further due to cold work 
strengthening. Initially, both of these motorcases were 
fabricated by using C-300 grade maraging steel but this was later 
changed to T-250 grade due to cost and availability concerns. 

The use of these high strength steels has not been without 
problems. The TOW launch motorcase has suffered four failures, 
the two latest failures occurring in 1986. The STINGER flight 
motorcase has suffered no flight failures but cracking has 
recently occurred on several motorcases during manufacturing 
which caused considerable production delays and cost until the 
problem was corrected. In both cases, the primary cause of 
failure was concluded to be motorcase deterioration due to stress 
corrosion. 





TOW Launch Motorcase Failures 


Failure Analysis 

Only shear formed TOW motorcases which were fabricated from 
C-300 maraging steel have suffered failures attributed to stress 
corrosion damage. The most recent failures occurred from two 
separate incidents during firing exercises at Yakima, Washington, 
and Oahu, Hawaii. During such dynamic events, some of the 
motorcase is lost or damaged beyond usefulness. Approximately 
75 to 80 percent (by weight) of the motorcases were recovered 
(figure 3). An intensive analysis of the size and number of the 
recovered motorcase pieces showed that both failures occurred 
from low pressure rupture (6,000 to 8,000 psi) (ref 1). Since an 
analysis of the manufacturing quality control showed these 
motorcases had been inspected and proof tested at a pressure of 
18,250 psi, material deterioration had obviously occurred during 
field storage of the launch tube assembly. 

Analysis of the failed TOW missiles did not result in the 
location of the failure initiation site. It is believed that the 
motorcase fragment(s) containing the initiation site was either 
not recovered or the failure event and following atmospheric 
corrosion attack had damaged the site beyond recognition. 
Elemental composition, mechanical properties and Rockwell 
hardness of motorcase fragments are shown in Tables 1 and 2. No 
material anomalies were found in either failed motorcase though 
evidence of stress corrosion cracking was found (Figure 4). 

Other unique fracture features (which are characteristic of shear 
formed TOW motorcases) included delaminations, shear bands and 
fracture splitting (Figures 5-6). 

As part of the root cause investigation into these failures 
(ref 2), several failure scenarios of low pressure motorcase 
failure were examined. During one such test, the motorcase 
ruptured at 4,000 psi. Subsequent analysis of the motorcase 
fragments positively identified the cause of failure as being a 
pre-existing through-thickness stress corrosion crack (figure 7). 
The fracture, which had initiated on the inner diameter surface 
near the aft end threads, was completely intergranular. Several 
cracks were found in this area which had heavy pitting corrosion. 
Contamination from a sulfur/carbon compound had evidently 
initiated the pitting corrosion which in turn initiated the 
stress corrosion cracks. 

Stress Corrosion Susceptibility Tests 

Immediately after the most probable cause of the TOW failure 
was established, questions had to be answered regarding the 
stress corrosion resistance of all configurations of TOW launch 


376 




motorcases, particularly with regard to newer motorcases which 
were being fabricated from T-250 maraging steel. A C-ring stress 
corrosion test (per ASTM G-38) was performed on the following 
groups of motorcases; 


Group 

Alloy 

Forming Method 

Manufacturer 

1 

C-300 

shear form 

Marquardt 

2 

T-250 

shear form 

Marquardt 

3 

T-250 

deep draw 

NI Industries 

4 

T-250 

shear form 

Dynamic Tool 


The results of the tests are shown in Table 3. Conclusions 
regarding the test data are; 

a. The T-250 alloy has a significant advantage over the C- 
300 alloy with regard to the stress corrosion resistance of the 
TOW launch motorcase. 

b. The fabrication method employed has a strong influence 
on a component's stress corrosion resistance. Deep drawn TOW 
motorcases have far superior stress corrosion resistance over the 
shear formed motorcases. Even variations in the shear form 
method have a significant influence on stress corrosion 
resistance. The higher amounts of residual stress which the 
shear form method imparts into the motorcase is believed to be a 
major cause of the lower stress corrosion properties. 

c. The change from C-300 to T-250 maraging steel has 
significantly decreased the probability of future stress 
corrosion failures of the TOW launch motorcase. 

STINGER Flight Motorcase Failure Analysis 

Failure Analysis 

From 1979 though 1987, the STINGER flight motorcase was 
fabricated from C-300 maraging steel without any significant 
cracking problem attributed to stress corrosion (approx. 29,000 
motorcases). After an extensive qualification test program, 
production of T-250 motorcases began in 1987. After the 
production of approximately 5,000 motorcases without any 
significant problems, a production rate increase was required to 
meet delivery schedules of other contractors. To meet this 
production increase, the motorcase manufacturer (NI Industries) 
increased the size of the heat treat load from 15 to 40 
motorcases. Shortly thereafter, cracking was discovered in the 
"boat tail" section of the motorcase during x-ray or magnetic 
particle inspection. During the investigation, of 44 motorcases 
(out of approx. 11,300) were found cracked. 


377 




The majority of the cracks emanated from the Ortman key slot 
and propagated forward, while several motorcases had cracks at 
various locations around the aft section (figures 8 and 9). All 
cracks extended in the axial direction. The fracture morphology 
of all cracks was intergranular, which is typical of stress 
corrosion or hydrogen embrittlement (figure 10). The majority of 
the cracks had an organic contaminant high in sulfur over most of 
its surface which is attributed to lubricants and coolants used 
during motorcase fabrication (figure 11). Hydrogen embrittlement 
testing (bolt loaded aft end C-rings at 75 percent of ultimate 
tensile strength for 1,000 hours) resulted in no failures. 
Electron microscopy of fractures from over-loaded test samples 
showed a ductile (dimpled) morphology which also indicates that 
embrittlement from hydrogen did not take place. It was concluded 
that the motorcases had cracked from stress corrosion. 
Unfortunately, the attacking corrosive material was never 
isolated, although it is believed that simple contamination from 
moisture was the most likely cause. 

Even though the basic manufacturing process had not changed, 
the stress corrosion resistance of the motorcase had decreased. 
The most obvious difference in the motorcase fabrication process 
was the increase in heat treat load from 15 to 40 motorcases. 

All other manufacturing processes were essentially the same. A 
comparison of the mechanical properties between motorcases from 
15 and 40 piece heat lots showed little difference although the 
40 piece heat lot usually was slightly higher (Table 4). This 
increase in heat lot size had a significant effect on the "time 
at temperature” for the motorcases. The heat treat process 
consisted of placing the motorcases (with fixtures) into the 
furnace (at 900 ’F) and removing them 4 hours later. As seen in 
figure 12, some 40 piece heat lots were at 900 'F for less than 
30 minutes and some heat loads did not reach 900 'F at all. The 
increased mass of metal (motorcases and fixtures) had simply 
overloaded the heat-up capacity of the furnace and resulted in an 
underaged heat treatment. The motorcase is required to be heat 
treated at 

900 “F for 3 hours (per Mil-H-6875H). A comparison of the 
mechanical properties among tensile samples from underaged 
motorcases and samples with a 482 ’C (900 'F) or 510 'C (950 °F) 
aging treatment is shown in Table 5. A stress corrosion test 
program was performed to investigate the effect of the underaging 
heat treatment. 

Stress Corrosion Susceptibility Tests 

The stress corrosion tests were performed using bolt loaded 
C-ring (per ASTM G-38) from the boat tail (aft end) section and 
from the thin wall section of the motorcase. The test consisted 
of three groups; the base line samples (underaged), samples aged 
at 900 °F for 4 hours, and samples aged at 950 'F for 4 hours. 


378 



The results of the tests (Table 6) clearly show the detrimental 
effect of the underaging heat treatment on the stress corrosion 
properties of the STINGER motorcase. Conclusions regarding the 
STINGER test data: 

a. The underaging of T-250 maraging steel (STINGER 
motorcases) significantly reduces the materials resistance to 
stress corrosion cracking. This can occur even if the heat 
treatment has produced the required mechanical properties. 

b. An aging temperature of 950 “F improves the stress 
corrosion resistance of T-250 maraging steel. There is an 
accompanying small decrease in tensile properties. 

c. Tensile coupons from heat treated STINGER motorcases 
apparently have slightly higher strength than heat treated 
tensile coupons. It is believed that the inherent residual 
stress in an unsectioned motorcase aids in driving the 
precipitation strengthening reaction to produce higher 
properties. 

Overall Conclusions 

The total influence of mechanical working and an underaging 
heat treatment on the stress corrosion behavior of maraging 
steels is not very well understood. In particular, the 
precipitation hardening reactions occurring during aging requires 
further extended study to understand which phases and/or alloying 
elements are aff.ecting the strength/stress corrosion relationship 
which was observed during these analyses. 


Reference 1: Technical Report RD-PR-87-7, Investigation of 1986 
Yakima and Oahu TOW Launch Motor Failures, Volumes 1 
and 2, U.S. Army Missile Command, 27 Jun 90. 

Reference 2: Unreported data, courtesy of NI Industries and 
Atlantic Research Corporation. 


379 



Figure 1. TOW launch motorcase. Nominal dimensions; 

length- A06 mm (16 inches), outer diameter- 53 mm 
(2.1 inches), wall thickness- 1.8 mm (0.072 inch) 



Figure 2. STINGER flight motorcase. Nominal dimensions; 

length- 990 mm (39 inches), outer diameter- 69.8 mm 
(2.75 inches), wall thickness- 0.58 mm (0.023 inch) 
Aft end outer diameter- A6.2 mm (1.82 inches) 





Figure 3. Photograph showing the typical fracture of a low pressure 
failure of a TOW launch motorcase. 



Figure 4. Stress corrosion cracking found on the inner diameter 
wall of the Oahu motorcase failure (TOW), 300x 


381 










Figure 7. Electron micrograph of through thickness stress 

corrosion crack which caused low pressure failure of 
TOW launch motorcase. 




Figure 8. 



Aft end section of STINGER flight motorcase. Note 
Ortman key slot. Black radial lines mark the location 
of axial cracks. approx. 0.8x 


383 





Figure 9. Elliptical surface crack found on the aft end section 
of a T-250 maraging steel motorcase (STINGER). 17x 


■ V 


'i 

$..V 






V 




< 


40t-’M 


20KU 00 000 


Figure 10. Electron micrograph of intergranular fracture found 

on a STINGER flight motorcase in the elliptical crack 
area (see figure 9). 500x 









Figure 11. Electron micrograph of stress corrosion fracture 

showing intergranular fracture. Note the contamination 
(thin coating) which contained high concentrations 
of sulfur, approx. 1.25 kx 


385 










Figure 12. Typical (time vs temperature) heat treatment curve which prod 
T-250 maraging steel motorcases (STINGER) with reduced stress 
corrosion resistance, ref. 2 





Table 1 

TOW Launch Motorcase 


I 




CO 

'co 







387 


+ C-300 per MIL-S-47 139, Type II, Class 
# T-250 per AMS 6518 






Table 2 

TOW Launch Motorcase 
Tensile Tests 


o cq o ir> o 
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ c6 


* 




cO 

CD 

c 

i2 

UJ 


o> 

c: 

2 

CO 

e 


CO 

ro 

0- 

2 



CNJ 

CVJ 

00 

CO 

CVJ 

c\i 

<N 

lO 

c> 

cvj 

CO 

CO 

CvJ 

CO 

CO 


o 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 







<N 



CO 

CO 

o 

CD 

CVJ 



CO 

05 

CSJ 

CVJ 

CO^ 

CO 

CO 


CN 

CVJ* 

CVJ* 

CVJ* 

CVJ* 

CVJ* 













CD 

CVJ 

LO 

1^ 

cq 




CD* 

ID 

LO 



c 

■© 



CO 

CO 


C75 

© 

w 



CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CVJ 

CO 

© 




'— 




Q. 




CO 

CD 

rl* 

s 

2 


00 



LO 

lO 

>- 




CO 

CO 

CO 

o 




CVJ* 

CVJ* 

cvT 

cvT 

CVJ* 


(0 

E 


CVJ 


CVJ 

o 

3 

3 


•*-> 

LO 



JZ. 

CO 

CO 

CVJ 

CO 

CO 

CO 

(D 

05 

1 

> 

o 

o 

1- 

1- 

1- 


o 


e 

E 

CO 

o 

00 


to 

to 

$ 


c 

(D 

E 

© 


a> CO 

© © 

~ w 

CD 

© x: _ 
a g © 

sz © 
o © w 

- E ® 
w ro -n 

E ” .92 

C CO ^ 

rt § ^ 
c cvj 

cvj 2 

* @ 


O O 

¥ f 

LO CO 
to LO 
I I 
CNI O 
iTj LO 

© . . 
e E 

to TO 
© W 

o o 

O LO 
CO C\J 
I I 

a I- 


a H- 


o o 
m m 

TO w 
© © 
c c 

■2 '2 
ro © 
^ x: 


© © 

II 

8 8 

cc tr 


388 


Tests I &2 are comparitive samples from an unfailed 
C-300 motorcase 







Table 3 

TOW C RING SALT SPRAY DATA 
Method-ASTM G-38 

Average Time to Failure in Hours 


GROUP 1 GROUP 2 


SAMPLE 

50k8l 

75ksi 

lOOksi 

SAMPLE 

50k8i 


75k8i 

100k8i 

1 

3117 

403 

240 

1 

6094 

• 

4500 

1032 

2 

913 

187 

179 

2 

6094 

• 

4124 

1428 

3 

941 

641 

227 

3 

6094 

« 

2015 

323 

4 

3616 

575 

227 

4 

6094 

« 

3584 

384 

5 

4520 

355 

192 

5 

6094 

» 

1267 

704 

6 

2901 

571 

179 

6 

6094 

• 

2015 

2220 

7 

3117 

713 

168 

7 

4685 


1023 

1296 

8 

2811 

669 

132 

8 

6094 

» 

2111 

740 

9 

5136 

427 

132 

9 

6094 

» 

2901 

1152 

10 

4572 

499 

132 

10 

6094 

• 

2263 

344 

AVG 

3184 

504 

181 

AVG > 

5973 


2562 

962 

STD 

1354.2 

154.3 

39.0 

STD 

363 


1108.0 

565.0 




GROUP 3 





GROUP 4 


SAMPLE 

50k8i 


75kai 


lOOksi 

SAMPLE 

50k8l 


75k8i 

lOOksi 

1 

6094 

« 

6114 

• 

2733 ** 

1 

6094 

» 

2916 

323 

2 

6094 

• 

6114 

« 

704 

2 

4712 


885 

132 

3 

6094 

• 

6114 

« 

2733 »• 

3 

6094 

> 

1895 

179 

4 

6094 

• 

6114 

« 

260 

4 

6094 

« 

933 

323 

5 

6094 

« 

5160 


1719 

5 

5800 


1363 

227 

6 

6094 

• 

4500 


2440 

6 

6094 

« 

1703 

280 

7 

6094 

« 

6114 

• 

1733 

7 

6094 

• 

1009 

280 

8 

6094 

• 

4966 


972 

6 

4572 


1363 

560 

9 

6094 

« 

6114 

ff 

2592 

9 

6094 

« 

785 

368 

10 

6094 

» 

6114 

> 

2124 

10 

6094 

» 

2425 

280 

AVG > 

6094 

> 

5743 


1603 

AVG > 

5774 


1528 

295 

STD 

0 


587 


842 

STD 

574 


674 

111 


Group 1 = Marquardt C-300 
Group 2 = Marquardt T-250 
Group 3 = Norris T-250 
Group 4 = Dynamic T-250 
• = No Failure 

•• = No Failure. Samples removed early. 


389 












Table 4 

Tensile Properties 
STINGER Fiight Motorcase 






390 








Table 5 

Affect of Aging Temperature on Tensile Properties 

STINGER Flight Motorcase 



391 


Table 6 

Stress Corrosion Tests 
T-250 Maraging Steel 



CD > 


CL O 
O 

"D 
_ C 

O ® 

■g 

“ o 

cp ^ 
^ CO 

f| 

^ E 
% -9 




392 


hJominal thickness of barrel section was 0.58 mm (0.023 inch). Barrel section 
samples were stressed to 689 MPa (100 ksi). 






- SESSION V - 

SYSTEM SIMULATION AND AEROBALLISTICS 




MISSION AUGMENTED AIRBORNE PLATFORM: APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE TO AIR DEFENSE SYSTEMS 


Dr. Willard M. Holmes 
US Army Missile Command 
Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
Redstone Arsenal AL 35898 


ABSTRACT 

A need exist to develop methods and techniques for enhancing the survivability rate of Au¬ 
tonomous Airborne Platforms (AAP) traversing a high density threat battlefield en-route to 
achieving mission objectives. The Mission Augmented Airborne Platform (MAAP) program is 
a research and development effort in response to this identified need. An autonomous vehicle 
operating on a programmed route or table driven mode of operation has advantages in less in¬ 
tense environments. Operating in a more complex environment requires the use of intelligent 
threat avoidance tactics to increase survivability rates. Typically, more intelligent decision mak¬ 
ing requires an increase in both the quality and quantity of knowledge. 

The autonomous nature of the platform restricts the options available for knowledge acqui¬ 
sition and time dependent decisions involving changing situational data and temporal knowledge 
bases. For unmanned autonomous systems this provides limited options: specifically, data and 
expert knowledge must be installed in the platform prior to initiating the mission; second, on 
board passive sensors must provide current situational data during mission operation; third, the 
up dated knowledge base must be used by a “Reasoning System” to accomplish situational 
assessment and generate intelligent actions to achieve threat avoidance. 


INTRODUCTION 


OVERVIEW 

New and emerging mission requirements in the modem tactical battlefield dictates that new 
and emerging technologies be re-examined in context of finding new solutions to traditional 
problem areas. The MAAP program is a research and development effort to examine the appli¬ 
cation of knowledge based expert systems to the operation of an autonomous airborne platform. 
The effective application of the knowledge based system is context sensitive or domain depen¬ 
dent due to the Imowledge base requirements for expert system operation. 

Establishing a degree of bounds on the scenario used in this research, some basic assump¬ 
tion were made about the platform operation and the related battlefield environment: the first 
priority in achieving mission objectives is to survive battlefield threats through threat avoidance 
operations; second, for autonomous system operation there will be no ground based or opera¬ 
tional environment signals generated specifically for the airborne platform; third, the platform 
will have a number of practical sensors on board for sensing the operating environment; and 
fourth, some knowledge about threat signatures are known prior to vehicle launch, but very lim¬ 
ited knowledge about threat locations is available to the system prior to launch. 


393 






For purposes of concept explanation, a functional diagram of the MAAP system operation 
is shown in Figure 1. The Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite constellation is available to 
provide location in space, time and velocity information of the platform. This information is 
available through on board GPS receivers. More details on this information will be provided in 
a later section. As indicated in Figure 1, direction of data flow to the GPS is bidirectional for the 
battlefield environment. This is to indicate that the GPS signal is broadcast to the battlefield en¬ 
vironment, but the battlefield can have the effect of jamming the GPS receivers on the plaiform. 


Bidirectional data flow is shown bet'" cen the platform and the expert system. This indi¬ 
cates the state of the platform is sent to the expert system knowledge base. With inputs from the 
battlefield environment through inboard sensors, the expert system reasons about collective sta¬ 
tus of the threat environment, platform states, and mission objectives. The results are appropri¬ 
ate maneuver commands to the platform for avoidance of the perceived threat. The platform in¬ 
board sensors include a five channel GPS receiver, a threat detector, and an inertial system that 
can stand alone or augment GPS operation. The MAAP system has an operationally degraded 
capability without GPS operation. The system can also operate in a basic mission mode without 
benefit of expert system operations. 



Figure 1. Functional Operation of MAAP. 


SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 

MAAP SYSTEM OPERATION 

Before providing specifics on knowledge based system development and operation, it is 
necessary to provide an overview of the context of the MAAP system operations. One objective 
of the MAAP task is to develop a concept that will enhance the survival rate of an AAP while 
traversing a high density threat battlefield environment. As used here the term “autonomous” is 
defined to include the ability to sense the environment surrounding the platform but not radiating 
any electronic signals. This also excludes receiving any signal specifically generated and di¬ 
rected toward the platform for purposes of guidance or command. 

The concept model developed here is defined in terms of two entities; an operating environ¬ 
ment; and an AAP. Each of these entities is modularly structured and will be discussed in a later 









section in terms of the associated major modules. In general the environment entity includes 
models of the GPS satellite constellation, battlefield threat lay down with associated terrain of 
interest, and the mission objective targets. The platform entity includes models of the platform 
structure, threat detectors/ sensors, an inertial measuring unit, a digital terrain map, and a knowl¬ 
edge based reasoning unit. 

A representative MAAP operation is depicted in Figure 2. Typical operation would include 
the platform having certain information installed on board prior to launch. An example would 
be, in addition to mission target location, signatures of expected threats and related informrtion. 
As the platform enters the threat environment, the threat detector senses signals to determine the 
nature of the threat-ground based signal jammer, surface-to-air-missile (SAM) target detection 
or engagement radars. After assessing the situation, one tactic might be to go into a terrain fol¬ 
lowing mode to avoid missile engagement or fly up with minimum maneuvers to avoid jammers 
signal coupling into the GPS antenna on top of the platform. 



Figure 2. AAP Performance Environment. 

ENTVrRONMENT OF PLATFORM OPERATION 
GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM 

The Navstar Global Positioning System (GPS) is a high-precision, worldwide network of 
orbiting navigation satellites. The final baseline constellation of 21 satellites (18 operational sat¬ 
ellites with three spares) will operate in 12-hour orbits at an altitude of 20,183km (10,989nmi). 

It will provide visibility of 6 to 12 satellites at 5 degrees or more above the horizon to users any- 


395 





















where in the world at any time. Typical orbits of the satellites are shown in Figure 3. With a 
four satellite constellation, highly accurate position, velocity and time is available to users 
equipped with suitable GPS receivers. Topical accuracies quoted for user equipment operating 
in P code are: positioning to 10 meters PMS in each axis; velocity to 0.1 meters/second in each 
axis; and time to 0.1 microseconds. Even more accurate positioning information has been re¬ 
ported using differential techniques^ The GPS system has been under development and opera¬ 
tional verification by the Defense Department since the early 1960s. 



Figure 3. Navstar Global Positioning System. 

EARTH AND TERRAIN MODELS 

Single and multi-channel GPS signal receivers process and display position solution in 
World Geodetic System coordinates. Developing a GPS model for simulation and analysis 
would offer advantages using an earth centered coordinate reference system with geodetic coor¬ 
dinates of longitude, latitude and altitude. This approach requires special consideration in forms 
of additional matrix transformation for displaying information in local coordinates at user 


^ Blackwell, Earl G.,“Overview of Differential GPS Methods”, Navigation Journal of The 
Institute of Navigation, Vol. 32, No. 2, Summer 1985, pp 114 - 125. 


396 






locations^. The terrain model along with the earth centered geodetic coordinates system is used 
in accomplishing terrain following maneuvers for specific threat avoidance. The missile posi¬ 
tion is defined in geodetic coordinates (longitude, latitude, altitude) while velocity and accelera¬ 
tion are defined in local (north, east, down) coordinates. 

THREATS 

Two types of threats are assumed for the MAAP conceptual model development: jammers 
and SAM systems. The jammers are wide band and have beams that can be directed toward sec¬ 
tors of the battlefield. The SAMs have two radars with different frequencies to accomplish 
tracking and engagement functions. These factors plus other related information will be instru¬ 
mental in identifying the threat capability associated with a particular site. While the SAMs are 
ground based, the jammers may be located at different altitudes but are not mobile or moving 
during the scenario operation. The location and activation of the threats in the battlefield will be 
a random event, specifically, the platform will have no knowledge of the threat location in ad¬ 
vance of detection. The major function of the jammers is to block or or cause a degraded opera¬ 
tion of the GPS receiver on the platform. 

PLATFORM OPERATION 

PLATFORM MODEL 

The platform operation is simulated with a six-degree-of-freedom model. The vehicle ve¬ 
locity profile is that of a typical slow flying craft with low level thrust capabilities. This as¬ 
sumption is included as part of the model to provide worst case condition for the reasoning mod¬ 
ule to develop avoidance tactics and minimize the critical time response required for real-time 
operation. Platform guidance can be accomplished in one of three modes: way point guidance, 
closed loop guidance, or a combination of both modes. The mode of operation can be controlled 
internally. The platform subsystems include: a five channel GPS receiver, a threat detector, and 
an inertial measuring unit. 

GPS RECEIVERS 

The above quoted accuracies in position and time requires the use of a five channel receiver 
system. Four of the channels are dedicated to tracking on a continuous basis the four satellite 
frequency signals. The fifth channel sequences amount the different frequency transmissions 
from the four satellites to provide ionospheric delay compensations. Receiving data from four 
satellites simultaneously, the process is essentially to solve four unknowns with four equations. 
Early version of GPS receiver stations were complex and to bulky to put on board of only large 
platforms. With advances in digital circuity and microminiaturization, presently five channel 
receivers occupy a few cubic inches and weigh less than five pounds. ’ITiis new weight and vol¬ 
ume allows GPS receivers to be used for operation not feasible before, i.e., high performance 
aircraft, missile guidance systems and infantry patrols^. This new development in size and 
weight makes it possible to include GPS in the MAAP system. 


^ The Analytical Sciences Corporation, “Autonomous Platform Operation Phase II Software 
Users Manual”, Prepared for US Army Missile Command, Huntsville, AL, Purchase Order No. 
701603, 22 May 1989. 

^ Boutacoff, David A., “Navstar Forecast: Cloudy Now, Clearing Later”, Defense Electronics, 
May 1986, pp 90 - 100. 


397 





Included in the GPS satellite models are representations of the random noise associated 
with the actual signals at the location of interest. To achieve improved operation using the GPS 
noisy signals and improved signal-to-noise ratios, Kalman filters are included as part of the sig¬ 
nal processing on board the platform. 

mEBTIAL MEASURING UNIT 

An inertial strapdown measuring unit is modeled in the platform operations. The model is 
modular structured such that parameters of different quality gyros and accelerometers can be in¬ 
cluded for GPS aided operation or platform operation without GPS. 

THREAT DETECTOR 

The sensor or threat detector monitors the RF environment of the platform and reports the 
results to the knowledge base for use in the expert system operations. Tbe detected threat signa¬ 
tures can be resolved into specific information about the threat operation; Assumptions about the 
threat detector’s capabilities include: 

• A wide band receiver and signal processing to identify SAM sites and jammers 
from the detected signal; 

• An approximate direction of the threat site from the platform; 

• An approximate range from the platform to the threat site; 

• An estimation of the power radiated from the jammers and SAM system radars. 

For purposes of providing threat reference knowledge to the expert system, the angular sec¬ 
tion in front of the platform is divided into angular sectors. Each sector is assigned a weighting 
function. As threats enter different sectors, appropriate weighting functions are added to indi¬ 
cate the nature of the threat. Topical sector designations are depicted in Figure 4. 



STAR 3 






In those instances where the GPS constellation shows degraded operation for a short period 
of time then the instrument of interest for GPS aiding is the altimeter. Degraded GPS operations 
are caused by poor geometry of satellites visible at locations of concern or the satellites are co- 
planar and cannot provide sufficient independent information to yield a meaningful position and 
time fix. This same type degraded operation occurs when a satellite fails, or when a satellite is 
shadowed by local terrain or by the vehicle carrying the GPS antenna. Since autonomous opera¬ 
tion is the mode of MAAP operation, active devices such as radar altimeters are eliminated. The 
Baroaltimeter is the instrument of choice for this analysis. Reported results show that it is possi¬ 
ble to use the Baroaltimeter as a source of information, i.e., altitude, when combined with sig¬ 
nals from three satellites to yield successful navigation solutions. A model of a Baroaltimeter is 
included in the platform simulation model. 

KNOWLEDGE BASED SYSTEM 


The MAAP reasoning module contains rules and an associated knowledge base to reason 
about the threats and best tactics to avoid the identified threats and produce guidance maneuver 
commands to execute the specific tactics. In general the rules are divided into five classes: 

• Waypoint Sector Rules 

• Jammer Response Rules 

• SAM Response Rules 

• Sector Cost Evaluation Rules 

• Data I/O Rules. 

The Waypoint Sector Rules fire when facts pertaining to the location of the next Waypoint/ 
target are asserted. These facts take the form: 

way-sector SECTOR 

where sector is one of the sector designations in Figure 4, indicating the sector in which the next 
Waypoint/target lies. The action taken by the Waypoint Sector Rules 5 is assign cost to each 
sector directly proportional to their displacement from the Waypoint/target sector. In the ab¬ 
sence of any threats, this rule effectively results in the expert system recommending that the 
platform proceed directly to the Waypoint/target. 

Jammer Response Rules fire when facts pertaining to the presence of jamming are asserted. 
These facts take the form: 

jammer LEVEL 

where LEVEL is either “high,” “medium,” “low,” or “clear” indicating the amount of jammer 
power entering the GPS receiver. The action taken by the Jammer Response Rules is to return a 
message to the platform guidance indicating the set clearance to be used for terrain following. 
The set clearances specified are designated as low, medium, and high, according to jammer lev¬ 
el. No message to commence terrain-following flight is issued - only a set clearance to assume 
in the event that the platform enters that mode. Here the platform is assumed to be autonomous, 
with no active sensor to aid in terrain following flight, terrain elevation in advance of the flight 





path is determined from knowledge of position and heading from the navigation system, and an 
on-board digital map of terrain elevations. This concept is known as “passive terrain follow¬ 
ing'*.” In the presence of jamming, GPS accuracy will degrade and disrupt terrain following. In 
this instance, it is necessary to increase the set clearances to avoid crashing. 

SAM response rules fire when facts pertaining to the report of SAM threats are asserted. 
These facts take the form: 


sam RANGE SECTOR 

where RANGE is either “near or ’’far” and SECTOR is as described above. The near/far field 
indicates whether the platform is within/outside the operating range of the SAM site. The SAM 
site is assumed to have detection and/or ranging radar that detects targets that are beyond the en¬ 
gagement range of the missiles. It is also assumed that a second radar is used to engage a target 
when within specified bounds. The threat detector can discriminate between the different fre¬ 
quencies. The “far” range indicates the platform has been detected but not engaged. Any eva¬ 
sive action taken at this point will be influenced by other threats either active or known to exist 
by previous encounters. 

The “near” range indicates the platform in engageable by a SAM and has a fixed amount of 
time to take evasive action. One tactic available to the reasoning module when the “near” mes¬ 
sage is received is to immediately transmit to the platform to commence terrain-following flight, 
if not already in that mode. 

Sector Cost Evaluation Rules fire when sector costs are revised, either due to threat reports 
or a change in the target/waypoint heading. These rules determine the sector of minimum cost 
and advises the platform if a change of heading is indicated. The Data 1/0 Rules control the ex¬ 
ternal functions which monitor the serial port for incoming data, assert facts into the CLIPS 
fact-list, and transmit data to the platform when appropriate. 

SAMPLE RULES 

A sample of the type rules used in the reasoning module is shown in Table 1. In addition, 
the module accomplishes the mission planning necessary to achieve the original mission objec¬ 
tives after completing threat avoidance maneuvers. The general concept followed in acquiring 
knowledge and developing rules for tactical maneuvers is to project action on the ground to ac¬ 
tion on the platform. Specifically, if a pilot on the ground or in an aircraft with the identified 
data and knowledge contained in the knowledge base, what would be his decisions and actions? 


'* Roberts, I. P., Ferguson, T. J., “GPS-Aided Passive Terrain Following”, The Analytic 
Sciences Corporation, 55 Walkers Brook Drive, Reading, Mass 01867, Technical Report 
TR-4185-4-1, June 1985. 


400 





TABLE 1. Expert System Rules for Threat Detection. 


> 




Ru| g$ 


IF 

the target is in the sector directly ahead 

THEN 

assign sector cost for Port-2 to 3.0 
assign sector cost fcr Port-1 to 1.0 
assign sector cost for Track to 0.0 
assign sector cost for Star-1 to 2.0 
assign sector cost for Star-2 to 4.0 


SAM is detected at distant range and 
SAM is located in sector Port-2 

THEN 

modify sector cost for Port-2 by +10.0 
modify sector cost for Port-1 by +10.0 


SAM is detected at near range and 
SAM is located in sector Star-1 

THEN 

modify sector cost for Track by +10.0 
modify sector cost for Star-1 by +10.0 
modify sector cost for Star-2 by +10.0 


EXPERT SYSTEM INTERFACE 

The early prototype expert system contained approximately 30 rules for situational assess¬ 
ment and guidance maneuver commands. Commands to the guidance system consisted of the 
limited set: up, down, left and right, and a restricted acceleration response. The information ex¬ 
changed between the expert system and the platform required the implementation of an interface 
module. The module functionality includes: 

* Performing a numerical-to-symbolic transformation of datx to be sent 
to the expert system 

* Performing a symbolic-to-numerical transformation of data received 
from the expert system 

* Sending and receiving messages to and from the expert system via the 
host computer serial ports. 

The above operations are identified as the mission manager and the resource manager in 
Figure 5. The sensor monitor operation is the exchange of data between the sensor system and 
renting expert system based commands to the platform guidance system via the interface. 


401 





VEHICLE 

STATE 


Figure 5. Expert System Integration with Autonomous Platform. 

SYSTEM SIMULATION 

SIMULATION MODEL IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES 

The MAAP simulation q)eration consists of a numeric processing element and a symbolic 
processing element. Interaction and data transfer between these elements requires a special in¬ 
terface protocol be available for numeric-to-symbolic and symbolic-to-numeric conversion as 
describe in the previous section. The numeric processing operation includes the environment, 
i.e., GPS satellites, threats, terrain models and the platform modules, excluding the reasoning 
system. The reasoning module is executed in the symbolic computation environment. The host 
computer configuration and the problem partitioning were selected to approximate actual real- 
world omfiguration for either hardware-in-the-loop operation or real-time laboratory testing. 
This ccmfiguration was of particular significance to investigate the operation of the reasoning 


402 













module on a portable processor,i.e., as a minimum, a 80286 based system supporting a C com¬ 
piler. 

SIMULATION OPERATING ENVIRONMENT 

The MAAP simulation was designed to operate on two parallel PC based processors. The 
numeric based algorithms are written in FORTRAN and operate on a 80386-based PC. The 
symbolic processing is a CLIPS (C Language Integrated Production System)^ based operating 
system and executes on a 80286 PC environment. Embedded software is used to handle the 
asynchronous serial data communications and rule-based threat avoidance maneuver commands. 
The basic AAP as part of the MAAP simulation architecture is shown in Figure 6. 


GPS MEASUREMENT ERROR 



MODIFIED APO U SIMULATION 
(INSPAC/INSPAZ) 

® APO n MODELS FOR JAMMER VISIBILITY 
AND POWER (JAMVAP) AND 
GPS S/S (GPSSNR) INCLUDED 


ESTIMATED 

TRAJECTORY! 


ENCLOSED MODULES 
MERGED INTO A 
SINGLE PROGRAM 


Figure 6. AAP Simulation Architecture. 


^ CLIPS is a C based expert system shell developed by NASA/Johnson Space Center’s Artificial 
Intelligence Section. 


403 
























RESULTS 

As stated previously, one objective of the MAAP program effort is to develop method and 
techniques to enhance the survivability rate of AAP operation in a high density battlefield threat. 
For purposes of demonstrating the the prototype operation of the MAAP, a simplified threat sce¬ 
nario was selected. Figures 7,8, and 9 are snap shots (screen dumps) recorded at selected in¬ 
stance during a platform trajectory with MAAP operation against a specified threat scenario. 

As indicated in Figure 7, the threat environment consist of two SAM sites and two jammer 
sites. The SAM sites are indicated with missile symbols at the center of two range rings. The 
outer ring of each site is the target detection/track boundary and the inner ring is the engagement 
boundary of the respective SAM site. The jammers are indicated as radiators with different 
beam widths. The jammer located in the lower part of the scenario, with a wide beam, is placed 
at ground level, the second jammer is located 500 meters above ground level. The platform has 
no knowledge about the location of the threats prior to initiating the mission. The threat scenario 
is shown as imposed on a terrain map. The beginning of the platform trajectory and the target 
objective are indicated by two crosses. 

Figure 7 depicts the platform 103 seconds into the mission at an altitude slightly less than 
1800 meters. The position of the platform is such that it is being illuminated by the ground 
based jammer and tracked by a SAM radar. While the ground based jammer is a minimal threat 
to jamming the GPS antenna, which is located on top of the platform, it is considered to be a 
higher threat than the SAM tracking radar. Threat avoidance maneuvers are executed to avoid 
the jammer beam. 






As indicated in Figure 8, the platform is 230 seconds into the mission and with a status of 
clear at 273 meters for terrain following. The platform, while avoiding the jammer, has crossed 
the engagement boundary of the SAM system. A missile has been launched and the platform 
has initiated a maneuver to go into the terrain following mode. If the SAM site engagement ra¬ 


dar is interrupted for three seconds or more, the missile launch exercise will be a failure. Threat 
avoidance commands maneuver the platform into a terrain following mode to provide terrain 
masking between the SAM site and the platform. An operational feature of the reasoning mod¬ 
ule is that once a threat has been detected, the approximate direction and estimated power levels 
are remembered for determining future avoidance maneuvers. With knowledge about the threat 
as depicted in Figure 8, the trajectory continues toward the mission objective in the terrain fol¬ 
lowing mode. 



The platform trajectory extending through the SAM engagement range is shown in Figure 
9. As the platform approaches the engagement boundary in the terrain following mode, the jam¬ 
mer beam located at 500 meters altitude is encountered. Since the jammer is above the platform, 
a high priority threat is present in terms of being able to jam the GPS antenna: The immediate 
command sent to the platform from the reasoning module is maneuvers command attempting to 
shield the antenna from the jammer with the body of the platform and climb to an altitude above 
the jammer. This operation is shown in Figure 9 with a final time of 567 seconds to engage the 
mission target at an altitude of 206 meters after descending from a higher altitude after avoiding 
the last jammer. 


405 












CONCLUSION 


The presentation is a very brief description of the major components and operation of the 
MAAP. This program is part of ongoing investigative efforts to identify techniques that can im¬ 
prove weapon system performance in a battlefield environment. Initial results provided by this 
effort clearly indicated that applying an emerging technology to traditional problem areas re¬ 
quires an examination of the traditional task and the new technology with a new set of questions. 
While the MAAP program described here is an early prototype, it does demonstrate the applica¬ 
tion of the emerging technology of Artificial Intelligence and related knowledge based system 
concepts can be cost effective when applied to traditional problem areas, i.e., air defense and 
more specifically operational survivability in a battlefield environment. 

The question could be asked “Why the discussion about the items not directly related to the 
knowledge based system development and operation”? The use of knowledge based expert sys¬ 
tems have proven to be very cost effective in certain areas of applications, particularly in areas 
such as an expert advisor, banking systems operations, reasoning over large data bases, etc. In 
most of these application the availability of additional information for the knowledge base was 
available to the expert system by interacting with the environment with mostly human inputs. 
Operating in domains where direct input is not feasible, alternatives must be considered. For the 
typical airborne autonomous system operation the cost effective use of a knowledge based sys¬ 
tem is difficult to establish with out demonstrating an extensive advantage. 

The question was asked “What can be added to the autonomous system such that the advan¬ 
tages of expert system technology can be realized?” One answer - GPS. The GPS receivers 












were added to the platform to provide additional information to achieve effective knowledge 
based system operation, i.e., improved threat avoidance. The answer to the initial question 
"Why the discussion...”, the major factor is to give an emphasis on the need to review traditional 
problem areas with a new perspective in order to achieve new solutions. 


407/(408 Blank) 






TARGET AND SCENARIO SIGNAL GENERATION FOR MICROWAVE 
AND MILLIMETER WAVE HWIL MISSILE GUIDANCE SIMULATION 

Alexander C. Jolly 
U.S. Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-5252 

ABSTRACT 

Evaluation of tactical missile guidance mechanisms and 
hardware components by means of hardware-in-the-loop (HWIL) 
simulation is extensively used by the U.S. Army Missile Command 
for the purposes of system development, integration and checkout 
and for detailed performance assessment. Experience has shown 
that HWIL simulation is a powerful tool which can be used to 
minimize the eunount of flight testing required throughout the 
missile system total life cycle, from technology development 
through to field upgrades and product improvements. 

In order to perform the realistic HWIL simulations that are 
needed to support missile system development and deployment it is 
necessary to provide realistic target and background scenarios 
which are received by the guidance 8en8or(s), including field-of- 
view dynamics and the effects of countermeasures and weather 
conditions. The required degree of target and background realism 
is governed by the sophistication and performance capability of 
the sen8or(s). This paper provides an overview of the mechanisms 
and techniques used at the Research, Development and Engineering 
Center of the U.S. Army Missile Command to provide target and 
background scenarios for HWIL simulation of missiles guided by 
microwave and millimeter wave radar signals. 

INTRODUCTION 

The Research, Development and Engineering Center (RD&EC) of 
the U.S Army Missile Command (MICOM) provides technical support 
to the Project Executive Officers and Project Managers charged 
with the development and fielding of tactical missile systems for 
deployment by the U.S Army. An essential element of this support 
is the evaluation of tactical missile hardware by means of 
hardware-in-the-loop (HWIL) simulations. The inclusion of missile 
hardware components, sub-systems and/or systems in a simulation 
implies the necessity of operating the simulation in real-time 
and, if the hardware includes external environment sensors, then 
a means of providing a realistic real-time input to the sensors 
is also required. 

In order to meet the requirements for HWIL simulation of 
closed guided loop target engagements by tactical missile systems 
for the U.S. Army, MICOM RD&EC performs HWIL simulation in a 
number of HWIL target scenario simulators at its Advanced 
Simulation Center located at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama. These 


\ 


409 




simulators contain extensive real-time computer processing 
capability and are interfaced to the appropriate missile hardware 
via purpose-built interfaces. This paper reviews the target and 
scenario signature modeling and signal generation capabilities 
for the microwave and millimeter wave radar guidance simulation 
facilities (respectively known as the Radio Frequency Simulation 
System - RFSS, and the Millimeter Simulation system - MSS) and 
indicates planned developments for the future. 

SIMULATOR CONFIGURATIONS 


Microwave 

The simulation facility in which microwave radar guided 
missiles are evaluated consists of a radio frequency (RF) 
shielded, anechoic room of dimensions 48x48x40 feet (width, 
height, length). Microwave signals in the frequency range 2-18 
GHz are radiated from a set of 550 horn antennas located on a 
vertical wall of the room and are received by a missile antenna 
projecting into the room through the opposite wall. The circular 
array of antennas subtends an angle of 42 degrees at the missile 
receiving antenna which is positioned at the intersection of the 
flight table axes of rotation. RF signal generation equipment 
permits waveforms of almost any desired degree of complexity to 
be generated under computer control and to be radiated from an 
appropriate triad of antennas such that the real-world signal 
directionality is dynamically maintained at the receiving 
element. 

The RFSS signal generation capability includes four 
independent channels with full polarization capability and 
continuous position control across the array. In addition, there 
are two channels available for the simulation of stand-off 
jammers on a sparse array of 16 antennas interspersed among the 
elements of the main array. A block diagram of the RFSS is shown 
in figure 1. 

Millimeter Wave 

The MICOM Millimeter wave Simulation System (MSS) parallels 
the microwave simulation facility in that modulated signals 
representing radar returns from a target and clutter scenario are 
radiated into a shielded, anechoic room for receipt by the 
missile receiving antenna, followed by processing into guidance 
commands by the missile receiver and signal processor. Guidance 
commands are fed into a simulation of missile flight dynamics 
which provides missile-target relative motion for use in 
generating the target and scenario signals. This facility 
operates in frequency bands centered on 35 and 94 GHz. 

At the present time, two independent channels are available 
for representation of targets and background signals. A third 


410 






SKNIACTIVB MISSILE SINOLATICH CONFIGUSATION 






























channel is being added to expand the signal generation 
capability. The array of radiating antennas is of hexagonal shape 
flanked by a horizontal line of antennas extending on each side 
of the central hexagon. At 35 Ghz, the angular extent of the 
antenna array is 7.4 degrees maximum, and at 94 GHz it is 5.6 
degrees. Obviously, for typical missile engagement trajectories 
these line of sight angular dynamic ranges are limited and 
synthetic line-of-sight angle control are necessary. A block 
diagreun of the signal generation chain, from the missile 
transmitter to the radiated modulated target and background 
returns is shovm in figure 2. 

GUIDANCE SENSOR CHARACTERISTICS 

Target and background signature modeling requirements are 
heavily dependent on the characteristics of the missile guidance 
sensor for which the signatures are generated. Sensor parameters 
which govern the level of modeling detail include: resolution, 
dynamic range, angle measurement technique, field of view 
(antenna pattern and scan limits), coherence, frequency 
bandwidth, signal processing characteristics, update rates and 
synchronization methods. 

Predominant use of the RFSS over its existence since 1975 
has been to perform HWIL simulations of tactical missiles guided 
by semi-active or passive techniques. For these*simulations, 
missile seeker antennas have been linearly or circularly 
polarized; angle tracking of targets has been based on monopulse 
direction finding; CW guided missiles have used Doppler signal 
processing. Consequently, target and background signature 
modeling for RFSS applications has required the realistic 
representation of signature frequency, signal.power (i.e., 
amplitude^ and Doppler frequency content. The single application 
of the RFSS to open loop tests of a coherent active RF seeker 
required the development of accurate range delay representation 
axfd phase control of the re-radiated signal. 

In the MSS, HWIL simulations have been performed exclusively 
for active millimeter wave guidance units in which signal 
processing discriminants were: signal power, frequency, phase 
(coherence), time and signal polarization. Because of the larger 
nximber of signal discriminants and the consequent greater 
sophistication of receiver signal processing, millimeter wave 
target and background signatures modeling and signal generation 
is more demanding than that for the microwave regime. 

TARGET AND BACKGROUND SIGNATURE MODELING 

BySS.-CjU9£9.H&Ye.I 

For semi-active CW doppler processing seekers, target 
signatures are defined by their Radar Cross Section (RCS), 


412 









MSS S101AL GENESATKM C(XlFICnSATION 













































doppler frequency shift and angle glint (the latter representing 
the short term angular variation of reflection centroid about a 
mean position). For passive RF seekers, doppler frequency shift is 
not necessary unless the receiver is extremely narrow-band; for 
active coherent seekers, signal phase and time delays are 
required to be represented. A summary of early developments of 
target signature modeling for the RFSS is given by Baird, et al 
(1981). 

In the development of models for specific HWIL simulations 
it is necessary to decide at the outset whether the models are to 
be deterministic or statistically based. Historically, initial 
approaches to characterizing RCS have been statistical, as 
presented by Swerling (1960). Modern developments in radar design 
and signal processing have led to the need for target signatures 
to be represented as a set of range and angle extended discrete 
scatterers with the reflections obtained by coherent summation of 
scattered signals in each of the seeker monopulse channels. 

Over the course of the last several years, an hierarchical 
sequence of target signature models has been developed for HWIL 
simulation in the RFSS of microwave guided missiles (that is, for 
the frequency range 2-18 GHz). This sequence has progressed from 
an isotropic point source target at a single frequency with range 
dependent amplitude, through statistically varying RCS and angle 
glint models to the range extended distributed scattering source 
models mentioned above. 

Statistical Target Models Statistical target models offer 
the advantages of simplicity and speed of execution, the latter 
being an important consideration for real-time simulation. 
Selection and development of the model, however, must be made 
with care and good judgement, taking into consideration the 
signal processing characteristics of the seeker used in the 
simulation. In general, monopulse target signal statistics are 
obtained in non-real-time from a baseline m^el selected from 
available analytical models or from measurement data. Parameters 
representing the probability distributions, means, variances and 
covariances of RCS scintillation and angle glint are obtained 
from extensive analysis of available data. Attention must be 
given to Joint probability distributions since although target 
RCS and angle glint are uncorrelated, they are not independent 
(Sandhu and Saylor, 1985). Figure 3 contains an illustration of 
the modeling process. 

Models of air-breathing targets used in the RFSS during the 
past several years have ranged from simple Swerling 
scintillation and Gaussian glint versions with no interdependence 
between the two distributions to complex monopulse models 
incorporating statistical dependence among the I and Q 
components, leading to the faithful reproduction of the true 
joint probability distributions between scintillation and glint. 


414 






Seeker Transmit 
• Mode 



STATISTICAL TARCBT MODELINGt GENERAL APPROACH 













i 


Figures 4 and 5 illustrate comparisons of results achieved for 
measurements and models for a particular example of the latter 
type of model. 

Deterministic Target Models Deterministic target models are 
represented by aspect-dependent, polarimetric scatterer lists 
containing relative amplitude and geometric position. During 
real-time simulation, missile-target relative geometry is used 
to compute target aspect at any instant; appropriate scatterer 
lists are obtained from look-up tables and transformed to line- 
of-sight coordinates. Seeker transmit frequency and polarization 
are used to compute a monopulse signal for each scatterer. 
Coherent svimmation of these signals results in a monopulse target 
signature (amplitude, phase, azimuth and elevation for each 
polarization) for transmission to the seeker from the RFSS 
antenna array. The response of a coherent monopulse seeker to a 
distributed scatterer target model has been analyzed by McPherson 
(1986). 

While the real-time model is relatively simple to implement, 
the non-real-time derivation of scatterer lists is more 
difficult. One method of deriving scatterer lists is by making 
laser scans of a physical geometric model of the target and 
measuring reflections in various directions, although this is a 
costly and time consuming process. Other sources of radar 
signature data are the specialized facilities such as those 
provide by the U.S. Air Force at RATSCAT or the U.S. Navy at 
PMTC. A diagrammatic representation of the modeling process is 
contained in figure 6. 

Jet Engine Modulation Jet engine modulation (JEM) and the 
related modulation phenomena of helicopter blades and propellers 
are all members of the "reciprocating machinery" class of radar 
scattering problems wherein one or more primary scatterers 
undergo a deterministic, oscillatory amplitude variation. This 
results in a strongly defined spectral structure which affects 
missile guidance performance, especially in an ECM environment. 
JEM and blade modulation simulation is based upon modeling the 
correct frequency domain signature of the modulation and 
converting to the time domain by means of Fourier transformation. 

JEM spectral structure (Gardner, 1970) is characterized by 
lines whose amplitude and spacing are determined by the number, 
size and rotational speed of blades on the engine compressor and 
turbine. Amplitude dependence with aspect angle is an exponential 
function of the cosine of the off-axis aspect. Amplitude 
fluctuations of the individual JEM lines is log-normally 
distributed and generally uncorrelated with fluctuations of other 
lines. Non-real-time modulation parameters are obtained by 
detailed analysis of measured data or from engine parameters; 
real-time models generate aspect dependence and statistical 
fluctuation of the power spectmim envelope. 


416 




































































(MCTERS) 
















































































































419 


DBTBRHIHISTIC TARGET HOTELING 















Ground Return Models Ground return modeling requires data 
representing: transmit and receive antenna characteristics/ 
seeker signal processing details, terrain model, and 
electromagnetic scattering model. During real-time simulations, 
the ground return model incorporates scattering coefficients, 
antenna gain patterns and engagement geometry to compute model 
outputs such as: total reflected power, power spectrum, and 
direction of arrival. These outputs control the signal generation 
hardware to provide the ground return signals which are radiated 
or injected to the seeker. 

Terrain model inputs may be deterministic or statistical in 
nature and represent terrain elevation and slope of the ground 
over which the simulated missile target engagement takes place. A 
source of these data is the Defense Mapping Agency. Other ground 
truth information such as type, extent, size and dimensions of 
ground cover, soil type and state, dielectric properties of 
ground cover are also necessary for an accurate estimate of 
backscatter coefficients. Analytical electromagnetic scattering 
models make use of the terrain model data, but are used in an 
off-line, non-real-time mode to generate tables of backscatter 
coefficients which are looked up in the real-time models. 

Clutter modeling is a specific example of. ground return and 
is modeled using the techniques described above, applied in a 
method known as "integration-along-isodops", that is, along 
curves of constant doppler shift as illustrated in figure 7. The 
process involves transformation of engagement geometry data 
(position and velocity) to inertial, velocity and transmitter and 
receiver boresight frames of reference and defining clutter 
patches along isodops which are sub-divided Into range cells. A 
scattering coefficient table is indexed using clutter patch 
position transformed into the inertial reference frame. Antenna 
patterns in the direction of the clutter patch are determined and 
all the data are entered into the radar range equation to yield 
clutter patch reflected power. The power spectrum is completed by 
summing all clutter patches over range cell steps and then 
stepping along the doppler spectrum. The process is shown in 
block diagram form in figure 8. Clutter signal generation 
consists of generating a time domain clutter signal from the 
spectrvim by means of inverse Fourier transformation, and 
modulating the transmitter carrier frequency with the clutter 
signal. 

MSS (Millimeter Wave) 

Modem active seekers operating in the millimeter wave 
spectrum perform far more extensive signal processing than the 
typical microwave guidance sensor. Millimeter wave seekers 
measure the amplitude and phase (or in-phase and quadrature 
components} of the monopulse sum, elevation delta and azimuth 


420 






421 


FIGUKE 7. UrTEGRATIOH ALONG ISODOPS BISXATIC CW CLUTTER N(H)EL - CONCEPT 









422 


















delta channel signals for the co- and cross-polarization 
components for each pulse transmitted. The measurements are made 
in each cell of a relatively coarse range gate for every pulse 
processed. A set of pulses using a "template" of discretely 
stepped or continuously scanned frequencies provides sets of data 
as functions of frequency and polarization in each coarse range 
cell which can be Fourier transformed to yield a fine-grained 
range profile corresponding to each coarse range cell. A map of 
the dominant scatterers in each fine range cell is then available 
for monopulse angle determination (ratio of delta/sxim) and 
polarimetric processing for target discrimination and 
classification. Use of the three monopulse measurement channels 
permits the development of a three dimensional representation of 
the target and clutter returns. 

Polarimetric processing is facilitated if the transmitted 
polarization is circular. In this case the return signals are 
independent of the missile antenna rotational attitude and return 
signals may be classified into even-bounce and odd-bounce 
scatterers (reflected polarizations changed by either an even or 
odd number of 180 degree units from the transmitted 
polarization). Measured signature effects with respect to 
reflected signal polarization may then be used as the basis of 
target and clutter classification algorithms. 

Target Models Based on the brief discussion above of the 
typical requirements for millimeter wave signal processing, it is 
clear that simulation models for targets must contain realistic 
coherent range, angle, polarization and Doppler frequency shift 
information for all transmit frequencies and polarizations used 
by the seeker. It is sufficient to produce the correct amplitude 
and phase response in each of the three monopulse channels as the 
seeker changes transmitted frequency and polarization. For both 
clutter and targets, the signatures are deterministically 
dependent on the illumination and observation aspect relative to 
an earth-fixed or target-fixed coordinate system, respectively. 
Conceptually, the simplest model for a target is a deterministic 
discrete scatterer model in which the most significant scattering 
points on the target are identified over a window of aspect 
angles. Each scattering point is characterized by its location 
in target coordinates, its amplitude and its polarization 
characteristics (i.e. even- or odd-bounce for circular 
polarization or, more generally, a scatterer is characterized by 
its polarization scattering matrix). For each combination of 
transmitted frequency and polarization, the target scatterer 
returns are weighted by the transmit and receive antenna patterns 
and range gate function, and coherently sximmed, resulting in a 
total amplitude and phase for the co- and cross-polarized returns 
for the current transmitter state. A different coherent sum is 
computed for each possible transmitter state and for each 
monopulse receive channel. Simplifications normally employed in 
real-time models are a) the use of the far-field approximation. 


423 




b) equal sum channel pattern weighting for all target scatterers, 

c) a delta channel weighting which is proportional to the angle 
offset of the scatterer from a reference point on the target, d) 
equal range gate weighting for all target scatterers, e) equal 
range attenuation for all target scatterers, f) no change in 
aspect over a complete sequence of transmitter states. The input 
data for this multiscatterer model can be derived either from 
coherent measurement data or from a mathematical electromagnetic 
scattering model. Methods of reducing coherent sum channel data 
obtained by Inverse Synthetic Aperture Radar (ISAR) measurements 
of returns from a target rotating on a turntable, in 
combinination with geometric facet data, have been developed to 
produce the scatterer lists (Saylor, 1987). The output of such an 
analysis is shown in figure 9. 

When the number of significant target scatterers is too 
large to permit real time computations, a statistical model can 
be employed to reduce the computational load and data storage. 

The statistical model consists of replacing all the scatterers in 
a fine range cell by a statistically equivalent scatterer. This 
scatterer is characterized by the statistics of the scattering 
amplitude within an aspect angle cell. The size of the angle 
cell is chosen small enough so that the scatterer statistics are 
stationary within the cell and independent from one range cell to 
another, and large enough so that the data storage available in 
the simulation computer is not exceeded. The statistical 
parameters chosen to describe the equivalent scatterers are the 
mean and variance of the in-phase and quadrature (I&Q) components 
of the complex scattering amplitude. By the central limit 
theorem of statistics, the I&Q components are expected to be 
gaussian distributed and are thus completely described by their 
means and variances. More details of the method are given by 
Saylor, McPherson and Henry, 1988. 

Individual statistical range profiles are developed for the 
monopulse sum and delta channels. The statistical scattering 
amplitudes in corresponding range cells in each monopulse channel 
are related by correlation coefficients. That is, the scattering 
amplitudes for the monopulse channels (for a given fine range 
cell) are jointly gaussian. The means and variances characterize 
the marginal densities for each channel. In the simulation, 
independent gaussian variables can be generated and transformed to 
achieve the desired covariance. Maintaining the proper 
correlation eunong the monopulse channels is essential for seekers 
which compute multidimensional scatterer maps for tracking. 

Failure to achieve the correct correlations will generally result 
in forcing the seeker to track the amplitude centroid of the 
target rather than the geometric centroid. 

Grot . nd Return Models The number of clutter scatterers 
present in the seeker's beam is generally too large to permit a 
real-time deterministic model to be used. Thus, a statistical 


424 





425 
































range profile model is usually the best choice for modeling MMW 
clutter for high range resolution seekers. The statistics for 
the I&Q components are the same from fine range cell to fine 
range cell for uniform clutter. Clutter is usually assumed to be 
uniform within a coarse range cell but is allowed to vary (i.e. 
have different statistics) from one coarse range cell to another. 

The frequency response for a statistical range profile model 
is generated by coherently summing the equivalent scatterer 
signals for each transmit frequency. Separate sums are performed 
for even and odd range profiles and for each monopulse channel. 
Under the usual conditions of equally spaced seeker transmit 
frequencies (or the simulation quantizes the continuous FM sweep 
into equally-spaced steps), and the number of frequency samples 
being an integral power of 2 , the coherent sums may be generated 
by using the FFT. The input to the complex FFT routine is a 
random sample of the uniformly sampled range profile for the sum 
and two delta channels. The output is the amplitude and phase 
(or I&Q) modulation which the target (or clutter) applies to each 
transmit frequency as measured in each monopulse channel. Line- 
by-line ratios of the delta to sum sequences can be performed to 
generate the signal glints in azimuth and elevation as functions 
of transmit frequency. The use of the FFT optimizes the phasor 
svim computation time for real-time operation. The FFT sum, 
however, is not as general as the direct phasor summation of the 
equivalent scatterer amplitudes at each transmit frequency. For 
example, near-field effects are not included and changes in 
aspect due to angular rotation of the missile-target line of 
sight during a seeker transmit sequence do not occur. These 
effects would result in a slight smearing of the seeker's range 
profile measurements and a small degradation in detection 
performance. 


SIGNAL GENERATION 


RFSS 




A primary objective of the seeker signal processor is to 
enhance the target-to-clutter ratio sufficiently to effectively 
eliminate the corrupting influence of clutter on missile 
guidance. A monopulse doppler processing seeker accomplishes this 
by filtering sxim and delta channel interfering clutter doppler 
components displaced from the target doppler before forming the 
delta/sum ratio used for angle tracking. This process is shown in 
figure 10. A high fidelity simulation must therefore produce the 
correct dynamic target and clutter spectral distributions in the 
radar receiver sum and delta channels simultaneously. It is 
theoretically straightforward, although in practice a little more 
difficult, to generate the desired spectral response in the 
receiver s\im channel. 


The clutter sum and delta channel power spectra are 



426 







nCURE 10. MONOPULSC ANCLE PROCESSING 



FIGURE 11. HWIL TARGET POSITIONIIIG HASUffARE 


















constructed at each missile position update by the "integration 
along isodops" method described above. These discrete power 
spectra are converted to complex voltage spectra by applying 
random phase angles to each spectral line amplitude. Conversion 
to the time domain occurs via discrete Fourier transformation. 

The resulting complex modulation sequence is combined with the 
simulated target signature and the sum channel signal is 
transmitted from the RFSS antenna array position corresponding to 
the seeker antenna beam peak. 

The target signature is computed either by forming the 
phasor sum of the discrete target scatterers or from the 
statistical model described above. Sum and delta channel 
components are weighted by the appropriate sum and delta antenna 
patterns in the direction of the target for that particular 
simulation time interval. 

Signal radiation from the antenna array for both the RFSS 
and MSS is based the weighted triad method of signal positioning/ 
as illustrated in figure 11. The algorithm for determining the 
amplitude weights is shown in figure 12. This algorithm is 
derived by computing the response of the three weighted triad 
signals in an ideal linear monopulse receiver, setting this 
response equal to the desired response and then solving for the 
required weight values. For a geometrical point-source target 
(no spatial extent), the resulting weights are real (i.e. not 
complex) and therefore amplitude weighting is sufficient (no 
phase weighting is required). 

The amplitude weights for an isotropic point source target 
are implemented with attenuators as shown in Figure 11. The 
phase ^shifters are used only to ensure that all three triad 
signal's are transmitted in-phase. When it is desired to 
simultaneously produce desired spectral and spatial distributions 
of target and clutter signals in all three monopulse channels of 
a seeker receiver, the additional degrees of freedom for such 
control is obtained by deriving phase shifter weighting values. 
This permits the combined target and clutter signals to be 
generated by a single RFSS or MSS signal generation channel. 

A procedure using triad position modulation to create the 
desired monopulse signals is shown in figure 13. The first step 
is to scale the delta channel signals relative to the sum channel 
to obtain the proper conversion of delta channel voltage to angle 
relative to boresight. The next step is to convert the delta 
channel complex voltage sequences to complex angle sequences by 
doing a seunple-by-sample normalization of the delta channel to 
the s\im channel (this normalization is a sample-by-seunple complex 
division process). The results will be to associate with each 
sum channel complex modulation sample, complex azimuth and 
elevation angles which are equal to the complex delta-to-sum 
ratio. The complex angles are used to generate a set of complex 


428 





FIGURE 12, HtfIL TARGET POSITIOHIHG ALGORITHMS 


429 







FIGDKB 13. COfPUEX TBIAD POSITIOIDIG COHCBPT 


430 


















triad weights. The algorithm used to compute the triad weights 
is the seune as the conventional algorithm. The essential 
difference in the triad weights resulting from this procedure and 
those resulting from the conventional approach is that the 
complex angle inputs to the algorithm yield complex (phase as 
well as amplitude) weights. As usual, the amplitudes are 
adjusted with attenuators. The phase shifters, however, are no 
longer used to level the phase among the triad signals, but to 
provide a sequence of controlled phase differences. The 
2 unplitude and phase modulation provided by this sequence of 
relative attenuations and phase shifts eunong the triad signals 
creates an independent amplitude and phase sequence in each of 
the three receiver monopulse channels. Each monopulse channel 
sequence has a different doppler frequency spectrum, reflecting 
the different illumination of target scatterers and clutter 
patches by the three monopulse antenna patterns. 

MSS 


Simulation of active seeker radar returns in the MSS require 
the coherent modulation of replicas of the seeker's transmit 
waveform to produce the correct instantemeous amplitude and phase 
in each of the seeker's three monopulse channels. The capeibility 
should exist to coherently delay replicas of the seeker's 
waveform to produce energy in each of the coarse range cells. 

The ability to produce a complex fine range cell distribution is 
required to produce the correct range profile signatixre. An 
independent fine range cell distribution is required for each 
monopulse channel to produce the correct angle signature. 
Independent copolarized and cross polarized range profile and 
angle signatures are required. These basic simulation 
requirements, in turn, require that the delayed seeker waveforms 
transmitted to the seeker in the simulation must be modulated in 
amplitude, phase, polarization and direction of arrival with a 
modulation sequence vdiich changes at every step in the seeker 
transmit frequency and at every change in seeker transmit 
polarization. To date, the fastest modulation rate required has 
been on the order of 100 KHz, although future systems may require 
higher rates. Coherent range delay, signature generation and 
directions of arrival control systems are required for coherent 
signal processing seekers. A fully coherent simulation will 
satisfy the requirements of both coherent and noncoherent 
seekers. 

The requirement to produce an independently controlled, 
complex, coherent range profile in each of the three 
seeker monopulse channels can only be achieved by independently 
BKxiulating the amplitude and phase of a triad of sources on the 
simulator array, as discussed above. Generally these sources 
transmit simultaneously and their location on the array may 
change at each change in seeker transmit state. This is one 
significant departure from standard narrowband monopulse seeker 


431 




simulations in which only the amplitude of the triad signals are 
controlled to provide direction of arrival information to the 
seeker. In general, amplitude-only control (with leveled phase) 
is the min imum requirement when aunplitude-centroiding within a 
coarse range cell is used by the seeker to develop aimpoints on 
the target. When scatterer mapping techniques are employed, both 
amplitude and phase control are required for the simulator 
sources which determine direction of arrival. The basic target 
positiion algorithms used in the simulator change significantly 
vdien phase control is added. The form of the algorithms has been 
described in the previous subsection (see figure 13). 

FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS 

It is anticipated that the capabilities of new generations 
of guided missiles and "smart weapons" will impose a higher 
burden than hitherto on required target and background modeling 
fidelity because of the increased signal processing power 
associated with such missile developments. Because of these 
requirements, RD&EC is continuing an active program of research 
into target and scenario modeling techniques for all regions of 
the electromagnetic spectrum, and into the use of new signal 
generation technologies. Examples of new technologies in the RF 
world include digital RF memories (DRFM) and ntimerically 
controlled modulated oscillators (NCMO); both of these devices 
give promise of much improved signal generation capability, but 
entail considerable expenditures in their applications. 

In addition, the MICOM Advanced Simulation Center has 
instituted a construction program which will, when complete, 
provide additional HWIL si^lation facilities to complement the 
existing facilities. The new simulation facilities include: 

o a MMW simulator for the frequency range 20-220 GHz 

o an RF simulator for the the frequency range 2-12 GHz 

o an RF simulator for the frequency range 6-18 Ghz 

o an imaging infrared (HR) simulation laboratory 

o a 3 chamber weapon systems simulator for inclusion of 
full scale ground equipment in battlefield simulations 

An illustrative layout of the facilities under construction in 
the High Bay of building 5400, Redstone Arsenal is shown in 
figure 14. 


432 






MILLIMETCfl NO 



433 


SDfDLATIOH 













CONCLUSIONS 


This paper has described tdie methods used to model and 
generate targeh and scenario bad^r^^und signatures for BNZL 
simulations of missiles guided by microwave and millimeter wave 
frequencies in the MICOM Advanced Simulation Center. The subject 
of the paper is extremely extensive and space constraints have 
permitted only the essentials to be addressed. Other topics 
associated with the subjects of this paper include the validation 
of models by conqiarison and correlation with measured data; this 
is an Important area of simulation model development ^ich has 
not been discussed but which is a topic of great interest and 
activity at RO&EC. Fturthexmore, the topic of computer 
requirements and capability, on which the degree of fidelity of 
signattire modeling ultimately depends, has also been neglected 
for reasons of lack of space. 

Research into improved techniques of signature modeling and 
signal generation are continuing. Clearly, the introduction of 
"smart/brilliant weapons" in idiich signal processing capabilities 
exploit developments in processor technology will require 
corresponding advances in both target and scenario m^eling 
techniques and in the basic need for HHIL simulation as a means 
of evaluating the hardware euid software performance of the new 
generations of munitions in an efficient and cost-effective 
manner. MICOM RO&EC has long recognized the value of the role of 
HNIL simulation in missile system development and has positioned 
itself to provide the very advanced simulation capabilities which 
new generations of tactical guided xoissiles will require. 


434 





REFERENCES 


Swarling, P., "Probability of Detection of Fluctuating Targets", 
IRE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-6 pp 269-308, April 
1960. 

Gardner, R.E., "Target Signature Study (U)", Naval Research 
Ledxjratory Report 7156, 15 September 1970 (Classified SECRET). 

Baird, A.H., N.C. Randall, D.A. McPherson, "RF Environmental 
Modeling in the Radio Frequency Simulation System", U.S. Axoy 
Missile Conmumd Technical report RD-CR-81-3, 6^ May 1981. 

Sandhu, G.S. and A.V. Saylor, "A Real-Time Statistical Radar 
Model", IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems Vol 
AES-21, No. 4, July 1985. 

McPherson, D.A., "Multiscatterer Target Response for a Coherent 
Monopulse Tracker", Simulation Technologies Inc, Tech Note 131- 
013, 10 December 1986. 

Saylor, A.V., "Derivation of Target Scatterer Lists from ISAR 
Target Images", Simulation Technologies Inc, Tech Note 131-026, 

27 July 1987. 


Saylor, A.V., D.A. McPherson, and S.C. Henry, "MMN Statistical 
Range Profiles Model for Real-Time Seeker-in-the-Loop Target and 
Clutter Simulations", Simulation Technologies Inc, Tech Note 131- 
032, 16 July 1988. 


435/(436 Blank) 








DYNAMIC INFRARED SCENE PROJECTION TECHNOLOGY 


Scottie B. Mobley 
U.S. Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 

ABSTRACT 

This paper will provide an overview of the critical Infrared (IR) projector requirements and 
specifications for Hardware-in-the-Loop (HWIL) simulations of imaging IR systems and will review the 
most prominent technologies associated with IR scene projection. Each method will be briefly discussed 
in terms of physical operaton with all revelant advantages and disadvantages being highlighted. A com¬ 
parison will be provided of the different categories of projection devices for applicability to HWIL simula¬ 
tion. 


INTRODUCTION 

The use of and benefits of HWIL simulations in the evaluation of weapon system performance is 
well established throughout ail branches of the Deparbnent of Defense. For exam(^, such simulations 
have provided substantial payoffe to radio frequency (RF) and millimeter wave (MMW) guided weapon 
system research and development. For "Hot ^pot* IR guided weapons this statement also applies to 
some extent. However, unlike the RF and MMW guided systems, no technique has been developed 
which can provide a complete evaluation of the new sophisticated imaging IR guided weapons. Accord¬ 
ingly, other simulation techniques have been utilitzed for their evaluation. These techniques are most 
often referred to as 'signal injection* or ‘tracker-in-the-loop* simulations. The system’s optical and imag¬ 
ing characteristics are modelled using a special purpose computer image generation device which then in- 

E cts the appropriate digital data into the tracker electronics thus bypassing all the system optics. 

espite the success of these types of simulations, there are inherent weapon system characteristics 
which can not be evaluated in this manner. For their accurate evaluation, the complete seeker optics and 
IR detector device must be included in the HWIL simulation. This type of simulation is referred to as ‘in- 
band* or *seeker-in-the-loop* to denote the fact that IR images are produced and projected to the 
entrance aperture of the weapon’s seeker. 

Figure 1 provides a simple block diagram of a typical inband HWIL simulation involving imaging 
IR guided weapon systems. Currently, all major components shown are available with the exception of 
an IR projector capable of producirig the realistic, radiometrically correct IR images required for complete 
system seeker and tracker evaluation. 



I PfUMC POSmON 
AND RATE 


COUMATEO R 


TARGET POSmON 



Figure 1. Imaging IR HWIL Simulation Block Diagram 


437 








REQUIREMENTS 


In general, imaging IR guided weapon systems can be classified as scanners or starers. Both 
iample the IR radiance over some wavelength range of interest and process this information to establish 
he appropriate airframe guidance commands for target intercept. Scanners typically consist of a linear 
irray of detectors which are sampled by the missile's image processing electronics as different IR com- 
)onents of the scene are reflected onto the detector elements by a moving mirror. Starers typically con¬ 
sist of a two dimensional matrix of detector elements called a Focal Plane Array (FPA). This FPA is 
jsually monolithic in construction and resides at the focal point of the collection optics. In the staring sys- 
ems, each detector element samples the IR radiance from a different, adjacent component of the 
Tiissile's Field of View (FOV). As was the case with the scanning systems, the image processing 
Electronics samples the FPA at tfie appropriate time interval. Both tediniques are utilized in the design of 
seekers for the modem imaging IR quided weapons. Accordingly, ^e requirements placed upon the IR 
projector are dependent on the type of system which is used in the weapon system being tested in HWIL. 
To a large extent, these differences in requirements are a function of the IR projection technique 
proposed. 

Despite their inherent differences, certain IR projector performance specifications are required by 
both types of systems. Examples of these are spatial resolution, frame rate, dynamic range, temperature 
resolution and flicker. Table I shows an expanded set of requirements for the projector. These are baised 
on the available or proposed IR sensors in the two time periods shown. The spatial resolution of the 
projector would ideally be greater than the resolution of the missile's imager by a factor of two. This 
would provide satisfaction of the Nyquist criterion. However, the performance of the imaging system is 
complex and useful results might be attainable with only equivalent resolution. Typically, as is indicated 
in Tab. I, the spatial resolution required is greater in the 3 to 5 micron band than in the 8 to 12. This is 
primarily the result of the requirement for larger arrays in the 3 to 5 to counter detector quantum efficiency 
problems and of the difficulty in the manufacture of larger arrays in the 8 to 12 region. The frame rate re¬ 
quired varies according to the type of detector material which is used and according to the type of 
scenario being simulated. Longer integration times require slower frame rates. In general 10^ represents 
an acceptable dynamic range, but the simulation of some scenarios requires a dynamic range on the 
order of 10®. 


Table I. Imaging IR Projector Requirements 


Characteristic 

1990 

1995 

Spatial Resolution (Pixels) 



8 to 12 microns 

128x128 

256 X 256 

3 to 5 microns 

512x512 

1024x1024 

Frame Rate (Hz) 



8 to 12 microns 

200 

500 

3 to 5 microns 

60 

200 

Dynamic Range 

10^ 

10® 

Target Temperature Simulated (®C) 

0 to 120 

0 to 700 

Target Temperature Resolution (®C) 



8 to 12 microns 

0.1 

0.1 

3 to 5 microns 

0.5 

0.5 

Countermeasure Simulation 

yes 

yes 

Pixel Addressing 

vector 

vector 

Simultaneous Wavebands 

.one 

twp 

Flicker (%) 

1 

0.1 


438 











TECHNOLOGIES 



The technologies currently being developed for IR projector applications can be categorized into 
three groups. These are resistor arrays, light modulation devices and other approaches. The principal 
characteristics of the various techniques are described below. 

RESISTOR ARRAYS 

The basic operational principle of the resistor arrays is relatively simple. Electric current is 
passed through the individual resistor elements which heat up and emit IR energy in accordance with 
Planck's Law. The amount of energy produced is dependent on the resistor tem^rature, the ratio of ac¬ 
tive to total pixel area (i.e. fill factor) and emissivity. Two distinct types of devices are currently under 
development in the United States, United Kingdom and Australia, these are the ‘bridge* and isolated 
thin film techniques. Both are generally addressed a line at a time through the use of a diode or transistor 
drive system, the diode approach relies on the thermal mass of the resistor to maintain IR energy output 
until it is readdressed. The transistor networfc approach uses the gate capacitance of the transistor to 
maintain a voltage accross the resistor until it is readdressed. 

In the resistor bridge devices two approaches have been considered for there fabrication. One 
uses a raised bridge element over a flat substrate. The other consists of a bridge element over a cavity. 
The raised bridge concept has not reached the status of development of the cavity backed devices and 
there is little data available on its characteristics at this time. Accordingly, only the cavity backed struc¬ 
tures will be further discussed. 

The cavity backed devices are monolithic in construction and are fabricated on standard silicon 
wafers. They typically have very small active areas and poor emissivity characteristics. Resistor tempera¬ 
tures of 1000 K have been demonstrated. However, fill factors less than 10% and emissivities less than 
0.20 degrade the temperature performance substantially. The bridge elements are small and frame rates 
on the order of 200 Hz are readily achievable when the substrate is cooled. Crosstalk between adjacent 
resistors is minimal because of the thermally isolated cavity structure of the resistor. Arrays of 128 x 128 
elements have been fabricated and are currently being int^rated into a projection system. The fabrica¬ 
tion of larger structures is possible, but yield problems could limit the development of arrays larger than 
256 X 256. Figure 2 shows an example of the typical resistor bridge structure. 

The isolated thin film resistor ^proach is by far the most profilic technology which has been or is 
being considered for IR projector applications. At this time, devices are being developed by several com¬ 
panies. Unlike the fabrication of the cavity backed devices, the fabrication of these structures requires on 
the order of 200 independent processing steps which functions to reduce yields even further. Resistor 
temperatures of 700 K have been demonstrated. The fill factor and emissivity characteristics are substan¬ 
tially better than those with the cavity backed devices. Fill factors on the order of 50% and emissivities of 
0.50 have been achieved. Again, the effective black body temperature simulated over the pixel will be 
less than the active resistor temperature. The structure of these devices yields a longer time constant 
and a slower frame rate. The frame rates are limited to the 30 to 60 Hz area. Because the resistors are 
not completely isolated from adjacent components in the array crosstalk will be evident in any simulated 
scene. Cooling of the substate also presents a difficult problem which must be considered in any projec¬ 
tor design using this technology. Arrays of 100 x 100 elements have be fabricated. Arrays with 256 x 256 



439 




elements are under development. Because of technology limits it appears that the production of larger ar¬ 
rays is unlikely. 



These technologies can be separated into two distinct groups. These are the Liquid Crystal Light 
Valves (LCLV) and the direct amplitude or phase modulation devices. Both function to modulate an IR 
readout source, but accomplish this in two vey different ways. 


The LCLV modulates the readout IR source through polarization effects in either a transmission 
or reflection manner. Only the reflected mode is suitable ior HWIL consideration. In this mode, tfie IR 
source is first polarized and then, through the appropriate optics, illuminates the liquid crystal material. 
Depending on the alignment of the liquid crystal material on a pixel basis the readout light’s polarization is 
altered and reflected back through an analyzer which results in a polarized spatially modulated beam. 

This beam is then collimated and optically directed to the missile sensor under test. The alignment of the 
liquid crystal is set by addressing it with a CRT and requires a continuous voltage to maintain its align¬ 
ment once addressing is complete. This presents a problem because the typical CRT can not continuous¬ 
ly maintain this charge while addressing the remaining pixels which make up the scene. However, 
special purpose CRTs have been developed which can maintain a charge distribution and as a result 
have been used to reduce if not eliminate the flicker problem. These devices are very expensive and are 
not readily available. As a result, only one of the flicker free LCLVs has been constructed. 

The LCLV has excellent spatial resolution which could support test of any current or future missile 
seeker. However, other inherent characteristics would appear to exclude the LCLV as a candidate for 
use in HWIL simulations. These are frame rate, contrast, dyrtamic range and physical size. Frame rates 
of 30 Hz are achievable with current LCLVs. The contrast is limited because of impurities within the 
LCLV. This results in temperature gradients occurring in the simulated scene when there should be none. 
The maximum temperature which can be simulated is around 320 to 370 K. The physical size is a prob¬ 
lem if flight table mounting is required. Figure 4 shows a reflection modulator. 



vuxo wruT 


Figure 4. Reflective LCLV IR Modulator 


The amplitude or phase Spatial Light Modulators (SLM) are made up of two different concepts. 
These are the Deformable Mirror Devices (DMiD) and the Deformable Membrane Devices (DMeD). 

Either can potentially operate as amplitude or phase modulation devices, but the DMeDs are more suited 
to phase modultion. The DMiDs are made up of individual mirror elements which, depending on the struc¬ 
ture, can be either deflected like a piston or tilted along some axis on the element by an electrostatic 
charge. One example of the angular tilt DMiDs is given in Fig. 5. The DMeDs consist of a reflective 
membrane stretched across a charge transfer plate which h^ wells etched into it to allow the membrane 
to deflect into for modulation. An example of this structure is shown in Fig. 6. The devices can be either 
addressed using a scanning electron beam or through direct addressing. The E-beam is preferred for the 
DMeDs and the DMiDs use direct addressing tiirough a Charge Coupled Device (CCD). 

In phase modulation mode each device operates simitariy to modulate a readout IR source. Each 
element is deflected to selected depth dependent on the required modulation. The readout light is then 


440 







Mirror EtoriMm 



Figure 5. Deformable Mirror Device 



Figure 6. Deformable Membrane Device 

deformed based on this deflection and is reflected back through a Schlieren optical system which con¬ 
verts this deformation to amplitude modulation. In amplitude modulation mode only the DMiDs will be con¬ 
sidered. In this mode the mirror elements are deflected angularly along the hinge axis. Depending on the 
amount of this deflection, the IR readout light is modulated by each mirror element based on the amount 
of energy deflected into collection baffles or out of the line of sight. 

The poor efficiency of the Schlieren readout approach of the phase modulation technique in con¬ 
junction with the inherently poor modulation efficiency of that technique eliminates it from further con¬ 
sideration. Accordingly, it appears that the DMiDs are better suited for HWIL applications because of the 
direct amplitude modulation which is offered. The primary disadvantage of DMiD SLM is that only mini¬ 
mal efforts have been taken to develop IR projector prototypes using this technology. However, this is 
currently changing with several government agencies becoming involved. Also, companies are pursuing 
this technology for application to high definition television. DMiDs have been fabricated with 256 x 256 
elements. Others are under development with resolutions greater than 1000 x 1000. In addtion to the 
high resolutions, frame rates of 500 Hz should be easily adnieved wtih these devices. Because of its 
reflective nature the device should readily simulate the high temperatures required for some target 
engagements. 


441 








QTHEB A EPRQACHES 

Other techniques which have been or are beinga>nsidered for IR scene projection include IR 
laser scanners and IR Cathode Ray Tubes (IRCRTs). The laser scanner approach is the newest having 
been developed over the last few years. On the otherhand, the idea of the IR CRT dates back ap¬ 
proximately 20 years, but for the most part the present IR CRTs which are under consideration are very 
different than those envisioned originally. 

The laser scanner functions in a manner that its name implies. An infrared laser within the 
bandpass of the weapon sensor under test is scanned rapidily across the entrance aperture of the sensor 
and paints out the IR scene as it progresses. The beam is scanned by passinp it through a two axis 
deflection s^em made of two acousto-optical modulators. Hence, the beam is deflected horizontally by 
one modulator and vertically by another. To avoid having the beam deflected to a sensor detector ele¬ 
ment which is not integrating at that instant, the beam deflection is synched with the readout scan of the 
sensor under test. This fact presents a problem if a dock signal is not available from the sensor under 
test. Laser scan projectors with resolutions of 128 x 12B have been built and are nearing operation at 
some facilities within DOD. Because of limits in the resolution of the modulation system any greater 
scene resolution is not possible at this time. The laser system offers high dymamic range ana high frame 
rate. A large complex optical system is required which prohibits any kind of interface with a flight table. 
Techniques are being considered whidi involve the use of fiber optic bundles to accomplish this interface. 
Howver, these are only concepts at this time. Another potential problem which depends on the sensor 
under test is the detector subframe dwell time which is used. Overall, the laser scanner is a good techi- 
que to use until other technologies become more advanced. 

The initial emphasi.*! in the IR CRT area was In the development of an IR equivalent to the visible 
wavelength television. Figu e 7 shows one of these concepts. However, these have for the most part 
been discarded because of difficulties in devleoping a phosphor for use in the IR wavebands. Although 
work is continuing within certain companies on the IR phosphor, the present IR CRTs whdh are being 
proposed differ substantially from tfie original idea. These utilize high energy E-beam welding techni¬ 
ques to heat up elements on a target plate. As the element heats up it emits energy inaccordance with 
Planck's Law. Prototypes of this technique have been built and demonstrated. Temperatures in excess 
of 1000 K have been achieved. The device also offers good resolution. However, the target plate ele¬ 
ments have no sample and hold capability with the time constant directly dependent on their physical 
structure. Again, synching of the E-beam deflection and sensor undet test scan would be r^uired. The 
frame rates achievable would be around 30 to 60 Hz. Depending on the E-beam characteristics crosstalk 
could be a problem. 



Figure?. Infrared CRT 


442 











COMPARISON 


From the previous discussions the foremost IR projector technologies are the cavity backed resis¬ 
tor array, the thin fim resistor array, the DMiOs, the DMeDs, the LCLV, the laser scanner and the IR CRT. 
The principal factors for comparison are frame rate, dynamic range, temperature resolution, spatial resolu¬ 
tion, flicker and physical size. Table II summarizes the comparison of these technologies on the basis of 
these characteristics. In the table, a numerical rating is given between one to ten with ten being excellent 
and one being unacceptable. 


Table II. IR Projector Technology Comparison 


Projector Technology 

Frame 

Rate 

■uSSH 

Temperatrue 

Resolution 

Spatial 

Resolution 

Flicker 

Size 

Resistor Array 







Cavity Backed 

7 

5 

5 

4 

6 

7 

Thiin Film 

4 

5 

4 

4 

6 

6 

Light Modulation 







LCLV 

4 

4 

3 

10 

6 

4 

DMiDs 

9 

8 

6 

9 

8 

9 

DMeDs 

4 

4 

3 

6 

8 

9 

Other Approaches 







Laser Scanners 

9 

9 

4 

4 


2 

IR CRTs 

5 

7 

3 

7 


6 


CONCLUSIONS 

From the preceding discussions it is apparent that given the current status of IR projcetor tech¬ 
nologies there is not an ideal device to cover all HWIL simulation requirements. However, several 
specific simulations can be carried out with the individual devices currently available. At present the 
DMiDs offer the greatest potential for future support of complete end to end HWIL simulations. As re¬ 
search is directed into this approach and given the prospects of other applications, this technique could 
prove to be the solution to the long standing problem which has faced the DOD laboratories involved in 
HWIL simulations of imaging IR systems. 


443/(444 Blank) 




















SIMSTAR - ANATOMY OP A MODERN HYBRID COMPUTER 


K.L. Hall 

U.S. Army Missile Command 
AMSMI-RD-SS-HW, Bldg 5400 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 35898-5252 


ABSTRACT 

Hybrid analog/digital processors have had a hong history, at least in 
terms of computer age. in recent years, however, this type of processor has 
suffered a decline in popularity and use, probably because of the difficul¬ 
ties of programming and the relative inaccuracy of its analog components. 
There is still a place for these processors in missile research and develop¬ 
ment, as shown by the discussions in this paper. 

After a brief survey of hybrid analog/digital systems, this paper dis¬ 
cribes the orgins and characteristics of a modern, digitally programmable, 
hybrid analog/digital processor developed by MICOM RD&EC in cooperation with 
Electronic Associates, Inc. (EAT). This processor, under the name SIMSTAR, is 
being marketed commercially within the United States, Europe and Japan. It 
forms the basis of MICOM's Advanced Simulation Center Hybrid Laboratory where 
SIMSTARs are heavily used in realtime hardware-in-the-loop (HWIL) simulation 
of various missile systems. 

SIMSTAR 's hardware and software characteristics have been tailored for 
realtime missile HWIL simulation. Two specific examples of SIMSTAR applica¬ 
tions are described in order to indicate the demonstrated advantages of 
SIMSTAR for these applications. 


INTRODUCTION 

The most common processors can be lumped into two brances. One branch de¬ 
scended from the idea of finger counting or the abacus and the other from 
graphical solutions and the slide rule. These two branches are the digital 
and analog processor branches (1). The following attributes may be associated 
with processors of the two branches (2): 

Analog 


1. Dependent variables within the machine are treated as continuous. 

2. Static or dynamic accuracy is usually limited to approximately .0001 
times the fixed point maximum value and since variables are fixed point scal¬ 
ing in required. 

3. Operation is parallel with all processes occuring simultaneously. 

4. High speed processing of realtime or faster with speed primarily 
limited by processor element bandwidths rather than problem complexity. 

5. Ability to perform efficient operations of addition, multiplication, 
integration, complex nonlinear functions, single bit combinational and sequen¬ 
tial logic, but limited in capability to store results, provide time delays 
and handle nonmumerical information. 


445 







6. Facility for including analog hardware and input/out devices easily 
into simulation. 

Digital 


1. All variables are quantized. 

2. Serial or relatively few parallel operation paths. 

3. Accuracy relatively independent of quality of system components and 
determined primarily by the number of bits provided in the processor paths 
and memory and numerical techniques selected for a specific application. 
Dynamic accuracy when interfaced to outside realtime hardware is relatively 
difficult to measure. 

4. Solution time is determined primarily by problem complexity and 
desired numerical accuracy. 

5. Provides capad>ility to "trade off” solution time and accuracy. 

6. Some numerical operations, such as integration, logs, and sine and 
cosine are performed by approximate numerical techniques. 

7. May store results, either numerical or nonnumerical. 

8. May perform logic operations on numerical and nonnumerical variables. 

9. Floating point capability usually provided thus avoiding scaling 
problems. 

10. Increased difficulty when programming a parallel processor. 

The hybrid processor system is intended to provide the combined 
strengths of the analog and digital processors while minimizing the weakness 
of both. Analog/Hybrid processors for high speed simulation applications re¬ 
quiring realtime or faster processing, have evolved from the analog processor 
shown in Figure 1 in the 1950 's and 1960 's to the hybrid system shown in 



Figure 1 - BAX 231R Analog Processor 1950-1960 


446 




































Figures 2, 3, 4 and 5 in the 1970's to the SZMSTAR processor shovm in Figure 

6 . 


The practical speed advantage of the 1970's hybrid system can be il¬ 
lustrated by an example of a high fidelity missile simulation which executed 
at 150 times slower than realtime on the CDC 6600 system alone. This same 
simulation executed in realtime with additional speed capability remaining on 
the hybrid system utilizing the same CDC 6600 as the realtime host processor. 

While the execution speed was as advantage for the 1970's hybrid sys¬ 
tems, progreunming time and system setup times were long due to a mostly 
manual setup and progreunming process. Typical setup times were approximately 
1 hour and programming could take 1 to 5 days. These times are reduced to ap¬ 
proximately 5 minutes for setup and 30 minutes for recompilation and reload¬ 
ing for the SIMSTAR system. Execution speed for SIMSTAR is approximately the 
same as for 1970*8 hybrid systems with small gains in speed in the host 
processor and function generation processor. Accuracy has improved by a fac¬ 
tor of 5 to 10 for the parallel processor subsystem in SIMSTAR over the 
1970's type hybrid processor systems. 

With SIMSTAR it is practical to expect to share a single hybrid simula¬ 
tion system between 3 or more hardware-in-the-loop tasks during a 2 shift 
work day with an excellent opportunity for obtaining useful quantity and 



Figure 6 - SIMSTAR Processor 1980's and 1990's 


449 










quality of results on each task. Coiiq>lete computer control of all aspects of 
the setup and modification of the run parameters on the SIMSTAR system per¬ 
mits creation of large predefined run sets. These predefined run sets allow 
large parametric studies and monte carlo sets to be conducted in a minimum 
time and with minimum human errors. The SIMSTAR system also provides a real¬ 
time workstation human interface including color displays, interactive con¬ 
trol and data logging with minimum impact upon host processor speed and data 
storage capacity. Traditional strip chart functions are available in the real 
time workstation which provides display and recording/playback/hardcopy of up 
to several hundred variables per frame. 

The U.S. Army Missile Command Advanced Simulation Center began in the 
late 1970's development with Electronic Associates, Inc. of a modern simula¬ 
tion simulation processor system currently known commerically as SIMSTAR to 
provide the speed and accuracy necessary to allow full model fidelity real¬ 
time processor capability for Army missile hardware-in-the-loop simulation ap 
plications. The first operational system was installed in the Advanced Simula 
tion Center in the mid 1980's. Figure 6 shows this new generation processor 
which is now the main processor resource in the Hybrid Hardware-in-the-Loop 
Laboratory. 

Currently SIMSTAR is being utilized in such simulation application areas 
as missiles and aerospace, nuclear, lense and shutter design, dynamic system 
education, steel rolling mill disign and high speed locomotive design. Simula 
tion activities are utilizing SIMSTAR as a processor system for time critical 
simulation in the U.S, Europe and Japan. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF A MODERN HYBRID SIMULATION PROCESSOR 

Figure 7 is illustrates a typical hardware-in-the-loop application of 
the SIMSTAR system. Unshaded boxes indicate SIMSTAR subsystems and shaded 
boxes indicate simulation application elements which are not part of SIMSTAR. 
The user communicates with this realtime simulation system through the real¬ 
time workstation and SIMSTAR host. These communications consists of realtime 
graphical plots, strip chart and x-y type presentations, numerical values, 
touch screen, mouse, and normal terminal. The user controls the simulation by 
means of the touch screen, terminal and procedures prepared to define runs or 
run sets. Data logging is accoBg>lished within the workstation thus relieving 
the host of this resource consuming activity. Logged data may be played back 
from memory in the workstation or stored on optical disk for later review. 
Hardcopy capability is provided for the graphical and numeric displayed 
results. 

The SIMSTAR host serves as the controller of the realtime simulation and 
provides high resolution analytical capability for the lower frequency vari¬ 
ables in the simulation. High speed aerodynamic table lookup capability is 
provided by the function generator. High frequency variables are produced by 
equations implemented on parallel processors 1 and 2. High speed analog and 
logic variables are provided from the host and parallel processors by way of 
the analog to digital, digital to analog and logic converters and through the 
electronic signal allocator which provides program control of the routing of 
these variables. Analog and logic variables which must be transmitted over 
long distances, more than 30 to 50 feet, are carried by fiber optic analog 
trunks and differential hardwired discrete trunks. 


450 







- SIMSTAR Subsystems 


• Non SIMSTAR Items 


Figure 7 - 8ZMSTAR Systoi Configuration 

Variables which define target and missile geometry are sent by the host 
through the shared memory to the database driven 3-D scene generator host and 
generator. The scene generator produces a realtime image of the missile field 
-of-view and provides this image to the siissile hardware under test. The mis¬ 
sile hardware and software process the image to provide guidance commands to 
the analytical portiions of the missile models. 

The SKXlern hybrid processor system provides the capability for perform¬ 
ing realtime execution of complex high fidelity models along with the 
capability for changing between several hardware-in-the-loop applications 
with a short, approximately 5 minutes, change over time. All operations are 
controlled by the host and a complete documentation trail of operations and 
changes is available to allow selection of the documentation level required 
for each application. Develoimient of realtime applications is made convenient 
by the Startran software package which provides a high level simulation lan¬ 
guage environment for application development and execution. 

TERMINAL HONING MISSILE APPLICATION 

In a typical ground to air application of a modern hybrid coiig>uter such 
as SIMSTAR the math model distribution to system resources is illustrated by 
Figure 8. Low to medium speed control and dynamic models are typically iiig>le- 
mented on the host processor. These siodels sdght include overall control of 
the simulation, aero equations, translation gecxaetry, atmosphere, target mo¬ 
tion, thrust, launcher motion and uss properties. The large nonlinear 


451 



















SCENE PARALLEL ELECTRONIC SIGNAL 

GENERATOR HOST PROCESSORS ALLOCATOR 



MISSILE HARDWARE 


rigur* 8 • Typical SIMSTAR Taralnal Ho»lng Application 


aarodynanic tablea are best suited to the function generator processor. High 
speed dynamic models of rotational motion, complex wing servo, seeker scan 
and seeker gyro are typically implemented on the parallel simulation proces¬ 
sors. The remaining functions required to close the control loop of this type 
missile system simulation are ingilemented by providing rotational and transla¬ 
tional variables for the targets and missile to the scene generator and its 
host which generates the proper image for the seeker signal processing subsys¬ 
tem to derive guidance commands for input to the wing servo by way of the 
electronic signal allocator. 


ZNERTIALLY GUIDED MISSILE APPLICATION 

A typical ground to ground inertially guided system is illustrated in 
Figure 9. For a simulation of this type system all of the missile motion 
models are typically i]iq>lemented on the host processor. Along with these mo¬ 
tion BKKlels such models as the autopilot, launcher control, earth, guidance, 
maes properties, launcher motion, thrust, atmosphere, aero equations and over¬ 
all simulation control are often implemented on the host. The more demanding 
dyniaanic SKKlels such as the complex actuators, body bending and hinge moments 
are usually is^lemented on the parallel simulation processors. The complex 
aerodynamic data tables is typically implemented on the function generator 
processor and routing of analog and logic variables between the host and 
parallel processors is usually accomplished directly or through the 
electronic signal allocator. 


452 












MISSILE PARALLEL ELECTRONIC SIGNAL 

HARDWARE HOST PROCESSORS ALLOCATOR 



FUNCTION GENERATOR 


Figur* 9 • Typical SXMSTAR Xnartially Guidad Application 


Since soma missile hardware elements such as control actuator systems 
can only be utilized for a limited number of simulated flights before 
degraded performance and the missile hardware/software may be more difficult 
to utilize when evaluating design changes, the validated math models are typi¬ 
cally utilized where a large number of simulated flights are required or 
where studies and analysis on subsystems are required. Thus in a typical 
hardware-in-the-loop simulation both the missile hardware/software and the 
math model representations of each subsystem aiiA provided and either may be 
selected. In Figure 9 several of the missile hardware/software functions are 
duplicated in math model implementations. 

CONCLUSIOH 

Modern technology and increased requirement for more complex dynamic 
models for realtime simulation applications have resulted in a continued need 
for hybrid simulation processor systems. These hybrid systems now provide a 
powerful and user friendly tool for many applications where time critical 
analytical demands are high. 


REFERENCES 

1. Jackson, A.S., "Analog Computation", McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1960, 

pp. 1-2. 

2. Bekey, 6.A., Karplus, N.J., "Hybrid Computation", John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
1968, pp. 3-6. 


453/(454 Blank) 










Simulation as a Tool 
in Assessing 

Millimeter-Wave Smart Weapon Systems 

Dr. James C. Bradas 
U.S. Army Missile Command 
Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
Guidance & Control Directorate 
Technology/Terminal Homing 
Redstone Arsenal. AL 35898-5254 

ABSTRACT 

The use of simulation as a tool in assessing weapon system 
performance has seen a tremendous increase in the last decade. 
Computer speed and memory have all contributed to the ability to 
build better and more complex models and simulations of weapon 
system components such as seekers of various types, missile and 
aircraft airframes, etc. The availability of high-speed mainframe 
computers (not necessarily supercomputers) of the Dec VAX variety 
and the like, have made it possible to model very complex, real-world 
situations involving radars, infrared seekers, RF and thermal targets 
and backgrounds, and the like. The increasing emphasis on the design 
of "smart" and/or "brilliant" munitions which use both RF and IR 
seekers to locate and track armored vehicles, has resulted in a need 
for accurate simulations capable of modeling the real-world in the 
laboratory in order for the engineer and algorithm designer to develop 
systems which can perform the extremely difficult tasks of target 
detection, discrimination, and tracking. The focus of all-weather 
"smart" munition systems in the 1980's has been using RF seekers 
operating in the millimeter-wave regime of the electromagnetic 
spectrum. In this paper, we discuss simulations currently in use at 
MICOM and future simulations, to be used in the assessment of 
performance of weapons which use millimeter-wave seekers and 
complex RF signal processing techniques. 

INTRODUCTION 

During the past 10 years, much work has gone into the 
development of so-called "smart" and "brilliant" weapon systems to be 
used in defeating massed armor formations at beyond visual ranges. In 
order for a weapon to classified as "smart" or "brilliant" requires that 
the weapon perform many of the same functions as would normally be 
performed by a human operator. Many of the functions to be 
performed by "smart" and "brilliant” weapons include the detection 
and discrimination of armored target vehicles sitting in a typical 
European battlefield environment. Some of these weapons are 
designed to be fired in the general vicinily of known target formations, 
with the process of target location, detection, discrimination, and 
tracking carried out by the weapon with no human intervention or 
outside information. Needless to say, such performance by a machine 


455 







requires an extremely sophisticated signal processing technique 
which utilizes information from the sensor (whatever type) in arriving 
at a decision to attempt to destroy a particular target vehicle. 

Of particular interest in sensor development to carry out the 
functions of "smart" or "brilliant" target detection, discrimation. and 
tracking, has been the development of active millimeter-wave seekers. 
Millimeter-wave seekers have many advantages over Infrared sensors, 
particularly in their ability to work in all-weather environments, in the 
presence of fog. haze, smoke, and various countermeasures which 
cause problems for IR. In addition, active millimeter-wave seekers do 
not depend on target temperature contrast with the background for 
target detection, and as such, are much less susceptible to simple 
countermeasures (such as flares or burning decoys). Because 
millimeter-wave sensors operate in a Radio-Frequency (RF) regime 
just above traditional microwave bands, radar signal processing 
techniques using polarimetric signature information are available to 
the weapon designer. 

In this paper, we will briefly discuss some of the current 
simulations being used to evaluate millimeter-wave systems under 
development by MICOM. 


TARGET MODELING 

Millimeter-wave sensors which perform the task of target 
detection and discrimination require very sophisticated signal 
processing techniques. Current radar techniques which are capable of 
such functions include various polarimetric techniques, range 
resolution, doppler processing, and various Imaging techniques like 
SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar). In order for the weapon designer to 
successfully design and implement a signal processing algorithm 
which accomplishes the necessaiy task at hand, it becomes necessary 
to test the algorithm with sensor data representative of the target and 
background scenario which the system is likely to encounter. 
Unfortunately, the availability of millimeter-wave target and 
background data has been extremely limited. Because of the limited 
amount of data of sufficient quality for the designer to work with in 
designing his system, the ability to accurately assess and predict 
which signal processing techniques are best able to accomplish system 
requirements. Because of a lack of target data in the early 80's. and 
because of the natural desire to develop a generic target signature 
model which would accurately predict target backscatter 
characteristics at all RF frequencies, much effort has been expended 
over the last decade to develop target signature models. Some of these 
models are quite detailed and complex, and require a computer of 
Cray-type capacities to perform signature calculations. Because of a 
lack of a supercomputer at RDEC, efforts were made to develop a 
millimeter-wave target signature model which could accurately 


456 









predict the fully polarimetric backscatter millimeter-wave signature 
characteristics of armored vehicles and still be fast enough to use with 
typical digital weapon simulations running in a VAX 11/780 
environment. These efforts led to the development of a target 
signature model called 3DSCAT. 

Many methods of predicting RF backscatter from complex 
objects have been developed over the years. Physical optics, the 
method employed in 3DSCAT, is a fairly accurate method of calculating 
the backscattered electromagnetic field from a complex object. 
Techniques must be included to Include the effects of multiple 
reflections on the object itself, since physical optics by itself predicts 
only the scattered field for a single reflection. Other methods, such as 
the Geometric Theory of Diffraction, Physical Theory of Diffraction, 
Method of Moments and so on, are more accurate, but require many 
more calculations for complex objects. We have been able to sh "'w that 
for the purposes of current millimeter-wave "smart" and "L.illiant" 
weapons, that Physical Optics provides more than a sufficient means of 
accurately predicting target signature characteristics. These predicted 
target signatures have been compared with data from real targets and 
have been shown to be In excellent agreement. 

3DSCAT models complex targets as a complex of simple 
geometric shapes, called geometric "prlmatives", whose radar 
signature characteristics are well known. To model a target, one 
decomposes the vehicle into the following prlmatives. 

1. Flat polygons 

2. Cone frusta 

3. Flat disks 

4. Spheres 

5. Arbitrary ellipsoids 

6. Prolate spheroids 

7. Oblate spheroids 

8. Ring Disks or Annuli 

9. Cavities 

10. Toroids 

11. Circular wire loops 

12. Ogives 

13. Top hats 

14. Rectangular Slots 

15. Curved Circular Cylinders 

16. Cylinder/Plate Dihedrals 

17. Eidges 

18. Dihedrals 

19. Trihedrals 

By specifying size, orientation, and surface reflectivity (perfect 
conductor or dielectric can be specified) as well as the range of aspect 


457 



angles over which each primatlve is visible to the radar. The coherent 
radar signature for each primative visible to the radar is calculated, 
summed coherently, and output to a data file. Several options are 
available as to the type of data output. One option calculates the 
coherent signature and outputs this data to a file. Another option ranks 
each scattering primative with respect to signature amplitude, and 
outputs this iiS^ormation. along with coordinate information, to a file. 
The 3DSCAT model is extremely versatile, and output can be easily 
tailored to specific needs. In additioii, excellent agreement between 
simulation prediction and real target data has been achieved. Figure 1 
shows a typical tank vehicle along with two types of reflections 
typically seen using a polarimetric radar. Odd reflections are the result 
of the radar pulse making an odd number of reflections before 
reflection back toward the radar, while even reflections are the result 
of an even number of reflections. In addition, for two target sections, 
namely the turret and a tool bolx on the fender, we list scattering 
primatives appropriate for use in modelling these portions of the 
target. Thus, for example, modeling the main gun on the tank might 
mean decomposing it into: 

1. Circular cylinder (main barrel) 

2. Circular cavity (opening on barrel) 

3. Cylinder plate dihedral (muzzle gas evacuator) 

4. Ring Disk (front of muzzle evacuator) 

Figure 2 shows the various scattering primatives used in 
3DSCAT. Figure 3 and 4 show the signature characteristics as a 
function of aspect angle for a right-angle dihedral with side lengths as 
shown at 35 GHz for both linear and circular polarizations. Figures 5 
and 6 show a 1 meter long edge as a function of aspect angle in a plane 
perpendicular and parallel to the edge surface, respectively, at 94 
GHz. Figure 7 shows a 5.5 cm circular disk at 94 GHz. Figure 8 shows a 
2 cm by 2 cm top hat at 92.7 GHz. Figure 9 shows a 1 meter long 
circular cylinder at 94 GHz. Figures 10 through 12 show veuIous 
samples of polar signature plots of typical main battle tanks. Figure 12 
shows a comparison of real data (top), with frequency averaged data 
(left side) and single frequency (ri^t side). Figure 13 shows a typical 
output file which contains a ranked (from highest to lowest) scattering 
primatives. Figure 14 shows a typical output in which target glint 
(apparent centroid of all scattering primatives making up the target) is 
plotted at 64 different frequencies, typical of a frequency agile radar. 
Figure 15 shows a table comparing model prediction with real target 
data of 6 different polarimetric features for a main battle tank. Again, it 
can be seen that agreement between simulation and real target data is 
excellent. 


458 







FUTURE DIGITAL SIMULATIONS 


Although we have focussed on target modeling in this paper, a 
realistic simulation capable of representing real-world conditions to a 
millimeter-wave seeker must be capable of presenting target and 
background signatures to the radar/seeker model. Since clutter 
modeling at millimeter-wave frequencies is not nearly as advanced as 
is the case with target models, problems still remain in using all 
digital simulations of seeker, target, and background in the 
assessment of weapon system performance. 

One simulation which is in the beginning stages at MICOM will 
use Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) collected by MIT/Lincoln Lab 
using a 35 GHz radar. This SAR data is fully polarimetric and images a 
scene with a resolution of 1 foot by 1 foot. Typical scenes include both 
targets sitting in grassy fields, targets near tree-lines, and targets on 
dirt and paved roads. Since scenes which contain both targets and 
surrounding clutter have all target and clutter interactions "built into" 
the data, this t5q)e of target/background signature model would 
represent a completely realistic database for use by the radar/seeker 
model. 

Our current plans in building a realistic all-digital millimeter- 
wave simulation are as follows. A typical scene consisting of an 
armored vehicle in representative clutter will be chosen. This 
miUimeter-wave database consists of a 400 meter x 400 meter array of 
point scatterers placed at 1 foot intervals in both downrange and 
crossrange. Each array element contains the full polarimetric 
scattering matrix associated with that particular scatterer. Before this 
database is interfaced with the radar model, a geometric model of the 
target contained in the scene will be layed over the database at the 
correct aspect angle. The scatterers In the scene which correspond tq 
the target will be given a z-direction (up) coordinate by determining 
where each target scatterer touches the top of the geometric model of 
the target. After this has been done, the polarimetric data will be 
transformed into whatever polarimetric basis is appropriate (the SAR 
data is linearly polarized). This database will be used to "feed" into the 
radar/seeker model contained in the simulation. By using such a 
database, it should be possible to simulate both the target search and 
terminal homing phase of a millimeter-wave "smart" munition. 

Figure 16 shows a color photograph of one of these SAR images 
received from MIT/LL. The image on the left is the SAR image taken 
with a resolution of 1 meter by 1 meter. The image on the right is an 
optical photograph taken of the same scene. It can be seen firom the 
SAR image that individual background objects are clearly identifiable 
(see, for example, lines in the plowed field, trees, and roads). Figure 
17 contains an enlargement of the lower left-hand comer of the SAR 
image showing trees and a portion of plowed fields. Clearly visible in 


459 








the image is a road which winds through the trees from right to left 
and then down. Also clearly visible are the shadows due to the trees 
(the radar is looking from the top of the SAR image down toward the 
bottom of the image). Figure 18 shows an enlargement of a farm-house 
which is also contained in the scene. Again, trees and roads, as well as 
lines in the plowed field are clearly visible. In addition, the roof and 
roof-line are visible in the approximate upper center of the image. 

Figure 19 shows a geometric model of an M-47 tank. This type 
of model will be used in associating a z-direction (up) with target 
vehicle scatterers contained in the SAR image. Although no plans are 
currently in place to associate terrain elevation with the background 
scene, t^s will be a future avenue of research. 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

It is clear that the development of realistic millimeter-wave 
target and background simulations presents a clear challenge to 
current modelers. It is also clear that such simulations are desperately 
needed in order to successfully evaluate and investigate newer and 
better signal processing techniques designed to detect, discriminate, 
identify, and track armored vehicles. The cost of real-world data 
gathering can be prohibitively expensive, possible under only very 
controlled and ide^ weather conditions. Simulation is the only other 
viable and cost-effective alternative to the successful development of 
current and future millimeter-wave munitions.. 


460 






mples of Even/Odd Bounce Interactions 



461 


Reflection Types and Geometric Primattves 






















462 


Scattering Prlmatlves. 










90 OdgCde Dihedral: a - 10 cm b - 15 cm, f - 35 GHz 
RCS ( dBstt ) [HH] - [VV]- 



xciuvi n3CDa»fi 


463 


Figure 3. 90 Degree Dihedral RCS, Linear Polarization. 



Figure 4. 90 Degree Dihedral RCS, Circular Polarl 







Examples of 3DSCAT ( Version 2.0 ) RCS Calculations 



Linear Polarization 


































Examples of 30SCAT ( Version 2.0 ) RCS Calculations 



Ci-rcular Disk RCS. Linear Polar! 









Examples of 30SCAT ( Versioo 2.0 ) RCS Calculations 



Linear Polari 







Examples of 3DSCAT ( Version 2.0 ) RCS Calculations 



Figure 9. Circular Cylinder RCS, Linear Polarization 








1 


X 

o 


o 

•€ 

» 

(/) eo 
w *0 
o 

a: c 
o -« 


ct 

<z 

a 

Oi 



470 


















REAl. TARGET DATA 



2 


Figure 12. Comparison of 3DSCAT RCS vs. Measured RCS of Main Battle Tank 
















3DSCAT (Xitt>utl Det&lled Scatterer Information 
Scattarera > 0.01 m2 

Target IDt Main Battle Tank 



473 


let Hatch 0.53 -2.8 -0.5 












474 


Figure 14. Target Glint Measured in Target Coordinates in Pitch and Yaw. 







VO o o 

^ cs cs o 


VO <N 

m ri <^* fvi 


12 

V S 

If 


On VO ^ VO — 00 
• *«••• 
in «« (S «-< rs cN 


2 c £ ^ 

^ g S jS + ‘V 

“ W S 3 9 3 
^20000 
f2 3 2 £ S 2 

cs m ^ m VO 


»» M 

J -S 

1 o 


<£ *£ 

1^ 


5 5 
S S 
U. t*- 


475 

























PWF-IMAGE OF TREES 



Figure 17. Enlargement of SAR Image of Trees at 35 GHz Obtained from 
MIT/Llncoln Laboratories. 




























479/(480 Blank) 









CFD in Tactical Missile Aero-Propulsion Technology 

Clark D. Mikkelsen, Kevin D. Kennedy, and Billy J. Walker 

US Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 


ABSTRACT 


PARCH, a fully elliptic, three-dimensional, two-phase (gas- 
particle) , Havier-Stokes flow solver has been developed to model 
cmnbined tactical missile external flow/plume flowfields with 
turbulent mixing and finite-rate chemistry. This paper describes 
the PARCH code capabilities, shows the results for three code 
validation cases, and demonstrates the potential PARCH 
contribution to tactical missile aero-propulsion technology with 
the solution for a transonic missile with bifurcated propulsive 
nozzles, blunt nose, and a large base. 


INTRODUCTION 


One long standing weakness in the state-of-the-art of 
tactical missile aero-propulsion interaction technology has been 
the ability to model conbined missile and rocket exhaust plume 
flowfields even though total flowfield solutions are fundamental 
to the prediction of vehicle aerodynamics, missile/plume 
signature, and plume/signal interference. 

Combined missile external flow/plume flowfields have been 
difficult to model because of the con^lexity of the physical 
processes that occur. These include aerodynamic flow separation 
of the missile afterbody boundary layer due to the high pressures 
at the rocket nozzle exit plane; the recirculation, mixing, and 
chemical reaction in the the base region; the mixing, complex 
shock structure, and afterburning of the fuel rich rocket exhaust 
in the near plume region; and the mixing in the far plume region. 
These difficulties are further increased by three-dimensional 
effects due to angle-of-attack, multiple exhaust nozzles, or 
bifurcated nozzles, and the two-phase, gas-particle constituents 
of most tactical missile rocket exhaust plumes. 

The technical approach taken toward resolution of this 
shortcoming in flowfield prediction capability has been to use 
proven numerical methods of coo^utational fluid dynamics (CFD) 
and apply them successively to this problem; i.e. to build on a 
known flowfield code while adding the capability to handle more 
coaiplex physical processes with each step. Running jointly with 


J^pproved for public release: distribution is unlimited. 


481 








this model development effort has been a program to verify the 
methodology for each process using simpler validation cases based 
on experimental measurements or known analytical solutions. This 
joint approach insures that each step in the development process 
accurately models the physical phenomena while reducing the risks 
inherent in code development. 

The objective of this paper is to describe the capabilities 
incorporated into PARCH, the missile external flow/plume 
flowfield model developed under this program, to show the results 
of three simple code validation cases, and to demonstrate the 
full PARCH potential with the solution for a complex but 
realistic tactical missile configuration. 


PARCH MODEL 


The PARCH Mavier-Stokes code is based on the ARC code developed 
at NASA Ames Research Center by Pulliam and co-workers and 
subsequently upgraded to the PARC code for generalized grid 
blanking/boundary conditions by Cooper at Arnold Engineering 
Development Center, AEDC^. PARCH incorporates several upgrades 
to the original ARC methodology with regards to thermochemical 
capabilities, multi-phase gas-particle non-equilibrium flow, 
turbulence modeling, numerical algorithms, and grid handling. As 
such, the PARCH model contains rather broad based capabilities 
and has been applied to rocket and scramjet propulsive 
flowfields, and to aerodynamic, reentry wake, and film cooling 
problems. 

Code upgrades to Parch provide significant flexibility. The 
choice of algorithms include central difference, 1st order upwind 
Roe schemes, and 2nd order upwind Roe schemes with TVD 
extensions. The basic algorithm is solved with either the 
diagonalized or banded block tridiagonal matrix inversions 
techniques. Thermochemical options include perfect gas, 
equilibrium air, one-step complete combustion, generalized 
multi-component finite-rate chemical kinetics, and thermal 
equilibrium, inviscid, laminar, or turbulent viscosity models 
may be specified with PARCH, but the original Baldwin-Lomax 
algebraic turbulence model has been replaced with the two- 
equation Chien low Reynolds number K-e model with corrections 
added for compressibility and curvature. In addition, a 
generalized multi-zoning or grid blocking capability has been 
implemented for the analysis of tactical missile flow problems of 
extreme geometric complexity. 

The governing Navier-Stokes equations use conventional 
implicit time stepping and linearization procedures. Approximate 
factorization is utilized to cast the equations into the 
conventional delta or strong conservation law form. The code can 
treat two-dimensional planar, two-dimensional axisymmetric, and 


482 






three-dimensional forms of the equations. Artificial viscosity 
is added both implicitly and explicitly and follows the switched 

• fourth-order and second-order form of Jameson. Variable spatial 
and temporal time-steps are used for improved algorithm 
efficiency and robustness. 


GRID GENERATION 


Experience has shown that obtaining a numerical solution to 
the Navier-Stokes equations for a given flowfield is as equally 
dependent on the grid which defines the flowfield as on the 
algorithm which represents the fluid dynamic equations; i.e., a 
poorly constructed grid may never give a valid solution 
regardless of the flow solver. Factors which determine the 
relative merits of a given grid include (1) the total number of 
grid points, (2) packing of the grid points to resolve specific 
features of the flowfield, (3) sketmess of the grid lines, 
particularly at grid boundaries, (4) the ratio of width to height 
to depth of the cells formed by the grid points, and (5) the 
location of the grid boundaries relative to specific features of 
the flowfield. Furthermore, grid generation is rarely a one step 
process, but rather a continuous refinement through packing to 
resolve shock waves, boundary layers, and other features of the 
flowfield as they develop. 


The grid generation code chosen for use with PARCH was 
INGRID, an interactive, user-oriented code designed to generate 
two-dimensional and three-dimensional computational grids for 
flow solvers such as the PARCH code. INGRID uses several 
techniques either separately or in combination to generate grids 
for arbitrary geometries. The computational mesh is formed using 
algebraic and/or partial differential equation methods with 
proper forcing functions. User defined grid clustering is 
accomplished with either exponential or hyperbolic tangent 
routines that allow for a desired grid point distribution. Grid 
optimization is accomplished using an elliptic solver and/or 
variational methods^'^. 


PARCH CODE VALIDATION CASES 


The following three flowfield calculations were completed as 
PARCH code validation cases. The cases were chosen because they 
represent fundamental fluid dynamic problems with known 
analytical solutions or experimental measurements for validation 
comparisons. These cases do not in any way validate the PARCH 
model for all possible flowfield conditions. Rather, validation 
is a process which adds credibility to the model as more 
validation cases of wider range and complexity are successfully 
c<MBpleted. Quality validation cases, however, are difficult to 


483 





<^tain for anything but tho most simplistic configurations since 
more cooqplex validation tests are restricted by cost, 
instrumentation, and technical problems. 


SUPERSONIC INVISCID FLOW OVER A WEDGE 


The first case chosen for code validation was a simple, 
two-dimensional, supersonic wedge flow configuration since 
solutions for the shoclc angle are given by compressible, 
isentropic flow theory. The specific case was a sharp wedge 
inclined at 15 degrees to a Mach € air (y * 1*4) free stream. 

The grid defining the flowfield over the wedge of interest 
is shown in Figure 1. The wedge is 9 units long and 2.41 units 
in height at the base giving a wedge angle of 15 degrees. The 
grid extends 0.5 units in front of the wedge tip and rises to 5 
units above the wedge centerline at the base. There are 250 grid 
points along the axis parallel to the wedge centerline and 100 
grid points extending normal to the wedge surface. Grid points 
were packed toward the wedge surface in the normal direction and 
toward the wedge tip in the longitudinal direction. The outer 
boundary of the grid represents the freestream and was located 
far enough away from the wedge surface so as not to interfere 
with the shock emanating from the wedge tip. The grid shown in 
Figure 1 is an end product, not an initial guess, and was based 
on both experience with the PARCH code and a priori knowledge of 
the theoretical shock location based on two-dimensional shock 
tables. JSo special mttmapt was made to pack grid points so as to 
better resolve the shock. 

PARCH was compiled and executed for this wedge flow 
configuration on a 64-bit word length machine. The initial 
flowfield, as defined by the density, velocity cooqponents, and 
energy at each grid point, was given as a uniform Mach 6 flow 
parallel to the wedge centerline. For this case, PARCH was run 
in an Euler or inviscid mode; hence, the initial flowfield 
conditions and the reference conditions are not unique, and any 
consistent set of conditions fixing a Mach 6, y > 1.4 freestream 
autd uniform Mach 6 initial flowfield condition should give 
identical results. 

The results for the PARCH wedge flow calculations are shown 
in the Mach number contours of Figure 2. The computed shock 
angle is at approxiawtely 23 degrees which is consistent with the 
theoretical solution from the two-dimensional shock tables^. 


484 





SUPERSONIC TURBOLENT FLOW OVER A CONE 


The second case chosen for code validation was a simple, 
axisymmetric, supersonic flow over a sharp, 7 degree half-angle 
cone. Turbulent boundary layer profiles for this configuration 
were taken in the AEOC Supersonic Wind Tunnel (A) at a freestream 
Mach number of 4 and freestream unit Reynolds number of 3 million 
per foot using probe techniques^. 


The grid defining the flowfield over the cone is shown in 
Figure 3. The cone is 1.016 m (40 inches) long and 0.249 m (9.82 
inches) in diameter at the base giving a cone half-angle of 7 
degrees. The grid extends 0.0127 m (0.5 inches) in front of and 
above the cone tip. The grid rises to 0.296 m (11.65 inches) 
above the cone centerline at the base. There are 150 grid points 
along the axis parallel to the cone centerline and 100 grid 
points extending normal to the cone surface. Grid points were 
packed towards the cone tip, toward the cone surface, and in the 
region of the shock. The outer boundary of the grid represents 
the freestream and was located such that the shock generated by 
the cone at Mach 4 would lie just inside the grid boundary. 
Packing of grid points toward the cone surface was altered as the 
PARCH flowfield developed to insure resolution of the turbulent 
boundary layer. Grid points were distributed, as recommended^, 
to give at least one grid point within a y*** of 1 and 10 grid 
points with a y'^ of 50. 


The PARCH code was compiled and executed for this case on a 
64-bit word length siachine. The initial flowfield, as defined by 
the density, velocity coiig>onents, and energy at each grid point, 
was calculated using one-dimensional, isentropic flow theory and 
the wind tunnel freestream conditions. PARCH was run in the 
viscous mode using the modified, two-equation k-e turbulence 
model. 


Results for the PARCH flowfield calculations are shown in 
the turbulent boundary layer profile of Figure 4 where measured 
and calculated velocities COTpare well at the measurement station 
0.902 m (35.5 inches) downstream of the cone tip. The velocity, 
U, was normalized by the constant edge velocity, U^; and the 
distance nozmal to the cone surface, was normalized by the 
boundary layer thickness, 5, which was defined as the location 
corresponding to D/U^ » 0.995. This PARCH calculation required 
7,550 iterations for convergence with no significant changes in 
the flowfield properties occurring between 7,550 and 8,550 
iterations. 


485 




SUPERSONIC LAMINAR FLOW OVER A CONE 


The third case chosen for code validation was identical to 
the second case above except that probe data for laminar boundary 
layer profiles over the sharp, 7 degree half-angle cone were 
taken in the AEDC Supersonic Wind Tunnel (A) at a freestream Mach 
number of 4 and freestream unit Reynolds number of 0.6 million 
per foot^. 

The grid defining the flowfield over the cone was identical 
to the grid for the jecond case above as shown in Figure 3; 
however, it was necessary for this laminar case to add some 
bluntness, 1/2000 of the base, to the tip of the cone. 

For laminar flow, the PARCH code requires a characteristic length 
scale to resolve the local Reynolds number; hence, a finite cone 
tip radius is necessary to avoid laminar boundary layer growth 
starting with an infinite local Reynolds number. This bluntness 
requirement does not occur in the previous turbulent case since 
the local length scale is derived from the turbulent mixing 
model^. 

The PARCH code was again compiled and executed for this case 
on a 64-bit word length machine with an initial flowfield as 
calculated using one-dimensional isentropic flow theory and the 
wind tunnel freestream conditions. 

Results for the PARCH flowfield calculations are presented 
in the laminar boundary layer profile of Figure 5 where measured 
and calculated velocities compare well at the measurement station 
0.902 m (35.5 inches) downstream of the cone tip. As in the 
turbulent l^undary layer results of Figure 4, the velocity, U, 
was normalized by the constant edge velocity, U^; and the 
distance normal to the cone surface, Z, was normalized by the 
boundary layer thickness, 5, which was defined as the location 
corresponding to U/U^ «■ 0.995. The measured data in Figure 5 
does not extend below Z/d » 0.35 in this laminar flow case 
because of probe interfence with the flow. This PARCH 
calculation required 9,000 iterations for convergence with no 
significant changes in the flowfield properties occurring between 
9,000 and 10,000 iterations. 


PARCH CODE DEMONSTRATION CASE 


A final case demonstrates the capability of the PARCH model 
to treat coaplex but realistic tactical missile configurations. 
The case of interest was a 12 caliber, optical-fiber guided, 
transonic missile with a blunt nose, boat tail, and a large base. 
Missile propulsion was provided by a monopropellant hydrazine 


486 






flight motor with bifurcated nozzles located upstream of the boat 
tail. Motivation for this demonstration case was provided by the 
need to satisfy design requirements limiting skin temperature aft 
of the propulsive nozzles and limiting turbulent intensity in the 
missile wake or optical-fiber trail. 

Analysis of this problem exercised many features of the 
PARCH code including finite-rate chemistry, and the two-equation 
K-E turbulence model. Some 270,000 grid points were required for 
a zero angle-of-attack calculation with quarter plane symmetry, 
and the PARCH multi-zoning capability was a direct outgrowth of 
this analysis effort. 

A sample of the results from this PARCH calculation are 
illustrated in the Mach number contours of Figure 6. This figure 
views the missile body from the aft end and shows the missile 
cylindrical surface, boat tail, and one of the bifurcated 
nozzles. The Mach number contours lie in the vertical symmetry 
plane passing through the nozzle and depict the diffusion of the 
high Mach ntimber exhaust into the missile external flowfield. 


CONCLUSIONS 


The PARCH model is currently the most advanced model of a 
missile in flight. The code has successfully completed a limited 
number of fundamental fluid dynamic cases as part of an on- going 
and extensive validation program to build confidence in the PARCH 
model; and the ability of the code to treat realistic, complex 
tactical missile problems has been demonstrated. 


REFERENCES 


1. Cooper, 6.K., "The PARC Code: Theory and Usage," 

AEDC-TR-87-24, October 1987. 

2. Dorrel, E.N., Jr. and Soni, B.K., "INGRID: Interactive Two- 
Dimensional Grid Generation," AEDC-TR-86-49, February 1987. 

3. Dorrel, E.N., Jr. and McClure, M.D., "3D INGRID: Interactive 
Three-Dimensional Grid Generation," AEDC-TR-87-40, April 1988. 

4. John, J.E.A., Gas Dynamics, 2nd Edition, Boston, 

Massachusetts, Allyn and Bacon, Inc., 1984, pp. 388-397. 

5. Donaldson, J.C., "Laser Doppler Velocimeter Application in 
Supersonic Boundary-Layer Flow," AEDC-TR-86-44, March 1987. 

6. Dash, S.M., Science implications International Corporation, 

Ft. Washington, Pennsylvania, Personal Communication. 


487 




NC»4EHCIATORE 


= specific heat ratio 
j = total velocity 

* constant edge velocity 
Z =* distance normal to the surface 

5 *= local boundary layer thickness 

ss local density at the wall 
as local shear stress at the wall 
= local viscosity at the wall 
y+ » dimensionless distance normal to the surface 

as ^ /M' W 


486 


*\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ 


^WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW 


M,\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\w 


^\\\\\v\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\w 


XVWWWVWVVWWWWWWWWO.-' 


ViWVWWWWWWWWWWWW 


,\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\W' 


.wwwwwwwwwwwwww 



Oi 


00 




so 


H in 


cn 


^ M 


489 * 


Fig. 1. Hedge Flowfield Grid 










Fig. 2. Wedge Flow Mach Number Contours 


o 



491 






492 


Turbulent Boundary Layer Profile 











Laminar Boundary Layar Profile 









Fig. 6. Tactical Missile Mach Humber Contours 







- SESSION VI - 

PROPULSION 




SAFE DISPOSAL OF ROCKET MOTORS 


William S. Melvin 
Propulsion Directorate 

Research, Development, and Engineering Center 
U. S. Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-5249 

ABSTRACT 

The U.S. Army Missile Command (MICOM) has been successful in applying 
critical fluid extraction (CFE) technology for propellant and explosive 
demilitarizations. A specific process that is ready for transition from 
research to pilot plant demonstration is the near-critical liquid (NCL) 
ammonia demilitarization of rocket motors containing ammonium perchlorate (AP) 
composite propellants. This demilitarization method consists of a straight¬ 
forward, four-step, continuous process. Step one involves removing the AP 
propellant from the rocket motor by hydraulic erosion using NCL ammonia. Step 
two extracts the oxidizer (AP) and separates the AP/liquld ammonia solution 
and binder residue (crumb). Step three recovers the AP by evaporating the 
ammonia. Step four condenses the ammonia vapor and recycles the liquid 
ammonia for a continuous removal/extraction operation. The CFE process is 
efficient and is conducted at ambient temperatures and low operating 
pressures. 

This paper summarizes the recommendations of a two-phase engineering 
design study to finalize a process and build a pilot plant facility to de¬ 
militarize rocket motors containing AP composite propellants. Phase I is 
Intended to demonstrate the technical feasibility of the process, to deter¬ 
mine the effects of process variables, and to demonstrate the safe operation 
of the ammonia CFE demilitarization process. Phase II includes the design, 
construction, and operation of a pilot plant to demonstrate that the critical 
fluid method is nonpolluting, cost effective, and environmentally acceptable. 

INTRODUCTION 

MICOM has successfully demonstrated an Innovative application of critical 
fluid extraction (CFE) technology for the demilitarization of propellant, ex¬ 
plosive, and pyrotechnic (PEP) munitions. The MICOM method of CFE demilitari¬ 
zation represents a radical departure from traditional open buming/open detona¬ 
tion (OB/OD) disposal methods. It offers an environmentally safe and straight¬ 
forward approach for resource recovery, reclamation, and/or in situ neutraliza¬ 
tion of otherwise hazardous munitions and ingredients. The method circumvents 
traditional ingredient solvation processes, avoids the use of water or hazard¬ 
ous organic solvents, and does not generate additional hazardous wastes. This 
demilitarization process is nonpolluting, cost effective, and environmentally 
acceptable. 


Cleared for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


495 





In the MICOM CFE demilitarization method, gases are compressed and 
"fluidized" under pressure to near-critical liquid (NCL) and supercritical 
fluid (SCF) conditions. These fluids serve as nontraditional extraction 
solvents when used in their NCL or SCF conditions. The unusual solvating 
properties of critical fluids can enhance selective and rapid extraction of 
PEP ingredients from complex munition compositions. The CFE demilitariza¬ 
tion process takes advantage of gas-to-liquid and liquid-to-gas phase trans¬ 
itions which occur during the compression and expansion (pressure reduction) 
of all confined gases. Because the CFE process is similar to the operation 
of closed-loop air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, continuous re¬ 
cycling of the solvent is possible. The main differences reside in the 
selection of an appropriate critical fluid solvent and the Incorporation of 
an extraction vessel and a pressure reduction (expansion) chamber for in¬ 
gredient recovery. Complete recovery of soluble ingredients is obtained by 
controlling the phase transition of the NCL or SCF solvent to the gaseous 
state. Liquefaction and recompression of the original CFE solvent completes 
the continuous demilitarization cycle. A simplified schematic of a CFE 
system is shown in Fig. 1. 



Ruid 


Fig. 1. Critical Fluid Extraction by Pressure Reduction Technique. 

The MICOM CFE demilitarization process, albeit simple in design, has been 
experimentally shown to be extremely effective for class 1.3 AP composite 
propellants and has similar usage potential for related PEP munitions. The 


496 






MICOM demilitarization program is broad-based and has included the investiga¬ 
tion of several CFE solvent systems. The MICOM method offers a unique alter¬ 
native to current OB/OD disposal practices and provides high payoff potential 
for propellant and conventional ammunition demilitarization. MICOM has tested 
the CFE process at the laboratory scale for a variety of conventional munitions 
and high energy materials. Plans for system engineering design, prototype 
scale-up, and testing of system specific processes are in progress. 

The primary advantages of the CFE demilitarization process are: 

1. It uses mature, well-developed technologies. CFE technology is a 
proven industrial process that can be applied to munitions demilitarization 
and hazardous waste minimization. 

2. The process is environmentally acceptable. The system is com¬ 
pletely self-contained, meaning no pollution of air or water environments. 

3. The method is economically advantageous. Strategic raw materials 
can be recovered. CFE solvents are low cost, recyclable for continuous pro¬ 
cessing, and do not generate additional hazardous wastes. 

4. Transportable facilities appear to be feasible. This process 
lends Itself to mobility, as the various components can be designed in 
modular form. 


DISCUSSION 

The use of critical fluids at conditions above and below their critical 
temperatures and pressures for demilitarization has been under active investi¬ 
gation by MICOM.Investigations have examined the extraction of both fuels 
and oxidizers using a variety of NCL and SCF extraction solvents which include 
carbon dioxide, ammonia, and nitrous oxide. Of particular Interest is the 
process using ammonia to extract ammonium perchlorate from hydroxy-terminated 
polybutadiene (HTPB) and polybutadlene-acryllc acld-acrylonltrile (PBAN) comr 
poslte propellants. Tests have shown that liquid ammonia will dissolve con¬ 
siderably more than its own weight of AP.^ This effort is the basis of the 
demilitarization process principally described in this paper. 

Ammonia is in the liquid state at approximately 120 psi and 70 °F. Be¬ 
cause of its affinity for AP, ammonia can be used at these conditions for 
extracting AP from propellant binders. To facilitate a rapid extraction 
process, the propellant is best cut or comminuted into small pieces. Dis¬ 
solved AP can be recovered by use of heat to evaporate the ammonia. For¬ 
tunately, composite propellant binders are not greatly affected by ammonia. 

The physical characteristics of ammonia and its affinity for AP suggests 
a unique process for demilitarization of rocket motors. In this process the 
rocket siotor serves as the extraction vessel. Liquid ammonia is injected at 
a high velocity stream that cuts or erodes the propellant into small pieces 
suitable for rapid extraction of the AP. The ammonia CFE method of demilitar¬ 
ization of rocket motors consists of a straightforward, four-step, continuous 
process. The first step involves propellant removal by hydraulic erosion of 
the propellant surface using NCL ammonia at moderately high pressures. The 


497 



second step includes extraction of the AF oxidizer and separation of the AP/ 
anmonia solution and binder residue (crumb). Partial extraction of the AP 
occurs during propellant removal. In the third step, the AP is recovered by 
evaporation of the ammonia. The fourth step involves condensation (liquefac¬ 
tion) of the ammonia vapor by compression and cooling. The liquid ammonia is 
then recycled for continuation of the cutting/extraction operations. 

Ample data exist on the processing of ammonia because of its use in the 
chemical and refrigeration industries. MICOM experiments have demonstrated 
that 100% of the AP can be rapidly extracted from composite propellants. 
Traditional water cutting of propellants suggests that liquid ammonia can 
similarly be used to cut or erode propellants.^ These conclusions are the 
basis for a CFE demilitarization pilot plant design carried out by Stone 
Engineering on behalf of the U. S. Army.^ The remainder of this paper is a 
summary discussion of the design study conducted in support of pilot plant 
implementation. 

MICOM has requested funding for a two-phased program to finalize a process 
and build a pilot plant facility to demilitarize rocket motors containing 
ammonium perchlorate (AP). The proposed 1,100 pound capacity rocket motor 
demilitarization facility will validate the engineering and processing 
requirements for applying this technology to AP composite propellants that 
comprise the major portion of the DoD and NASA large rocket motor inventories. 
Phase I is intended to demonstrate the technical feasibility of the process, 
to determine the effects of process variables in three critical steps (pro¬ 
pellant removal, AP extraction, and AP recovery), and to demonstrate the safe 
operation of the ammonia demilitarization process. Phase II will include the 
design, construction, and operation of a pilot plant to demonstrate that the 
critical fluid method is non-polluting, cost effective, and environmentally 
acceptable. 

PHASE I - TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
EROSIVE PROPELLANT CUTTING 


Tests will be conducted to determine optimum conditions for erosive cutting 
of bulk composite propellant using high pressure liquid ammonia jets. The 
effects of pressure, nozzle size and configuration, impingement velocity, and 
nozzle-to-propellant surface distance requirements will be assessed. These 
tests will provide the baseline data on propellant surface erosion efficiencies, 
surface penetration depths, cutting phenomena, and binder communition that are 
required for engineering design scale-up. An apparatus has been designed to 
conduct these tests. 

AP EXTRACTION 


The AP extraction tests will determine how the AP extraction rate is 
affected by the surface-to-volume ratio of the propellant sample, contact 
time, and AP concentration in the AP/ansnonia solution. An apparatus has been 
designed to conduct these tests. 


498 






AP RECOVERY 


A simulated falling film evaporator and linear delivery nozzle will be 
employed in this investigation. Tests will be accomplished to determine the 
rate of AP recovery with respect to factors such as AP concentration, operat¬ 
ing pressure, rate of solution input, temperature of evaporator plate, and 
top-to-bottom temperature gradient. Other factors in the evaporation/recovery 
process that will be investigated include: (1) the minimum operating pressure 
at which ammonia evaporation can be conducted without causing flashing of the 
feed solution, resultin'* in entrainment of AP dust in the ammonia vapor, and 
(2) the determination of whether the AP will fall freely from the evaporator 
plate and collect in the bottom of the evaporator vessel, or whether a mech¬ 
anical means will have to be Incorporated to remove the solid AP from the 
evaporator plate. An apparatus suitable for conducting these measurements 
has been designed. 

SAFETY TESTS 


Safety tests will be conducted to identify any potential hazards associa¬ 
ted with the demilitarization process and to determine if there is a need to 
establish limits for processing variables (such as temperature, pressure, and 
AP concentration) to ensure a safe pilot plant operation. 

Both the crumb (binder/Al residue) and AP/ammonia solutions will be eval¬ 
uated with respect to safety characteristics. Crumb that contains excessive 
amounts of residual AP (up to 10%--two to three times the expected concentra- 
* tion) will be subjected to standard compression, thermal, electrostatic, im¬ 
pact, and friction tests. 

Ammonium perchlorate/ammonia solutions at AP concentrations up to 95% of 
saturation (67% by weight) will be evaluated. The safety tests that will be 
conducted include thermal, electrostatic, impact, friction, pressure, detona¬ 
tion, and critical height to explosion. In addition, low and high pressure 
pumping tests (at pressures that will encompass the range of pressures that 
will be employed in the high and low pressure sections of the pilot plant) 
will be accomplished. 


PHASE II - PILOT PLANT DESIGN 

The pilot plant concept, as depicted in Fig. 2, consists of a four-step 
CFE process. The entire process is contained in a closed system where high 
pressure jets of liquid ammonia are used to cut composite solid propellants 
into small pieces. These propellant pieces are transferred to a crumb separa¬ 
tor where the liquid ammonia dissolves the ammonium perchlorate (AP) oxidizer 
out of the binder. The AP/anmonia solution is transferred to an evaporator 
where the ammonia is evaporated from the solution and the AP is recovered. 

The ammonia vapor is compressed and colled and recondensed to a liquid and 
then is transferred to a liquid ammonia storage tank to be recycled through 
the system. Because the system is closed, the entire process continued until 
all the propellant has been removed from the rocket motor and all the AP has 
been separated from the propellant binder without loss of the ammonia. The 
crumb separator and evaporator are sized to contain all the inert binder and 
all of the AP from one 1,100 pound rocket motor. 


499 





CnmCAL FLUID EXnUCTWN (CFE) PROCESS 
FOR AIMOMUM PERCHLORATE MOTORS 
USWOUQUIO AMMONIA 



Fig. 2. Pilot Plant Schematic 

The first step of the process is to remove the propellant from the 
rocket motor. To do this, the motor is mounted into a holding structure 
with the nozzle end up. Special fittings for each type of rocket motor are 
mounted on each end of the motor. The lower (head) end is connected to the 
inlet pipe to the crumb separator. The upper (nozzle) end is connected to 
the lance drive mechanism. Both end fittings must be pressure tight to pre> 
vent the loss of ammonia during the process. 

The lance contains two (or more) adjustable high pressure nozzles which 
direct jets of liquid ammonia into the propellant to cut (erode) the propel¬ 
lant. Low pressure jets of liquid ammonia are used to flush the surface of 
the propellant and carry off the cut pieces of propellant. The lance rotates 
slowly and moves down the axis of the rocket motor while the high pressure 
jets of ammonia cut the propellant and the low pressure jets wash away the 
loose pieces. As the propellant is removed, the adjustable nozzles are moved 
closer to the new propellant surface for more efficient cutting. The lance 
is moved up and down the axis of the propellant while rotating until all the 
propellant is removed from the motor case. The lance is designed to accom¬ 
modate a fiber optics light source to illuminate the cutting location, and a 
TV monitor to observe the cutting and to determine when all propellant has 
been removed. 


500 























The second step of the process is to collect the propellant pieces in the 
crumb separator. Here the liquid ammonia will dissolve the AP leaving a 
porous crumb of rubber binder which contains the powered aluminum fuel. The 
crumb separator tank consists of a fixed upper section and a removable lower 
section which is sized to contain all of the propellant crumb from the rocket 
motor. The upper section contains the crumb and liquid ammonia inlet pipe, 
a pipe to the vacuum pump, an over-pressure relief pipe, and two liquid am¬ 
monia outlet pipes (one to a recirculating pump for the crumb separator and 
the other to the high- and low-pressure recirculating pumps to the rocket 
motor). The lower section contains one inlet pipe from the recirculation 
pump. Between the two sections is a screen to prevent propellant crumb from 
floating to the upper liquid level. Above the inlet pipe in the lower sec¬ 
tions is a fluidized bed screen through which the upward flow of liquid 
ammonia agitates the crumb in the liquid ammonia to increase the efficiency 
of the AP extraction. 

The crumb separator also contains pressure, temperature, liquid-level, 
and concentration sensors. The liquid level sensor determines when, and how 
much, solution is recirculated to the rocket motor. The concentration sensor 
determines when to divert solution to the evaporator after a predetermined 
AP/ammonia concentration level has been reached. 

In the third s tep of the process, the AP is recovered from the AP/ammonia 
solution by evaporation of the ammonia. The evaporator tank consists of a 
fixed upper section and a removable lower section which is sized to contain 
all of the AP from the rocket motor propellant. The upper section contains 
the solution inlet pipe, an outlet pipe to the vacuum line, and an outlet 
pipe for the ammonia vapor. It also contains a heated falling-film evapora¬ 
tor which separates the AP from the anmonia. The incoming solution is dis¬ 
charged through a ring-type nozzle around the upper edge of the falling-film 
evaporator. The solution flows down a smooth, Teflon-coated conical surface 
(large diameter at the top) where it is heated, and the ammonia is boiled off. 
The precipitated AP falls into the lower section of the tank. To minimize 
AP sticking to the evaporator wall, a vibrator may be required to shake it 
loose. The lower end of the evaporator probably will require more heat 
because the boiling point of the AP/ammonia solution increases as the concen¬ 
tration level Increases. The pressure in the evaporator tank is lowered as 
the vapor is drawn out through a filter (to remove any AP dust) and a dryer 
(to remove any water) to a compressor which recompresses the vapor before it 
is pumped into a condenser. 

The fourth step of the process takes place in the condenser where the 
ammonia vapor is cooled and reliquefied. The liquid ammonia is then trans¬ 
ferred into the liquid ammonia storage tank where it is ready to be recycled. 
(A heat pump will be used to supply the heat to the evaporator and the cooling 
for the condenser.) 

To ensure safe and efficient operation of the pilot plant, pressure, temp¬ 
erature, liquid level, and concentration sensors are strategically located 
throughout the system. Pressure and temperature sensors are located in each 
of the four tanks, in the drain line from the rocket motor, and in the high- 
and low-pressure lines to the rocket motor. Readings from any of these sen¬ 
sors which exceed the predetermined levels will cause an alarm to sound and 
will shut down the system automatically. 


501 




Liquid level sensors are located in the crumb separator and in the liquid 
ammonia storage tank. The sensor in the crumb separator controls the liquid 
level by controlling the recirculating piimps to the rocket motor. The sensor 
in the ammonia storage tank monitors the amount of liquid ammonia in the 
system. 

Concentration sensors are located in the crumb separator and in the inlet 
pipe to the high-pressure pump. The sensor in the crumb separator controls 
the pump which transfers the AF/ammonia solution to the evaporator. The 
sensor in the inlet line to the high-pressure pump shuts the system down if 
the concentration level exceeds a predetermined level. Additional sensors 
in the process building are provided to detect ammonia leaks in the system. 

Any leaks will cause an alarm to sound and the system will be shut down 
automatically. 

All pilot plant instruments and sensors will be monitored by the computer- 
controlled system. The control system will measure and record all parameters, 
store this information for each rocket motor, and provide a printout for each 
selected parameter. Two sets of limits, upper and lower, for each parameter 
will be input into the computer. Whenever any of the lower limits are ex¬ 
ceeded in a predetermined time, the control will cause an alarm to sound and 
if the operator cannot bring that parameter back within limits in a predeter¬ 
mined time, the computer will cause the process to shut down. If any of the 
upper limits are exceeded, the computer will cause the process to shut down 
immediately. 


SUMMARY 


CAPACITY 


The simplicity of the MICOM CFE demilitarization process makes it parti- 
cularily amenable to system scale-up. System specific processes are con¬ 
sidered viable for applications which range from large ICBM rocket motors 
to small hand grenade munitions. 

OPERATING COST 


Operating cost is believed to be low. Costs will vary in accordance with 
system specific requirements, size of munitions, and whether smaller munitions 
can be demilitarized in bulk (soak) processes. Small and mobile designs are 
feasible. 

PROCESS CONTROL 


All system configurations are intended to utilize existing technologies and 
off-the-shelf industrial components. 

RECLAMATION QUALITY 

The CFE process provides high quality, high yield ingredient reclamation. 
The process has an extensive industrial base which can be readily adapted to 
meet the needs of the munitions industry. 


502 






WASTE STREAMS GENERATED 


The process is designed to eliminate or minimize hazardous waste genera¬ 
tion. 

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS 


Minimal constraints are anticipated as the CFE demilitarization method 
addresses emerging Environmental Protection Legislative Acts on Clean Air, 
Clean Water, Hazardous Waste Reduction, Resc irce Conservation and Recovery, 
and Federal Facility Contamination. Therefore, the MICOM critical fluid 
demilitarization method offers defense contractors, NASA, and the DoD a 
"clean" process which will be economical and meet EPA environmental con¬ 
cerns . 

DATA GAPS 

The CFE demilitarization process for recovery of ammonium perchlorate 
from composite propellants is ready for transition from research to pilot 
plant demonstration. This effort will provide an extensive data base in 
support of other munition demilitarization applications which are presently 
under consideration. 

CONSTRUCTION COSTS 


Construction costs are believed to be highly competitive with cost 
savings through joint ventures with private industries. 

DEVELOPMENTAL COSTS 


Costs will vary in accordance with the specific demilitarization effort. 
Typical system engineering design, testing, and evaluation costs are esti¬ 
mated to be $1.5M per system. 

DEVELOPMENTAL STATUS 


A process to meet the demilitarization requirements for Class 1.3 large 
rocket motors is ready for transition to pilot plant demonstration. Similar 
processes for conventional munition applications have been demonstrated at 
the laboratory scale. Funding is required for prototype engineering design 
and evaluation. 


REFERENCES 

1. Melvin, W. S., "Demilitarization Method for Composite Propellants," 1989 
JANNAF Propulsion Meeting, CPIA Publication No. 515, Vol. Ill, pp 103-111. 

2. Melvin, W. S., and Graham, J. F., "Method to Demilitarize, Extract, and 
Recover Ammonium Perchlorate from Composite Propellants Using Liquid 
Ammonia," Propulsion Directorate, U.S. Army Missile Command, Redstone 
Arsenal, AL, U.S. Patent 4,854,982, Filed 31 January 1989. 


503 





3. Bvtgs, T. L., Bradley, H. H., McBride, W. R., and Prentice, J. L., "A 
New Class of Propellants; Solution Monopropellants Part I: What is a 
Solution Monopropellant?," 12th JANNAF Combustion Meeting, CPIA Publica¬ 
tion No. 273, Vol. Ill, pp 89-103. 

4. McBride, W. R., "Sensitivity and Characterization of Selected Liquid 
Ammonia Systems," NWC TP 5836, pp 33-38. 

5. Brown, E. D., "Propellant Removal by Water Washout (Hydromining)," 

Morton Thiokol, Inc., Brigham City, Ul, 1985 JANNAF Safety and Environ¬ 
mental Protection Subcommittee Meeting, 4-8 November 1985, CPIA Pub. 436 
pp 99-103. 

6. Davis, R. T., and McGill, H. L., "Critical Fluid Demilitarization of 
Rocket Motors," Technical Report No. 35801-90001, Stone Engineering 
Company, April 1990; Performed under MICOM Contract No. DAAH01-89-C-0099 





INSENSITIVE MUNITIONS SOLID PROPELLLANT DEVELOPMENT 


Eric J. Herring 
Propulsion Directorate 
U.S. Army Missile Cononand 
Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-5249 


INTRODUCTION 

Recently the U.S. Army has adopted an Insensitive Munitions 
(IM) policy for current and future missile systems. Army missile 
systems will need to meet IM requirements in the fielded 
motor/launch configuration. This policy will significantly 
reduce the severity of personnel and equipment losses in the 
handling of munitions during production, storage, shipping, and 
combat operations. A much publicized incident occurred several 
years ago in West Germany. This was the accidental ignition and 
subsequent overpressurization of the first stage PERSHING rocket 
motor which resulted in three deaths and nine injuries to Army 
personnel. The cause was attributed to electrical discharge 
during the removal of this motor from its shipping container. 
Another example is the 1967 incident on the aircraft carrier, 
U.S.S. Forrestal off the coast of Vietnam which resulted in 134 
deaths/161 injuries and considerable cost to repair the ship. 

This incident involved a jet fuel fire and munitions cook-off 
from the fire. These heavy losses did not result from direct 
enemy fire. 

Potential losses of lives, planes, ships, helicopters, ' 
tanks, etc. can also result from the initiation to 
explosion/detonation of the impacted munitions during combat, and 
may lead to the detonation of other munitions on board. This 
paper is a presentation of a general background on propellants, 
approaches to the research and development of IM solid 
propellants, motor cases, shipping cases, mitigation, which will 
meet the Army's policy of Insensitive Munitions and the IM 
testing required for all U.S. munitions of the future. 

BACKGROUND 

Rocket motor propellants can be divided into three general 
types: solids, liquids, and gells. Solid propellants are 
typically composed of a polymeric binder system with plasticizer, 
metallic fuels, oxidizers, and additives such as combustion or 
chemical stabilizers, bum rate catalysts, etc. Solid 
propellants can be classified as high performance aluminized 
composite smokey and minimum signature formulations. Minimum 
signature formulations are especially important in Army tactical 


505 





missile systems to minimize detection of the launch platforms 
during an engagement (radar/visual/flash signature) and to lessen 
interference of guidance (visual/or mm. wave). Minimum signature 
solid propellants are detonable, while higher performance smokey 
propellants are non-detonable. This is due to the presence of 
high energy "smokeless" explosive ingredients used to formulate 
the minimiim signature propellants. 

Liquid propellant systems typically consist of oxidizers and 
fuels. Oxidizers such as liquid oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, and 
inhibited red fuming nitric acid react in the motor chamber with 
liquid fuels such as liquid hydrogen or hydrocarbons. Most 
oxidizers and fuels are hypergolic and do not need igniter 
systems. Gelled propellant systems also consist of oxidizers and 
fuels. Silicon dioxide (very fine particle size) is typically 
used to gel the oxidizer and fuel in IRFNA gel oxidized systems. 
Gelled systems are considered insensitive as the fuel and 
oxidizer are separated. 

Solid propellants are classified as Class 1.1 or Class 1.3 
depending on the detonation sensitivity of the propellant as 
tested per Army TB700-2, "DOD Explosives Hazard Classification 
Procedures," the primary Class 1.1/1.3 test criteria has been the 
Naval Ordnance Laboratory (NOL) Card Gap Test. The general setup 
for this type of test is sho%m in Figure 1. The attenuating 
material, plexiglass disks, 0.01-inch thick are placed between 
the explosive Pentolite initiator and the propellant test sample, 
and serves to dampen the shock wave from the detonation of the 
Pentolite pellets. The number of these disks, or cards as most 
often referred, required to attenuate and prevent a detonation of 
the propellant, is the measure of sensitivity of the propellant 
(or explosive). The higher the card (0.01-inch) value, the more 
sensitive the propellant. A positive test is one in which a hole 
is punched through the 3/8 inch thick steel witness plate which 
is placed beneath the test sample. For Class 1.1 propellants a 
negative test is greater than 69 cards while for Class 1.3, it is 
less than 70. Examples of positive and negative test results are 
shown in Figure 2. 

Composite propellants usually contain an oxidizer such as 
ammonixim perchlorate (AP) and/or the metallic fuel aluminum, 
which form hydrogen chloride (HCl) and aluminiun oxide during 
combustion. The HCl readily combines with the moisture in the 
air to produce a very smokey exhaust while metals form solid 
oxide particulates which contribute to radar signature. 

APPROACHES TO DEVELOPING IM SOLID PROPELLANTS 

Several approaches are available to develop IM solid 
propellants. These approaches are being investigated and 
developed at the Propulsion Directorate through in-house or Army 
funded contractual work. The initial, and most obvious, is to 



decrease the amount of high energy explosive ingredients in the 
propellant such as HMX, RDX, and nitroglycerin. Decreasing or 
eliminating these highly energetic ingredients would make the 
propellant less sensitive; however, rocket motor performance will 
suffer, often times significantly. Therefore, more propellant 
weight would be required to perform the same missile mission. In 
general, the higher the specific impulse of the propellant, the 
greater the sensitivity. A viable method to boost the 
performance of lower energy propellant formulations is to design 
the rocket motor to burn at higher combustion pressures. For 
example, a propellant formulation with a specific impulse of 
224.6 at 1,000 psia will have an impulse of approximately 235.5 
at 2,000 psia. Composite motor cases are stronger than metal 
ones and for the same case weight, they can be designed to 
operate at these higher pressures. 

Another option is the development of new polymers, 
plasticizers, and oxidizers to enable the necessary tradeoff of 
energy and sensitivity of the propellant. Current formulations 
use inert polymers which decrease propellant performance. New 
energetic polymers such as the trifunctional hydroxy glycidyl 
azide can be used in propellant formulations to increase 
performance while allowing a reduction of more sensitive 
explosive ingredients such as HMX, RDX, etc. In addition, 
research and development in ongoing new plasticizers and 
oxidizers will provide energetic and insensitive ingredients for 
propellant formulations. These more energetic, less sensitive 
ingredients require less quantity for the same performance and 
will make the overall system less sensitive. 

Another approach is to physically separate the oxidizer and 
the fuel elements of the propellant systems; e.g. bipropellant 
systems. An example of this is the hybrid rocket propulsion, 
with a solid fuel grain (no oxidizer) and liquid or gelled 
oxidizer in a separate tank. Gelled oxidizers provide an extra 
IM benefit by immobilizing a dangerous liquid component of the 
bipropellant system. The gelled oxidizer flows when pressurized. 
Air-oxidized propulsion systems also offer IM features as no 
oxidizer is needed, and only fuel is carried on the rocket 
system. Examples of these are the ducted rocket and turbojet 
propu1sion systerns. 

In addition to the propellant options listed above, several 
external protective options are available. The first of these 
deals with the development and evaluation of IM rocket motor 
cases, shipping containers, and launchers. The Propulsion 
Directorate is currently investigating fiI^unent wound, braided, 
fabric wrapped, strip laminate, and hybrid motor cases. These 
motor concepts operate by attenuating kinetic energy of 
fragments/bullets, and by softening of the resins used to bind 
the various fibers, metal strips, etc. during exposure to heat 


507 




from a fire. The later phenomena prevents motor pressure buildup 
and motor explosions/detonations will not occur. Another means 
to vent rocket motor pressure is by passively opening the head or 
aft closures of the motor. These typically operate by mechanical 
or physical disruption of the closure locking mechanism. 

IM TEST REQUIREMENTS 

There are seven .'equired IM tests; however, only four of 
these are mandatory for Army propulsion systems. These tests 
are: fast cook-off, bullet impact, sympathetic detonation, 

fragment impact, slow cook-off, shaped charge jet impact, and 
spall impact. The latter three tests are required if a threat 
assessment evaluation shows they are required. A brief 
description of each of these tests follows. 

a. "The fast cook-off test consists of engulfing the test 
item in the flame envelope of a liquid fuel fire, and recording 
its reaction as a function of time.”^ An average fuel flame 
temperature of at least 1600 degrees F as measured by 
thermocouples, neglecting the contributing heat from the burning 
motor, will be considered a valid test. The passing criteria is 
"no reaction more severe than burning." 

b. The bullet impact test consists of firing three 50 
caliber armor-piercing (AP) bullets at 2600 to 3000 feet/second 
at the test item. The time between each bullet impact should be 
between 90 and 110 milliseconds. A configuration for a bullet 
impact test is shown in Figure 3. The passing criteria is "no 
reaction more severe than burning." 

c. The sympathetic detonation test consists of detonating 
one munition Idonor) adjacent to one or more like munitions 
(acceptors)."^ The reasoning behind this test is that the 
detonation reaction may propagate from one munition to another 
within a stockpile or group of munitions. A possible sympathetic 
detonation configuration is shown in Figure 4. The passing 
criteria is "no detonation of any acceptor." 

d. The fragment impact test consists of firing a one-half 
inch, 250 grain, mild-steel cube traveling at 8000 to 8600 
feet/second into the test item. A configuration for fragment 
impact is shown in Figure 5. The passing criteria is "no 
reaction more severe than burning." 

e. "The slow cook-off test (SCO) is used to determine the 
reaction temperature and to measure the overall response of major 
munition subsystems to a gradually increasing thermal 
environment."^ This test involves subjecting the test item to a 
gradual temperature rise of 6 degrees F per hour till a reaction 
occurs. The passing criteria is "no reaction more severe than 
burning." 


508 





f. The shaped charge let impact test subjects the test item 
to a jet of a M42/M46 grenade, representative of a top attack or 
an 81~nun precision shaped charge (or both), representative of a 
hand-held high explosive anti-tank attack. The decision on which 
jet to use shall be based upon the threat assessment. A config¬ 
uration for the shaped charge jet impact test is shown in Figure 
6. The passing criteria is "no detonation as a result of the 
shaped charge impact." 

g. The spall impact test subjects the test item to hot 
spall fragments produced by impacting a 1-inch thicl' rolled 
homogeneous armor plate with the shaped charge jet of an 81-mm 
precision shaped charge. A configuration for the spall impact 
test is shown in Figure 7. The passing criteria is "no sustained 
burning" shall occur as a result of the spall impact.^ 

The Propulsion Directorate, in the development of IM pro¬ 
pellants, is developing less costly subscale IM test articles for 
quick propellant screening for IM characteristics. The test 
article is prepared by casting propellant into a tube of Kevlar 
or graphite composite for subscale testing. A schematic diagram 
is shown in Figure 8, which shows the composite tube without 
propellant before hydroburst testing. Since less propellant is 
involved this is a more safe and cost effective screening tool 
for IM propellants. 

CLOSING REMARKS 

The above is an overview of the Army's efforts to develop IM 
propulsion technology for future missile systems. The Propulsion 
Directorate is playing a vital and active part in this IM 
technology area. The Army missile systems will be required to 
meet rigorous and challenging IM Test Requirements as stated 
earlier in this paper. The IM technology development is still in 
an early stage; however, the cost benefits in personnel and 
equipment during the manufacture, storage, usage and demilitari¬ 
zation shipment of propellants makes Insensitive Munitions well 
worth the effort. 


GLOSSARY 

Cyclotetramethylenetetramine 
Insensitive Munitions 
Cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine 



HMX 

IM 

RDX 


509 







References 1-4: MIL-STD-2105A, (DRAFT) 19 JAN 90/ Hazard 

Assessment Tests for Non-Nuclear Munitions 




Figure 2, Typical Card Gap Test Results. 


BLAST 

GAGES 


HIGH SPEED MOTION 
PICTURE CAMERAS TO 
record TEST ITEM 
REACTION 


° '•» V V VELOCITY SCREENS 

TEST ITEM 1 i 


FRAGMENT 

SHIELD 



DISTANCE TO FIRST VELOCITY SCREEN 
DISTANCE TO SECOND VELOCITY SCREEN 
DISTANCE TO TEST ITEM 
DISTANCE TO FIRST BLAST GAGE 
DISTANCE TO SECOND BLAST OAGE(S) 













Figure 4. Possible Symp athetic Detonation Configuration. 


BIASTGAGE 




HIGH-SPEED CAMERAS 
TO RECORD TEST riEM 
REACnON 

WITNESS 
PIAIEFOR 
FRAGMENT 





g 




a 


II 

/] 
✓ TEST 


FRAGMENT 

.PROJECTOR 


/ 


LAUNCH 

DEVICE 


di * DISTANCE FROM FRAGMENT MAT TO WITNESS PLATE 
di • DISTANCE FROM FRAGMENT MAT TO TESTITEM 
da » DISTANCE FROM TEST ITEM TO BLAST GAGE(S) 



512 





STEEL WITNESS PLATES 



STEEL WITNESS PLATE 


TEST ITEM 



STEEL WITNESS PLATES 


81 mm PREQSION 
SHAPED CHARGE 


3 








1-in THICK 
RHA PLATE 


SHIELDING PLATE 




PLAN VIEW 


Figure 7. Soall Impact Test Configuration. 


5 












Figure 8. Epoxy End-Capped Kevlar Braided Tube for Hydroburst Testing. 


515/(516 Blank) 





COMPOSITE MOTOR CASE TECHN0L06T 


Kelly B. McGuire 
Propulsion Directorate 

Research, Development, and Engineering Center 


ABSTRACT 


Composite motor case technology has matured over the past twenty years, 
with great advances in the manufacture of the fibers used to fabricate motor 
cases. In addition to the advances in fiber technology, significant improve¬ 
ments to the manufacturing hardware have also taken place. The advantages and 
disadvantages of composite motor fabrication are discussed, along with three 
alternate methods for manufacturing a composite motor case: filament winding, 
braiding, and steel strip laminate. The response of composite cases to the 
Insensitive Munitions requirements outlined in MIL-STD-2105 is also discussed. 

I. INTRODUCTION 


Ever since man became interested in rocket propulsion, he has constantly 
sought to optimize his propulsion vehicle. Rocket technology has evolved 
over the past thousand years from simple paper and gunpowder rockets to com¬ 
plex liquid and solid rocket motors. In the 50's and 60's the rocket motor 
designer opted to stuff as much energetic material into the rocket motor case 
as possible to enhance its performance. However, the payoffs from this effort 
became smaller and smaller in recent years. The next approach to enhance the 
performance of the motor was to minimize the inert weight of the motor case. 
Significant weight savings were not possible until the 70's and 80's when there 
were great advances in the manufacturing of the fibers required to fabricate 
composite motor cases. 

A typical solid rocket motor configuration is shown in Fig. 1. The primary 
elements in a solid rocket motor are: the igniter, propellant grain, insula¬ 
tion, liner, motor case, and nozzle assembly. Of these components, the motor 
case and nozzle are ideal candidates for composite fabrication. Substantial 
weight savings can be achieved by replacing these components with composite 
materials. This paper will only address the benefits of a composite motor 
case. 

The Propulsion Directorate has been active in composite motor case research 
over the past several years by participating in manufacturing technology pro¬ 
grams such as: "The Collapsible Net Metal Mandrel Program," "The Integral 
Wound Composite Adaptor Program," and "The Low Cost Free Flight Motor Program." 
Many of the results from these programs are currently being used in industry. 


517 



II. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF C(»1P0SITE FABRIGATION 


ADVANTAGES 


There are several advantages to using a composite motor case rather than 
the traditional monolithic case. The primary benefit of using a composite 
motor case is weight savings, which can improve the overall performance of 
the motor. The weight savings are easily visible when comparing the motor 
case materials currently used in Army systems. Bar graph representations 
of the material density and tensile strength of these materials are shown 
in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, respectively. The results of a laminate analysis of 
a 6-inch diameter tube subjected to a 3,000 psi internal pressure are given 
in Table 1. The results presented in this table demonstrate that a graphite 
tube is approximately 7 times lighter than a comparable 4130 steel tube. 

Composite motor case fabrication offers the following advantages: 

* Tailorable case stiffness to weight ratio 

* Non-strategic materials 

* Light weight 

* Short lead time for special configurations 

* No welds 

* Corrosion resistent 

* Low Thermal Expansion of graphite/epoxy 
DISADVANTAGES 


Some of the disadvantages of composite motors are listed below: 

* More susceptible to damage during handling operations 

* Require more complex inspection (Ultrasonics, X-ray) 

* Analysis more difficult (requires additional materials trans¬ 
formations) 

* Hlgn cost for small tactical motors 

* Closures and attachment hardware present significant challenges 
in the design of composite cases 

* Dilatation can be a problem for propellant grains 

* Extra case thickness can create problems for volume limited 
applications 


518 






III. TYPES OF COfPOSITE MOTOR CASES 


There are three basic methods of fabricating composite motor cases: fila¬ 
ment winding, braiding, and steel strip laminate. The first two methods uti¬ 
lize fibers and a resin matrix material to form the structure, and the latter 
utilizes thin steel strips and an epoxy. Each of the manufacturing methods 
are described in greater detail below. 

FILAMENT WOUND 


Filament wound cases generally have a higher strength to weight ratio than 
monolithic cases. This strength is primarily due to the advances in fiber 
technology during the past decade. Filament winding is also cost effective, 
especially when manufacturing large motor cases. 

Filament winding became a proven technology in the early 60's as a viable 
method for fabricating pressure vessels. In the early days of filament wind¬ 
ing the machines consisted of a modified lathe which had the capability of 
rotating the mandrel while traversing along the longitudinal axis. The wind¬ 
ing patterns were obtained by selecting the appropriate gears to achieve the 
desired mandrel rotation and traverse speed. The modem filament winding 
machine is computer controlled and has six degrees of freedom, enabling the 
machine to wind complex geometries with relative ease. 

The procedure for fabricating a filament wound case consists of several 
steps. The winding time ranges from a few hours for a small case to 14 days 
for the proposed Filament Wound Case (FWC) for the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket 
Booster. The first step Involves preparing a mandrel made of plaster, sand, 
salt, or more recently, a collapsible net metal mandrel. Following this 
step, the Insulators are Installed on the mandrel and spliced in preparation 
for the case winding. The case body or pressure vessel is formed by winding 
a series of helical and hoop layers, as depicted in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. The 
helicals provide the primary structure for ensuring the integrity of the 
domes, while the hoop layers provide the pressure carrying capability of the 
cylindrical section. The fibers used during the winding process are either 
preimpregnated with resin or dipped in a resin bath during the winding pro¬ 
cess. Upon completion of the winding, the case is placed in an oven or 
microwave and cured. Following this step the cases are exposed to a series 
of leak and hydroproof tests to ensure Joint and case integrity. 

BRAIDED 


The use of low cost, light weight, mass produced fabrication concepts for 
tactical motor cases has been a goal of several Army technology programs for 
the past decade. The principal concepts which have been pursued are strip 
laminate, line pipe, and braiding, all of which rely on rapidly produced 
tube type fabrication methods. Such construction becomes increasingly 
attractive as the motor L/D requirement increases since the closure design, 
weight, and cost all become less significant with larger L/D ratios. The 
braided composite construction discussed here was previously used for launch 
tubes and similar open ended applications. However, the more stringent 
requirements for free flight artillery rockets indicated an excellent poten¬ 
tial application. This potential was most fully exploited and developed in a 
recent Manufacturing Methods and Technology (MM&T) Program, as outlined in 
Reference 1. 


519 






Braiding is an extremely old process which was first mechanized during 
the industrial revolution. The methodology used today was developed for the 
textile and rope industries. The major factor in making braiding a viable 
concept for rocket motor cases is the advance in the materials industry. 
Fibers today are lighter and stronger than other structural materials, making 
composite cases an attractive alternative to the monolithic equivalent. 

The braiding process utilized the over and under placement of adjacent 
strands of yam in a specified pattern around a mandrel. The typical pattern 
interlaces helical and longitudinal yams into layers of fiber (fiberglass, 
Kevlar 49, graphite, etc.) reinforcement in a sequence optimized for specific 
strength and stiffness requirements. These layers are impregnated with resin 
and used to complete this unique composite structure. By adjusting the braid 
angle, the hoop and longitudinal strength can be optimized. The greater the 
braid angle, the greater the longitudinal strength. 

The braiding equipment used to fabricate motor cases at the Propulsion 
Directorate consists of the Wardwell 144 carrier braider shown in Fig. 6. 

The major components for braiding rocket motor cases are the braiding wheel, 
braider support structure, mandrel traverse mechanism, component mandrel, and 
support equipment for the mixing, application and curing of the resin. A 
schematic of the braider is shown in Fig. 7. This figure identifies the com¬ 
ponents previously mentioned. A balanced braid is obtained when the width 
of fiber lies flat and adjacent so that no gaps occur between widths. The 
braid angle is controlled by adjusting the number of carriers, the speed of 
the carriers around the braid wheel, and the feed rate of the mandrel through 
the braid ring. The machine shown in Figs. 6 and 7 has the capacity of 144 
helical cops of fiber and 72 cops of longitudinal fiber. The braid angle can 
be altered to achieve the optimum configuration for various diameters and 
shapes. Longitudinal fiber of the same or different material can be inter¬ 
woven around the circumference to increase the bending stiffness. Each of 
the carriers travels about the braid ring along a serpentine guide path, pro¬ 
ducing an over and under braid effect. These layers can be optimized for 
specific load cases by tailoring the winding pattern to accommodate the burst 
or stiffness requirement. The fibers are impregnated with epoxy resin and 
cured, resulting in a bonded composite structure. 

STEEL STRIP LAMINATE 


Steel strip laminate (SSL) motor cases are fabricated by winding a 3-inch 
wide continuous strip of 301 stainless steel approximately 0.003 inches thick 
over a cylindrical mandrel. The steel strips are held in place by epoxy. A 
typical SSL c ase will consist of four to six layers of steel. The resulting 
case has strength and weight properties similar to a monolithic case. This 
technology is best suited for fabrication of motor cases with a large L/D 
ratio. Although there are limits as to the tallorability of the SSL design, 
initial test results indicate the SSL case could meet the Insensitive Muni¬ 
tions requirements. 


520 




IV. INSENSITIVE MDNITI(»IS 


One of the areas of concern in the military is safety in storage and 
handling of munitions. A program is under way to make the munitions less 
susceptible to low energy impact, fragment impact, fuel fires, and prolonged 
exposure to a heat source. Many of these requirements are addressed in great 
detail in MIL-STD-2105A. There are two primary ways to meet the requirements 
of MIL-STD-2105A. The first method is to obtain a propellant formulation 
which is rugged and non-detonable. The propellant chemists are currently 
striving to arrive at a propellant formulation which is non-detonable, yet 
has sufficient mechanical and ballistic properties to perform as a tactical 
propellant. The second method of meeting the requirements of MIL-STD-2105A 
is to encase the propellant in a rugged energy absorbing motor case. Some 
of the tests currently under investigation are described below. 

INSENSITIVE MUNITION (IM) TSTS CURRENTLY UNDER INVESTIGATIO N 

Slow Cook-Off . The slow cook-off test is used to determine the reaction 
temperature and to measure the overall response of a rocket motor to a gradual¬ 
ly increasing thermal environment. The test consists of preconditioning the 
test article to 100 °F before increasing the temperature at a rate of 6 "F per 
hour until reaction occurs. Passing this test requires no reaction more severe 
than burning. 

Fast Cook-Off . Fast cook-off consists of engulfing the test item in the 
flame envelope of a liquid fuel fire and recording its reaction as a function 
of time. This test is accomplished by placing a common jet fuel (JP-5, JP-8, 
etc.) in a basin whose dimensions are at least 10 feet larger than the dimen¬ 
sions of the motor being tested. The flame temperature is measured via thermo¬ 
couples. Passing this test requires no reaction more severe than burning. 

Bullet Impact . The bullet Impact test consists of impacting the test 
article by at least three 50 caliber armor-piercing bullets at 2800 ± 200 ft/p. 
Passing this test requires no reaction more severe than burning. 

Fragment Impact . The fragment impact test consists of striking the test 
article with a 250 grain steel cube traveling at 8300 ± 300 ft/s. Passing this 
test requires no reaction more severe than burning. 

CCTIPOSITE MATERIALS CONTRIBUTIN TO THE IM PROBLEM 


Utilizing composite motor cases can maximize safety of the rocket motor 
during storage and handling. Safety can be accomplished through the proper 
selection of fiber and matrix material. For example, to achieve the desired 
results from the bullet and fragment impact tests, a composite motor case must 
be capable of absorbing a large portion of the energy of the projectile upon 
Initial impact, thus minimizing the shock to the propellant grain. Another 
benefit is the non-sparking characteristic of the organic composite fibers. 


521 




A composite case can minimize the threat of detonation of a motor due to 
either the fast or slow cook-off test by allowing the pressure inside the case 
to vent. Methods currently under investigation to achieve this goal involve 
the selection of matrix materials. An ideal candidate for a matrix material 
would be one that has sufficient strength to ensure the integrity of the motor 
under operating conditions, yet would melt at temperatures below the propellant's 
auto-ignition* temperature if exposed to a heat source for a prolonged period of 
time, thus allowing the case to vent in the event of ignition. In addition to 
this desired thermal response, the potential exists for adding an ablative 
coating to the matrix material which could prolong the time a motor could be 
subjected to a heat source prior to ignition. 

V. CCMCLnSKMS 


Composite motor technology is constantly improving, primarily due to major 
advances in the manufacture of fibers used during the winding process. Com¬ 
posite motor cases offer high strength to weight ratios and tailorable case 
stiffness properties. The fa brication process has been proven over the past 
25 years. Composite cases offer several solutions to the Insensitive Muni¬ 
tions problems facing the industry today. 

REFERENCES 

1. Crownover, W. S., and McGuire K. B., "Use of Braided Composite Construction 
for Tactical Rocket Motor Cases," U.S. Army Missile Command, TR-RD-PR-86-7, 
January 1987. 

2. Christensen, Paul, "Filament Wound Rocket Motor Cases - Where Are We Now 
And Where Are We Going?", Hercules, January 1987. 


522 







TABLE 1 STRUCTURAL COMPARISON UNDER INTERNAL PRESSURE 
6 INCH DIAMETER TUBE, 3000 PSI [2] 


MEASURE 

STEEL 

4130 

ALUMINUM 
7075-T6 

S 

GLASS 

KEVLAR 

49 

AS 

GRAPHITE 

IM 

GRAPHITE 

HOOP STRESS 
(KSI) 

180 

83 

180 

140 

175 

253 

RADIAL 

GROWTH 

(IN) 

0.015 

0.021 

0.099 

0.058 

0.042 

0.054 

mSSmSIM 

5.0 

3.9 

B 

1.1 

1.0 

0.7 



Thrust Skirt 



Figure 1. Typical Solid Rocket Motor Configuration 


523 































TENSILE • STRENGTH (KSI) MATERIAL DENSITY PCI) 


MATERIALS CONSIDERED FOR ARMY SYSTEMS 
DENSITY COMPARISON 


1.0C 
0.90 - 
0.80 - 
0.70 - 
0.60 
0.50 
0.40 - 
0.30 - 
0.20 - 
0.10 - 
0.00 



7075-73 4340 ST DGAC ST KEVLAR 
MOTOR CASE MATERIAL 


GRAPHITE 


Figure 2 Density of The Materials Considered For Army Systems 


MATERIALS CONSIDERED FOR ARMY SYSTEMS 
TENSILE STRENGTH COMPARISON 


900 



7075-73 4340 ST DGAC ST KE\1AR GRAPHITE 
MOTOR CASE MATERIAL 

Figure 3 Tensile Strength of Materials Considered For Army Systems 


524 















Figure 4 Filament \^nding Helical Pattern 



Figure 5 Filament Winding Hoop Pattern 


525 



'^eeWardwcM 





527/(528 Blank) 












Rocket Motor Testing at the Propulsion Directorate 

Robert W. Milton 
Propulsion Directorate 

Research, Development, and Engineering Center 

ABSTRACT 

The U.S. Army MICOM Propulsion Directorate at Redstone 
Arsenal, Huntsville, Alabama, has the job of improving the 
propulsion systems of existing Army missile systems and 
designing and implementing new and innovative propulsion 
technology in future systems. This broad assignment 
encompasses a large number of interrelated tasks, including 
the topic of this paper, Propulsion Directorate Testing, 
that are all focused upon the improvement of propulsion 
technology. 


INTRODUCTION 

Since propulsion technology improvement is a research 
and development effort, the best way to evaluate the success 
or failure of new ideas is by testing and analysis. Many 
prototypes that seemed ideal on paper have failed to produce 
the desired results when put on the test stand or laboratory 
bench. In addition, a good, well planned test program 
allows technical personnel and engineers to evaluate 
specific parameters of a propulsion system without being 
burdened with interference effects from non-contributing 
items. In effect, testing is the acid test for new ideas 
and concepts, and the Propulsion Directorate recognizes the 
need for an advanced test capability. 

DISCUSSION 

A major percentage of the test work being performed at 
the Propulsion Directorate relates directly to the 
Insensitive Munitions (IM) program. This program was 
created to evaluate and desensitize munitions to accidental 
and combat induced environments that could lead to failure 
of the system. Each system must undergo a battery of tests 
to determine its sensitivity characteristics and reaction to 
damaging stimulus, such as being hit by hot metal fragments, 
accidental impact, or gunfire. 

The Propulsion Directorate also devotes considerable 
effort investigating mysteries of propellant related mishaps 
in the commercial world and in the military arena. Some of 
the investigations have had worldwide repercussions and have 
given the Propulsion Directorate an excellent reputation for 
thoroughness and effectiveness. 

The Propulsion Directorate, in its mission of improving 
missile propulsion technology, is able to test a wide range 


529 




of new concept hardware and ideas. A very capable on site 
testing environment is a necessity. Complete chemical as 
well as physical analysis can be performed efficiently with 
a minipuffl of logistical problems. Elemental propellant 
formulation analysis, surveillance work, quality control, 
ageing studies, mechanical properties testing, static 
firing, and exhaust signature evaluation can all be 
accomplished in the Propulsion Lab complex. 

The Propulsion Lab has an extensive chemical analytical 
capability and is continually faced with new challenges. 
Chemical testing and analysis can be performed efficiently 
and effectively at the Propulsion Lab. The fundamental 
characteristics of solid or liquid propellant are determined 
by its chemical composition and properties. In order to 
achieve comprehensive knowledge of new and existing 
propellants, a modern and capable chemical analysis 
capability is a must. Propellant compositions must by 
analyzed throughout their development to insure that the 
various individual ingredients are combined to achieve the 
desired finished product. Constant monitoring of fielded 
missile propellant is done routinely to insure the continued 
operationability of the system, in addition, quality 
control testing and service life investigations of 
propellant are an important role in chemical testing. Gas 
chromatography, infrared and ultraviolet spectroscopy, 
atomic absorption and propellant extraction and analysis are 
only a few of the chemical testing capabilities of the 
Propulsion Directorate. 

The Propulsion Directorate realizes that the physical 
properties of a propellant are as important as the chemical 
ones, and has an entire function and test area dedicated to 
achieving the desired combinations of strength, flexibility, 
and longevity in its propellants. Physical propellant 
properties can be characterized exactly the same way as more 
commonly recognized structural materials, such as steel or 
aluminum. Propellants have a measurable ultimate tensile 
and yield stress, a modulus of elasticity, and creep and 
fatigue limits. In order for these characteristic 
propellant properties to be experimentally determined, a 
tensile test specimen is loaded until failure. The 
resulting strain curve allows the determination of the 
unique properties of the specific propellant sample. 

The Propulsion Directorate has a multiple bay static 
test firing range and extensive ballistic data acquisition 
capability. Figure 1 is a photograph of the static test 

stand. 




P-3 d o o » 

































Figure 2. Turbine Engine. 


The stringent material requirements of a flight ready, 
high thrust, small diameter, light weight turbine engine has 
helped push technology forward. For example, there is a 
huge difference in the operating stresses and material 
property constraints that are imposed upon an ordinary car 
engine and a missile turbojet. A standard automobile has an 
engine that can run at approximately 6000 RPM and 300 
degrees Fahrenheit, while a missile rated turbojet will run 
at 120,000 RPM and 800 degrees Fahrenheit. Obviously, the 
same materials that will work perfectly in the automobile 
engine will not withstand the necessary operating stress and 
temperatures imposed by the turbojet. For these reasons, 
new and exotic materials like high temperature ceramics and 
alloys are being tested for their potential. 

One of the most unique permanent test facilities in 
place at the Propulsion Directorate complex is the Signature 
Characterization Facility (SCF). A critical factor 
concerning the acceptability of a new or existing propellant 
is its characteristic exhaust signature when burning. The 
lower or smaller the exhaust signature of the missile, the 
less chance of interference with guidance signals, and the 
less >ralnerable the launch crew will be toward counter 
attack. If a missile, when fired at the enemy, leaves a 
highly visible smoke trail, then the enemy will be able to 
fol-low the missile trail backward along its course and find 
the launching vehicle. In addition, a propellant that has a 
high infrared signature is much more easily tracked by heat 
seeking means than a propellant that has a low infrared 
signature. The amounts of toxic and corrosive chemicals in 






the exhaust of a missile could possibly negate the ability 
of the weapon system to be fired from an enclosed space, 
such as a room in a building, or a tank turret. The 
Signature Characterization Facility has the capability to 
test all these signature parameters, and more. Essentially, 
the test facility consists of a twenty foot long, 
climactically controlled, static test chamber, and a 
separate data acquisition and control room. The chamber is 
temperature and humidity controlled, and can be set in the 
range of '40 degree F to 140 degrees F. Small scale motors 
are fired in the chamber and their signature is evaluated 
with monitoring equipment. Figure 3 is a photograph of the 
control room of the SCF showing the complex array of 
instrumentation utilized to collect signature data. 



Figure 3. SCF Control Room. 


533 














A small scale motor is mounted on a static firing stand 
in the environmental chamber, and ignited. During the burn, 
the actual motor flame can be tested for its visible and 
infrared components, and utilizing special interferometry 
techniques, the chemical composition of the flame can be 
investigated. After the motor has extinguished itself, the 
exhaust plume is contained in the chamber while 
comprehensive tests are run. Data on toxicity, particle 
size, chemical composition, and light transmission on 
various wavelengths is gathered, and the typical sampling 
time is on the order of five minutes. 

The Propulsion Lab is committed to Insensitive 
Munitions work, and the bullet test program is a good 
example. The small caliber bullet test work done at the 
Propulsion Lab was performed in order to gain a better 
understanding of a small arms bullet impact threat, and the 
nature of any inhibiting mechanisms that may permit the 
survival of the developed weapon system against bullet 
impact stimulus. The test setup consisted of a remotely 
mounted and fired rifle that was used to shoot a variety of 
propellant filled, analog motor test cylinders, each five 
inches in diameter and ten inches tall. In addition to high 
speed data sampling equipment and VHS video, a 40,000 frames 
per second camera was used to record the response of the 
bullet striking the test motor. The high speed camera is 
fast enough to photograph a bullet in flight, so it is an 
excellent tool to record the fast responses of reacting 
propellant. 

A propellant sample can actively react in three 

distinct ways when struck by a bullet.^ The sample can 
burn, explode, or detonate. Good evidence of a reaction is 
obtained by the high speed camera or video recorder, such as 
what recorded the series of photographs below. Figure 4 is a 
video camera picture of a motor that exploded when struck by 
a bullet. The sample was destroyed by the explosion, and 
large pieces of propellant and motor case were recovered 
from over 150 feet away. 


534 





Figure 4. Picture of Sample Exploding. 


The picture clearly shows the hullet hole in the front of 
the case, and the exhaust flame coming from the nozzle area. 
This figures illustrate how dangerous a bullet strike on a 
missile motor can be, and how, under certain circumstances, 
the missile could become propulsive and inadvertently 
launch. At the very least, both the reactions caused by 
bullet impact and illustrated by Figures 4 and 5 would have 
damaged the missile launching vehicle and threatened the 
crew. 



Figure 5. Picture of Propulsive Bum. 


535 







Some of the testing performed by the Propulsion Lab, 
because of the uniqueness of the test, takes existing data 
acquisition and measurement technology to the limit. For 
example, a special propellant sensitivity test, called the 
RND test, measures the actual speed of a detonation wave as 
it travels down the length of a 15 inch long propellant 
2 

sample. Contrary to popular belief, when a substance such 
as an explosive or propellant detonates, the entire piece of 
materxal does not react at exactly the same time. A 
detonation wave front is created by a certain, specific 
stimulus and travels radially outward in all directions. In 
an example where the detonation stimulus is applied to the 
end of a long narrow sample, as it is in the RND test, the 
detonation wave travels down the length of the propellant 
with great speed. Detonation waves, unlike acoustical or 
other vibration waves, travel supersonically through the 
detonating material. Some of the detonation waves travel at 
more than 11,000 miles per hour, almost 15 times the speed 
of sound in air. The extreme velocity of the detonation 
wave is one reason why it is so difficult to accurately 
measure. Since the entire RND test specimen is only 15 
inches long, it is obvious that some specialized equipment 
is necessary to accurately record the high velocity 
detonation wave as it travels down the length of the test 
specimen. The solution to such a problem is to measure the 
elapsed time the detonation wave takes to travel between two 
points that are a known distance apart. Five small 
piezoelectric pins are inserted into the test sample at 
equally spaced distances down the length of the sample. 
Figure 6 is a photograph of a RND test specimen with the 
pins installed. 


These pins have an extremely fast electrical response 
time and give off a characteristic voltage spike when 
impacted by an object or a shock wave. The time between the 
voltage spikes of the successive piezoelectric pins is 
recorded by an extremely fast recording oscilloscope that 
has the capability to collect data at a rate of 27 billion 
samples a second. The high acquisition speed allows the 
oscilloscope to record the elapsed time for the detonation 
front to pass successive pins as it travels down the 
detonating sample. An actual data trace is shown below in 
fig 7. 


536 






Figure 6. RND Test Specimen. 


FOGBl 



VOLTS 






I 







The trace clearly shows each individual voltage spike 
that was produced when the detonation front passes and 
activates a piezoelectric pin. The average velocity of this 
detonation wave front is approximately 15,000 miles per 
hour, or 20 times the speed of sound in air. 

» 

Some of the most interesting test work has been 
performed as a direct result of investigations into missile 
related accidents or mishaps. 

One noteworthy investigations was initiated in 1985, 
when, in Germany, a Pershing missile that was being unloaded 
from its packing crate ignited and burned, killing 5 U.S. 
Servicemen. The event was given a national defense priority 
and an investigation was launched. There were no immediately 
apparent reasons for the failure, although sabotage was one 
of the considerations. An unusual set of circumstances of 
the normally routine uncrating procedure had been noted by a 
professional observer. Apparently, there was some 
difficulty in the uncrating process, and the motor could not 
be removed in one smooth operation. The motor had been 
binding in the crate, and was raised and lowered repeatedly 
from the shipping container. The observer said that he heard 
a sharp electrical pop just before the missile ignited, and 
because of this testimony, the theory was put forth that 
somehow, as an effect of the repeated attempts at uncrating 
the motor, an electrical charge built up in the motor case 
due to friction with the crate, and the missile was ignited. 
The motor case was made of Kevlar and the portions of the 
packing crate that had been in contact with the missile were 
made' of rubber. These two materials are both excellent 
electrical insulators. The Propulsion Lab was given the 
task, along with other directorates at MICOM, of finding the 
reason for the motor failure. A subsequent investigation 
revealed that an electrical effect known as 
triboelectrification had taken place between the motor case 
and the rubber shock mounts of the packing crate during the 

uncrating process.^ Triboelectrification is the creation of 
a charge of electricity in two contacting materials due to 
friction. In the case of the Pershing incident, 
triboelectrification took place between two good electrical 
insulators, namely the Kevlar motor case and rubber shock 
mounts in the crate. Normally, triboelectrification is not 
a concern in metallic materials because the conductive 
materials disperse the electrical charge. 

Triboelectrification was a factor in the Pershing incident 
because neither the motor case or the packing crate that 
contacted the motor were electrical conductors. Since the 
triboelectric charge was caused by the friction of two 
insulators, the charge could not dissipate through either 
material, and built up to a possible 5000 volts. The 
subsequent discharge of this high voltage is what ignited 
the motor. Once triboelectrification and its effect on 
insulated motor cases was understood, it was easily fixed. 


538 





simply painting the outer motor case of the missile and the 
inner bearing surfaces of the packing container with a 
metallic paint allows the electrical charge to dissipate anc 
has prevented any future incidents with this and other 
missile systems. 

Triboelectrification was the culprit in another fatal 
incident, one that occurred on Redstone Arsenal. An FBI 
trainee was killed when a water cannon exploded. The effect 
of triboelectrification was suspect, and an investigation 
was started with the help of the Propulsion Lab. The 
evidence revealed that a triboelectric charge of sufficient 
magnitude to fire the cannon was built up by the simple 
action of unwrapping some adhesive tape from the body of the 
water cannon. The charge was on the order of 6000 volts, as 

. 4 

demonstrated by a laboratory investigation. The results of 
the experiments are shown in Figure 8. This figure depicts 
the high voltages created by the act of separating different 
types of adhesive tapes from each other. In order to 
prevent the accident from occurring in the again in the 
future, a less adhesive packing tape is now being used. 


Material 

width (In) 

Voltage 

Reinforced 

1.0 

6,000 

Plastic 



Black Plastic 

0.5 

6,000 

Black Plastic 

1.0 

9,000 

Cloth 

0.76 

700 


Figure 8. High Voltages Created by Adhesive Tape Separation 


539 








other types of missile systems have had problems, and 
these have also been investigated by the Propulsion Lab. In 
the mid 1980's, several TOW missile launch motors failed in 
the form of a pressure burst in which dangerous fragments of 
the motor were thrown about. These failure of the launch 
motors raised the questions of safety and reliability in a 
major missile system, and a "DO NOT USE" notice was sent 
from MICOM to the various armies in the world that fielded 
the TOW weapon. The Independent Review Board that was 
formed to conduct an investigation of the accidents felt 
that there should be an effort to determine the actual 
chamber pressure levels at the time of the motor failures. 

If this could be defined, then failure scenarios and causes 
could be better refuted or justified. Sample TOW launch 
motors were tested and caused to fail at various pressures 
by machining a notch of different sizes in the side of the 
motor. The resulting pieces of the exploded motors were 

5 

gathered up after each induced failure and weighed. A 
resulting average weight of fragments versus failure 
pressure was established, and when this data was compared to 
the actual TOW motors that failed in the field, it was a 
relatively simple task to estimate the approximate chamber 
pressures of the Tow launch motor failures. 


The Propulsion Lab also is involved in commercial 
propellant related accidents. Ammonium Perchlorate, AP, is 
an oxidizer, and is used in many solid fueled rocket 
propellants. In May, 1988, the PEPCON Ammonium Perchlorate 
facility in Nevada was completely destroyed by an explosion. 
The devastation of the production facility was a result of 8 
million pounds of AP going up in smoke and flame. The 
destruction of the facility was a severe blow to the missile 
industry because it cut the U.S. production of AP in half, 
and taxed the capabilities of NASA and defense programs that 
utilized AP as a propellant ingredient. Concerns about 
possible future incidents created an urgent need to increase 
the knowledge base of AP transportation and storage safety 
issues. A panel of technical representatives was formed 
that included personnel from the Propulsion Directorate, and 
was tasked to perform specific tests that were designed to 
simulate the conditions of the destroyed AP facility. The 
resulting data helped the panel review current shipping and 
storage regulations concerning Ammonium Perchlorate and make 
the proper recommendations for changes in procedure to keep 
similar incidents from happening in the future. 


540 



CONCLUSION 


The Propulsion Directorate has an international 
reputation and an exceptional ability to perforin complex and 
unusual tests of missile propellant systems. These 
experiments range from chemical analysis, physical 
properties studies, and static tests of conventional and 
turbine propulsion systems to complex investigations into 
missile related accidents and failures. 

REFERENCES 

1. Milton, R., and Thorn, L. B., "Small Arms Bullet Impact 
on Analog Motors," JANNAF Propulsion Meeting, Cleveland, 
Ohio., May 1989. 

2. Thorn, L. B., and Wharton, W. W., "Screening of 
Nondetonable Minimum Smoke Propellants for Army 
Applications," JANNAF Propulsion Meeting, San Diego, Ca., 
December 1987. 

3. Dreitzler, D. R., "Electrostatic Voltage Generation 
Measurements on Missile System Materials," JANNAF 
Subcommittee Meeting, Monterey, Ca., April 1986. 

4. Dreitzler, D., "Electrostatic Voltage Generation 
Measurements on Missile System Materials," JANNAF 
Subcommittee Meeting, Monterey, Ca., April 1986. 

5. Sanders, S., et al., "Investigation of 1986 Yakima and 
Oahu TOW Launch Motor Failures", Technical Report 

RD-PR-87-7, March 1988. 


541/(542 Blank) 






AN OVERVIEW OF THE ARMY ROCKET MOTOR 
SERVICE LIFE PROGRAM 

J. M. Fisher 
Propulsion Directorate 
U.S. Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, AL 


ABSTRACT 

The objective of service life technology is to understand, predict, and 
verify the effects of loads, environments, material response and aging on 
the shelf life and structural integrity of rocket motors. Work conducted 
by the U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineering Center, Propulsion 
Directorate and its contractors has led to the development of analytical 
models which account for thermal/vibrational loads, mechanical property 
variability, aging, cumulative damage, solar radiation, wind velocity, 
viscoelastic propellant behavior, internal gas generation/solubility/dif- 
fusivity and stress-free temperature shift. These models have been imple¬ 
mented in several computer codes and applied to Army rocket motors. In 
several instances application of these service life techniques has led to 
the extension of the effective service life for rocket motors. For example, 
HAWK service life has been extended from 10 to 17 years with a further 
extension to 20 years planned for late FY90; PATRIOT service life has been 
doubled from 7 to 14 years; and MLRS service life will be extended from 
10 to 15 years in late FY90. These extensions represent significant savings 
of over 800 million dollars by delaying required rebuys. In addition, 
service life technology provides for more efficient production planning, 
lower costs for stockpile reliability programs, improved management of 
rocket motor inventories and more reliable structural margin prediction. 

INTRODUCTION 

An important factor in the development, deployment, and use of any 
missile system is: How long is it good for? While care is taken in design¬ 
ing and manufacturing rocket motors to insure sufficient motor performance 
and safety margins at production, effort is also required to monitor and 
maintain this performance during the lifetime of the motor. In fact, 
analysis is even required to determine what this lifetime should be. Un¬ 
fortunately, rocket motors do not yet come equipped with turkey buttons to 
let the user know when its service life is "done". Service life evaluation 
is the technology area which addresses the experimental and analytical work 
involved in determining and verifying useful shelf life for solid rocket 
motors. 


543 






FAILURE MODES/STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS 


The first step in evaluating service life for a solid rocket motor is to 
determine the critical failure mode or modes. This is a function of the 
motor and system configuration, components, design application, and constit¬ 
uent materials. Failure modes may include phenomena such as internal fis- 
suring of the propellant grain due to gas generation from chemical degrada¬ 
tion, bondline failures due to stresses induced by thermal cycling and/or 
cracks in the propellant at the bore or other internal surface due to ther¬ 
mally induced strains. The critical mode for failure can be determined by 
finite element analyses, full-scale or analog testing, actual field failures 
and combinations of these. 

COMPOSITE PROPELLANTS 


Solid rocket motors containing composite propellants are primarily sus¬ 
ceptible to failure from thermal cycling. The coefficient of thermal 
expansion for metallic or composite case materials is typically an order of 
magnitude lower than the coefficient of thermal expansion for solid propel¬ 
lant. This causes the case to act as a rigid restraint as the propellant 
tries to swell and shrink with the temperature cycling. The resulting stres¬ 
ses that build up in the propellant grain and bondline damage and weaken them, 
ultimately leading to failure. This phenomenon is referred to as cumulative 
damage.^ 


Linear cumulative damage based on maximum principal stress as shown in 
Equation (1), is used as the failure criterion in SLife, an in-house com¬ 
puter code for evaluating service life. 

6 


D = 


n 

= I 

i=l 


Atj 


( 


Oi 


) 


( 1 ) 


where 


D 

s 

cumulative damage 


Ati 

s 

time at 


at 

s 

temperature dependent 

shift function 

To 

s 

reference temperature 

. °F 

Oi 

s 

average stress during 

Ati 

Oo 

s 

critical stress, psi, 

(at at/t=0) 

6 

= 

inverse slope of log ; 

stress-vs-log reduced time at 


at/t=0 


Figure 1 Shows bore temperature calculated by SLife as a function of time 
for a composite motor. Figures 2 and 3 show stress and strain, respectively, 
at the bore associated with the thermal loads from Figure 1. SLife then 
calculates the resulting cumulative damage values shown in Figure 4.^ 


544 




DOUBLE BASE PROPELLANTS 


Modified double base, or minimum smoke, propellants are less susceptible 
to stress and strain damage induced by thermal cycling than the composite 
propellants. However, the minimum smoke propellants tend to degrade chem¬ 
ically and generate gasses as a byproduct of this degradation. If the rate 
of gas generation exceeds the rate at which the gas can diffuse through the 
propellant web, internal cracks develop which can lead to motor failure. The 
internal pressure at which these cracks will develop is a function of the 
propellant's mechanical properties. This critical pressure parameter is 
determined from Equations (2), (3), and (4), and serves as the failure cri¬ 
terion in the in-house service life code GASLife.^ 

Per = a„ (1 + En,) ^ ° — 



a 

Av 

V 


1 + Av/v 


^m ‘Pf 


In (E/F) 

1 + In (E/F) 


(3) 

(4) 


where 


Per = critical pressure for cracking, psi 
Oq == maximum stress 
Cq = strain at maximiim stress 
a - volume change ratio 
Av/v “ strain dilatation 

(pf = volume fraction of filler particles 
E initial slope modulus, psi 
F = secant modulus at max stress, psi (a^j/eg,) 

Figure 5 shows internal pressure values for a minimum smoke motor stored 
at Yuma, AZ. With time, the gas generation rate increases as chemical stabil¬ 
izers in the propellant are consumed. There is a critical level of stabilizer 
below which the gas generation rate increases exponentially. Until this 
critical level is reached, stabilizer depletion follows a fairly linear rela¬ 
tion with time. Figure 6 shows percent stabilizer loss for minimum smoke 
motors which have been stored at Yuma, AZ and Fort Greely, AK for 1, 4, and 
5 years.^ 


545 






MATERIAL CHARACTERIZATIONS 


As with any empirical analysis, the results of service life evaluation 
are only as good as the inputs. Therefore, it is vital to have complete and 
accurate d^ata on all the material properties for the constituent materials 
in a rocket motor. This includes thermal, chemical, and physical properties 
for the case material, any liner and/or insulating materials and the solid 
propellant. ProperMes are experimentally determined for thermal conductiv¬ 
ity, coefficient of thermal expansion, density. Young's modulus, bondline 
strength, maximum stress and strain, solubility, diffusivity and gas genera¬ 
tion as appropriate. Materials are also subjected to accelerated aging in 
order to develop aging models for critical properties. 


Values for the maximum stress obtained for the propellant at various 
strain rates over a temperature range are shifted according to the time- 
temperature equivalence principle.^ Equation (6) is used to apply this 
principle numerically or the shifting can be done by hand. 

Cl (T - Tg) 

■•“e " C; (I - T,) 


where 


at 

Cl and C 2 
T 

To 


reduced time shift function 
material constants 
temperature, F 
reference temperature, F 


The resulting reduced time plots are then used to obtain critical stress, 
Oq, and beta, B, parameters required for cumulative damage calculations. 
Figure 7 shows maximum stress versus reduced time data for minimum smoke 
motors tested after being stored at Fort Greely, AK for 1 and 4 years. 


SHELF LIFE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS 


To monitor changes in motors due to time and temperature cycling, long 
term surveillance programs are established. In these programs, motors are 
stored at various sites with representative climatic environments. These 
sites include Yuma, AZ representing a hot, dry climate; Albrook, Panama re¬ 
presenting a hot, humid climate; Fort Greely, AK representing an arctic 
climate; locations in Germany representing actual deployment sites, and 
Redstone Arsenal, AL representing igloo storage. Periodically, motors 
stored at these sites are brought to MICOM, RD&E Center for testing. This 
testing includes both static firing for performance evaluation and dissection 
for propellant and bondline evaluation. Results from surveillance programs 
provide real time aging data vital to development and validation of aging 
models and service life evaluations. 


546 










Depending on the propellant type and the associated failure mode, tests 
conducted on these dissected motors include the following: 

(1) Time-Temperature Characterization - Viscoelastic characterization 
of the propellant provides material property inputs for structural and 
service life analysis. 

(2) Gradient Tests - Radial and longitudinal gradients in mechanical 
properties of the propellant may be present due to casting flow phenomenon, 
chemical migration or other causes and must be considered in evaluating 
possible failure sites and modes. 

(3) Joint-in-Tension - A reduced time-temperature characterization is 
conducted using bond joint specimens from dissected motors to monitor the 
bondline strength as a function of time in storage and storage location. 

(4) Adhesive Fracture Energy - The energy required to promote growth of 
a crack or debond is determined as a function of age and storage location. 

(5) Crosslink Density Test - Crosslink density is determined for the 
propellant to correlate with changes in mechanical properties with time and 
temperature cycling. 

(6) Nozzle Mechanical Properties - Mechanical properties of the nozzle 
material are monitored to detect and model any degradation which may adversely 
affect motor performance. 

(7) Motor Case Tests - Hydroproof testing of static fired motor cases 
validates safety margins. Specialized tests may also be developed for system 
specific critical, potential failure modes. 

(8) Igniter Tests - Pyrotechnics contained in igniters are analyzed 
chemically to monitor changes in composition which may adversely affect 
performance. Squib resistance is also measured to insure adequate perform¬ 
ance. 

(9) Stabilizer Level Determination - The level of stabilizer present in 
the propellant following the storage time is measured to determine the per¬ 
cent lost during storage. 

(10) Gas Generation Rate - The rate of outgassing, or gas generation, is 
measured for propellant removed from the aged motors in order to monitor any 
effects from aging. 

Data from such tests conducted on dissected motors as well as the baseline 
material characterizations serve as inputs to the in-house service life 
codes. 


547 





THERMAL LOAD MODELS 


In order to simulate the thermal load histories experienced by surveil¬ 
lance motors during their storage, temperature profiles have been developed 
for each of the storage sites. These thermal models consist of Fourier 
series representations fitted to hourly temperature readings from a 10-year 
period. Igloo storage is represented by the cosine function in Equation (7) 

T - 64 + 20 cos - 1 ) ’] (» 

The in-house computer codes used to evaluate service life calculate ambient 
temperatures from these models. The effects of solar radiation and wind 
velocity may also be included depending on the storage scenario being 
simulated. 


PREDICTIVE MODELING 

The results obtained from either SLife or GASLife represent service life 
evaluations based on mean properties, mechanical or chemical, for one motor. 
In order to make a predictive service life evaluation for a population of 
motors it is necessary to adjust these results according to the variability 
which might be seen in this population. One way is to quantify the varia¬ 
bility in quality control data for the population in question and use this 
correlation to modify the code results. 

Statistical analysis of quality control data on 475 propellant mixes 
for a composite motor led to the following relation.^ 



where 

D* = cumulative damage for the motor population 
D = cumulative damage based on a single motor 
E* = mean modulus from quality control data 
E = modulus from the single motor 
o„,* = mean maximum stress from quality control data 

OjQ = maximum stress from the single motor 


The predicted service life for any motor from this population stored 
at the site considered is then the reciprocal of D*. Table I shows service 
life estimates for the composite motor based on properties from a single 
motor and the predictive values adjusted for the mean motor population.^ 


548 





TABLE I. Service 

Life Predictions For 

A Composite Motor 

Storage Site 

Motor 

Service Life 

Population 
Service Life 

Alaska 

33 

45 

Arizona 

125 

172 

Igloo 

93 

128 


RESULTS/CONCLUSIOHS 

The testing and analyses discussed previously have been applied to 
several Army rocket motors. The resulting service life evaluations have 
increased the original expected lifetimes of some of these motors. Such 
service life extensions delay rebuys and thereby lower the cost of main¬ 
taining a functional inventory. Table II below lists some of the systems 
along with their original expected service life, the extended service life 
expected, and the resulting savings. 

TABLE II. Service Life Extensions/Savings 


Systems 

HAWK 


MLRS 

PATRIOT 


Original 
Seinrice Life 

10 

10 

7 


Extended 
Service Life 

15 

20 

15 

14 


Dollar 

Savings 

44M 

undetermined 

750M 

24M 


Analyses conducted as part of service life evaluations provide 
verification of the structural integrity and margins of safety for solid 
rocket motors. Service life technology facilitates more efficient pro¬ 
duction planning, improved management of rocket motor inventories, lower 
costs for stockpile reliability programs and more reliable structural 
margin predictions. Service life evaluation and its related technologies 
play a vital role in the development, deployment, and maintenance of the 
Army's solid rocket motors. 


549 





FUTURE EFFORTS IN SERVICE LIFE 


Efforts in the future will be directed toward improving and verifying 
service life evaluation techniques. This includes both the experimental 
and analytical aspects. Experimental procedures and specimens may be 
improved to better simulate loading conditions actually seen in the motor. 
Analog or subscale tests would also be beneficial in applying and calibra¬ 
ting damage calculations. This is of particular interest in systems which 
have bondline failure modes since measurement of bondline stresses in the 
motor configuration are difficult at best. 

Other experimental efforts are underway to validate and model the shift 
in stress-free temperature with time. This phenomenon has been shown to 
exist in certain propellants and significantly lowers the damage resulting 
from temperature cycling. Service lives for motors with propellants which 
exhibit this tendency may far exceed original calculations. 

A desirable analytical improvement would be to have the ability to model 
actual three dimensional geometries found in rocket motors. Solid rocket 
motors may have rather complicated internal geometries due to things such 
as stress relief grooves and finocyl bore designs. With the current 
service life codes equivalent thermal models must be derived for motors 
with geometries other than a cylindrical bore. Inhomogeneity and aniso¬ 
tropy of material properties are also real world problems which cannot be 
evaluated with current service life techniques. 

The development and implementation of service life evaluation tech¬ 
niques has provided unique and vital benefits to the entire solid rocket 
motor community. It is, however, a technology area which needs continued 
research, development, and application to promote growth and evolution. 


550 




REFERENCES 


1. Bills, K. W., Jr., et al. "Solid Propellant Cumulative Damage Program," 
Aerojet General Corporation, Sacramento, CA, RPL-TR-68-131, October 1968. 

2. Davis, Louise M. and Patterson, Joel E., "Analysis and Prediction of 
the MLRS Rocket Motor Service Life," TR-RD-PR-87-3, U.S. Army Missile 
Command, Redstone Arsenal, AL, May 1987. 

3. Martin, D. L., "Service Life Prediction of Smokeless Propellant Motors," 
TR-RK-75-6, U.S. Army Missile command, Redstone Arsenal, AL, January 1975. 

4. Fisher, J. M., "CHAPARRAL Service Life Evaluation," 1988 JANNAF Joint 
Propulsion Meeting, San Diego, CA, December 1988. 

5. Ferry, J. D., "Viscoelastic Properties of Polymers,” John Wiley and Sons, 
New York, NY, 1961. 

6. Martin, D. L., "Structural Service Life Analysis for Rocket Motor Grains," 
TR-RD-PR-86-6, U.S. Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, AL, April 1987. 

7. Martin, D. L., and Siron, R. E., "Service Life Prediction of the MLRS 
Propellant Grain," TR-RK-82-1, U.S. Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, 

AL, October 1981. 


551 





BORE STRESS - PSI 



552 


BORE STRESS - KPA X 10' 







BORE STRAIN - IN/IN 





Figure 3. Bore strain versus time for a composite motor 
stored at Ft. Greely, AK. 



553 







Figure 4. Cumulative damage at bore for a composite motor. 










DISRUPTIVE 




555 














Fig 6. Minimum Smoke Motor—Stablllzer 
Depletion versus Storage Time 


o BASEUNE MTRS 
o Ft Greely Mtrs 












BASELINE 



-tI- tI- ro ro CN cvj ^ 

(isd) ss3yis a3i03yyoo 001 



557/(558 Blank) 


Figure 7. Log corrected stress-vs-log reduced time for motors stored at Ft. Greel 








BIPROPELLANT GELS (U) 


W. M. Chew and B. D. Allan 
Propulsion Directorate 
U.S. Army Missile Command 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 

ABSTRACT 

This paper discusses the status and current research in gel 
bipropellant propulsion. Gel propulsion is a novel technology 
that is a practical alternative to solid or liquid propellant 
systems. In particular, gels are an attractive solution for 
systems that require both high performance (high density impulse 
and/or energy management) and compliance with the Insensitive 
Munitions Guidelines. Gel propulsion has a similar density 
impulse to solids, the controllability of liquids, and is safer 
than either. Gel propulsion is versatile and can be applied to a 
wide range of applications from low cost fixed thrust systems to 
advanced systems requiring sophisticated energy management. Gel 
propellants can be formulated to give a wide variety of 
performance, signature, and density characteristics. This paper 
reviews the status and direction of research/development of each 
subsystem (propellants, pressurization, storage and expulsion, 
and engine). This review shows that gel propulsion technology is 
ready for full scale engineering development. 

INTRODUCTION 

The Army's propulsion research and development programs are 
currently working toward three primary goals. First, missile 
systems currently under development are requiring significant 
increases in performance. This includes longer range, higher 
velocity, and the ability to turn on and off, throttle, and/or 
pulse the propulsion system (energy management). The propulsion 
systems are also required to be packaged within smaller and 
lighter envelopes. Secondly, Joint Service Requirements for 
Insensitive Munitions (JSRIM) requires all DOD munitions to 
comply with the DOD Mil Std 2105 Insensitive Munitions (IM) 
Guidelines. Finally, propellants with minimum signature exhaust 
are desired to prevent identification of the launch site and 
interference with target acquisition and missile control systems. 

At present, no Army missiles can pass all the IM guidelines. 
State-of-the-art aluminum containing ammonium perchlorate 
composite solid propellants leave a distinct exhaust trail 
containing aluminum oxide and hydrogen chloride. They also fail 
the slow cook-off IM test requirement. Ammonium nitrate 
propellants are a possible insensitive replacement, especially 
for minimum signiture propelllants. Ammonium nitrate 
propellants, however, are significantly less energetic, and a 


559 





significant performance penalty is paid for minimum signature IM 
solid propellants. 

Gel propulsion systems are a good solution for future IM Army 
missiles because it is inherently insensitive and gel propellants 
can be easily formulated to give high performance and/or minimum 
signature. The characteristically high Isp of liquids and high 
density-impulse of solids propulsion can be obtained through by 
gelling liquid propellants with high energy solids. The Navy has 
recently demonstrated that a gel propulsion system will pass 
bullet impact and fast and slow cook-off IM tests. Gel 
propulsion systems should easily pass the other four tests 
because the oxidizer and fuel gels are non-detonable, 
immobilized, and are separate components. Minimum signature is 
obtained by proper selection of liquid and solid ingredients. 

Table 1 lists several key properties of gel propulsion that make 
this technology attractive. Isp is high because of the liquid 
propellant components, and the high density Isp is obtained 
through solids loading. The combination of gel propulsion's IM 
and density-impulse properties make it ideal for volume limited 
systems such as ADKEM. Because gels can be throttled and pulsed, 
they are ideal for applications such as N-LOS, which require 
energy management, or "smart" missiles that have feedback between 
the propulsion and guidance and control systems, which 
dramatically increases the range and kill probability. The 
advantage of energy management is clearly shown in Table 2. 

Gel propellants are immobilized at rest and can move only under 
shear conditions. Fuel gels and oxidizer gels are hypergolic at 
the contact surface and will extinguish as the fuel and oxidizer 
burns away from the interface. Both the monomethyl hydrazine 
based fuel gel (MICOM gel) and inhibited red fiuning nitric acid 
based oxidizer gel (IRFNA gel) are soluble with water, except for 
the aluminum in the fuel gel. Accidents or hostile action that 
results in contact of the two gels, therefore, can be easily 
extinguished with water flushing and their active components 
neutralized. This property also makes demiliterization easy. 

The motor components of a gel propulsion system are similar to 
liquid motor components (Figures 1 and 2); a pressurization 
subsystem that expels gel propellants from a storage/expulsion 
subsystem into a bipropellant engine. The engine can have a 
simple fixed thrust injector or a more sophisticated injector 
with throttling and/or pulsing capability. 

Gel propellants are formulated by mixing liquid propellants, a 
gellant, and generally an energetic, high density solid. The 
resulting gel has high viscosity and will flow only if a shear 
force has been applied to overcome the yield point. This 
property prevents sloshing and ullage changes in center-of- 


560 





gravity during in flight that can be a problem with liquid 
propellants in some types of missiles. Gel propellants become 
less viscous when increasing shear forces are applied (shear 
thinning). Gels reduce the high evaporation rate that is 
typical of liquid oxidizers and fuels, which minimizes toxicity 
concerns. When a gel is exposed to air, a crust forms that 
inhibits further evaporation. The high viscosity, yield point, 
and self sealing properties of gels minimize the hazards caused 
by tank ruptures. If the rupture occurs, the gel will flow 
slowly through the rupture; crusting, however, starts immediately 
and the leak is stopped. 

The gelled fuels Al\imizine (Air Force), Notsgel (Navy) and MICOM 
gel (Army), were developed in the 1960's. They are 
hydrazine/hydrazine derivative gels loaded with aluminum which 
were hot-fire tested in engines using liquid oxidizers. These 
programs were drastically reduced in the 1970's because ammonium 
perchlorate based solid propellants had higher density impulse, 
the toxicity of the volatile components was of concern, and 
control of optimvim oxidizer/fuel (0/F) flows were difficult due 
to the difference in rheology between fuel gels and liquid 
oxidizers. The Army is now actively pursuing gel propellants for 
four reasons: 

1. the desire for propulsion systems with energy 

management capabilities 

2. The development of microelectronics that can 

maintain feedback between propulsion and guidance 
and control 

3. the requirement for Insensitive Munitions 

4. the development of an oxidizer gel that matches the 

rheological flow properties of the fuel gel under 

all operating conditions. 

During the 1980's subsystems were developed and a successful, all 
up system feasibility demonstration test was conducted. A solid 
warm gas generator expelled MICOM fuel and IRFNA oxidizer gels 
from piston tanks into four 1500 Ibf engines. The engines were 
controlled with 2-10 msec electronic signals to the servovalves 
at a slew rate of 1 per 10 msec. This test demonstrated that 8 
msec electronic signals results in reproducible full thrust 
pulses and 2 msec signals results in reproducible pulses of 
roughly 50% full thrust. The schematic for this system is given 
in Figure 3. 


DISCUSSION 

This section discusses current research/development for each gel 
subsystem and gel propulsion systems. 


561 






GEL PROPELLANTS 


MICOM fuel and IRFNA oxidizer gels pass centrifuge settling 
tests, environmental vibration tests, and accelerated 
compatibility tests with aluminum, stainless steel, and several 
elastomer materials. Together, these tests indicate a gel 
propulsion life cycle of over 20 years. Gels have been 
reproducibly manufactured in 130 Ibro batches. Properties of 
MICOM and IRFNA gels are summarized in Tables 3 and 4. 

The rheology of MICOM and IRFNA gels have been extensively 
studied. The viscosity has been measured between -65° and +165° 

F using a Ferranti-Shirley cone plate, Haake rotating concentric 
cylinder, and capillary flow viscometers (Figures 4 and 5). The 
yield points have been determined with cone penetrometers and by 
extrapolating the viscosity curve to zero shear. The pressure 
drops produced by different flow rates through an extensive set 
of geometric flow passages have been determined at ambient 
temperature. These geometries simulate the flow passages within 
typical propulsion system hardware such as straight tubes and 
orifices of different diameters and gradual and sudden expansions 
and contractions. The difference between viscosities measured by 
viscometers and straight tube flow tests are significant as shown 
in Table 5. Engineers, therefore, should use flow data when 
optimizing engine and propellant flow line designs. As an 
example of the data from non-tubular geometries, the results from 
the orifice plate tests are given in Figures 6 and 7. These 
figures show that 0.2 inch diameter orifices almost cause gel 
cavitation. Gels can cavitate, and cavitating venturis are used 
to control gel flow rates during engine hot-fire tests. 

One advantage of gel propulsion is that gels of differing 
composition can be used in the same, or very similar, hardware to 
tailor the propulsion system to specific requirements. For 
example, when minimum signature gels were required, carbon was 
substituted for aluminum in the fuel gel to eliminate smoky 
aluminum oxide in the exhaust, and lithium nitrate was removed to 
eliminate smoky lithium oxide. These minimum signature gels have 
been developed and are awaiting engine testing. Similarly, when 
a safer replacement for liquid hydrogen was desired for a booster 
application, two different aluminum loaded RP-1 gels were 
formulated. 

Our current areas of research involve formulating hydrocarbon 
fuel gels for air breathing applications, interhalogen oxidizer 
gels for increased Isp, testing of minimum smoke oxidizer and 
fuel gels, and determining the compatibility of gels with 
bladder, flow line, and injector materials. 


562 





PRESSURIZATION SYSTEMS 


Solid propellant hot and warm (2000° F) gas generators and 
monopropellant and bipropellant liquid gas generators have been 
developed and tested to expel gels from storage/expulsion tanks. 

Current research in this area is focused on developing cool, on 
demand gas generators. Solid gas generator development is based 
around glycidyl azide polymer (GAP), an energetic binder. Other 
generator concepts include catalytic decomposition of gas 
mixtures and the use of fuel rich (off optimiun) liquid 
bipropellants. These key improvements will reduce the cost and 
weight of gel propulsion systems by reducing the quantity of 
pressurant propellant and allowing the use of elastomer bladders 
in the expulsion subsystem. 

EXPULSION SYSTEMS 

Gel propellants have been expelled from piston and bonded rolling 
diaphragm (BRD) tanks. The advantages of BRD tanks are that they 
can be welded to seal the propellants completely and do not 
require an elastomer to withstand the friction occurring within a 
piston. An engineering sketch of a tandem BRD tank is given in 
Figure 8. Elastomers that can be used as bladders have been 
shown to be compatible with both MICOM fuel and IRFNA oxidizer 
gels in accelerated aging tests. 

Research in this area includes advanced development of BRD tanks 
with in lighter and smaller subsystems, and development of tanks 
with elastomeric bladders that will result in inexpensive, light, 
and small subsystems. 

ENGINES 


Several unmodified liquid engines have been used successfully to 
hot fire gel propellants. Two types of engines, using face shut¬ 
off pintle (Figure 9) and impinging stream platelet (Figure 10) 
injectors, have been designed specifically for gel propellants, 
fabricated, and hot-fire tested with gels. Both straight and 
turn-flow nozzles have been used. 

Hot fire tests have demonstrated that gel engines are capable of 
energy management. Several engines have demonstrated throttling, 
one with a 19:1 throttling range. Other engines demonstrated 
reproducible pulsing with as short as 2 msec electronic signals. 
Face shut-off injectors have been turned off for over an hour and 
re-started with no evidence of plugging. 

The impinging stream injectors have faster mining than face shut¬ 
off injectors as evidenced by their shorter of 4 inches vs. 30 
inches. Both injectors have demonstrated a C combustion 
efficiency of approximately 98%. 


563 





Conventional materials have been successfully used as ablatives 
and throat materials in gel engines. Graphonol and quartz epoxy 
ablatives have been used in combustion chambers and quartz and 
silica epoxies have been used in nozzles. Graphite inserts in 
face shut-off injector engines have demonstrated minimal throat 
erosion rates ( Figure 11). 

Research in this area is focused on improved designs 
incorporating state-of-the-art composite materials to increase 
engine performance and decrease engine size and weight. 

SYSTEMS 


System studies have been made for various Army and Navy anti¬ 
aircraft missiles, close range fire support, and ballistic fire 
support. These studies predict gels to give similar, if not 
improved performance to the existing solid propellants. IM and 
energy management characteristics make gels very attractive. An 
example of the results from one of these studies is given in 
Figure 12. 

Research in this area includes understanding the interconnections 
between the various subsystems to optimize system designs and 
identifying one or more candidate point designs for full scale 
engineering development. 


CONCLUSIONS 

Gel propulsion is a mature technology and a practical alternative 
to solid and liquid systems. It is versatile and will meet 
current and future propulsion requirements. Gels are 
particularly well suited to high performance systems requiring IM 
compliance and energy management. 

The Propulsion Directorate has an active program that is aimed at 
developing low cost, low weight gel propulsion systems with long 
shelf-lives. 


564 





REFERENCES 


Allan, B. D. , "Development and Testing of MICOM Gel," RD-TR-71- 
11, U.S. Army Missile Command, June 1971. 

Allan, B. D., "A Gelled Oxidizer for Tactical Missiles," 
presented at U.S. Army Science Conference, June 1982. 

Allan, B. D., "Thixotropic Gels for Tactical Missiles," JANNAF 
Propulsion Meeting, February 1983. 

Gould, R. A., "Full Scale Hazard Testing of Gelled Liquid 
Propellants for the Insensitive Munitions Advanced Development 
Program," NWC TP 7060, Naval Weapons Center, China Lake, CA,; 
April, 1990. 

Giola, G.P., Chew, W. M., Ryder, D. D., "Propulsion Systems 
Hazards Evaluation and Liquid/Gel Propulsion Component 
Development Program," Tr-CR-RD-PR- 90-1, Final Report by TRW Inc, 
December, 1989. 

Smith, A. L., and Anderson, R. E., "Propulsion System Hazard 
Evaluation and Liquid/Gel Propulsion Component Development," TR- 
CR-RD-PR-90-2, Final Report by Aerojet TechSystems, January, 
1990. 

Chew, W. M., Denson, J. R., and Jones, J. F., "Metallized 
Hydrocarbon Gel Propellant," JANNAF Propellant Development and 
Characterization Subcommittee Meeting, CPIA Publication No. 527, 
67 (1990). 

Schaplowsky, R. K., Anderson, R. E., Cabeal, J. A., and 
VanderWall, E. M., "Characterization of Gelled RP-1 Containing 
Aluminum," JANNAF Propellant Development and Characterization 
Subcommittee Meeting, CPIA Publication No. 527, 77 (1990). 


565 






TABLE 1. ADVANTAGES OF GEL PROPULSION 


HIGH PERFORMANCE 

HIGH Isp - >300 lbf*sec/lbin 

HIGH DENSITY Isp - >495 Ibf* sec *g/lbm*cm^ 

CAPABLE OF MULTIPLE STARTS 

CAPABLE OF THROTTLING - 19:1 Demonstrated 

CAPABLE OF PULSING - 2 msec demonstrated minimum 
reproducible pulse width 


SAFE 

COMPLIES WITH IM GUIDELINES 

GELS ARE INSENSITIVE TO SHOCK, FRICTION, AND ESD 
GELS ARE SELF SEALING 

GELS HAVE LOWER EVAPORATION RATES THAN LIQUID 
PROPELLANTS 

FUEL AND OXIDIZER GELS ARE NON EXPLOSIVE ON CONTACT 


VERSATILE 

HARDWARE AVAILABLE FROM SIMPLE FIXED THRUST TO 

SOPHISTICATED ENERGY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

GELS PROPELLANTS CAN BE FORMULATED FOR SPECIFIC 

MISSIONS SUCH AS HIGH VELOCITY, LONG RANGE, 
AND MINIMUM SIGNATURE 


EASILY HANDLED 

HAS >20 YEAR SHELF LIFE 

RHEOLOGICALLY MATCHED TO MAINTAIN OPTIMUM 0/F RATIO 
OVER ENTIRE TEMPERATURE RANGE 

GELS HAVE REDUCED SLOSH 


ARE EASILY PUMPED 






TABLE 2. RANGE IMPROVEMENTS USING MICOM/IRFNA GEL FOR THE LANCE 
MISSILE SYSTEM 


Propellants _ Range, % of Baseline 


UDMH/IRFNA Baseline 

100 

MICOM gel/IRFNA gel 

200 

UDMH/IRFNA 

235 

(new guidance & control) 


MICOM gel/IRFNA gel 

375 

(new guidance & control) 



TABLE 3, PROPERTIES OF MICOM FUEL GEL 


Composition (Wt%) 


Aluminum 

Monomethyl Hydrazine 
Gellant/Stabilizer 

Density (g/cc) 

135° F 
77° F 
-40° F 

Freezing Point 
Accelerated Settling 


Approximately 60 
Approximately 38 
Approximately 2 


1.39 

1.49 

1.55 

-65° F 


No settling after 30 minutes at 500 g acceleration 


Sensitivity 


Shock and compression - negative 
Auto decomposition - exotherm at 380° F 


567 






TABLE 4. 


PROPERTIES OF IRFNA OXIDIZER GEL 


Composition {Wt%) 

Lithium Nitrate 

IRFNA 

Gellant 

Density (g/cc at 77° F) 

20% LiN 03 
30% LiN 03 
40% LiN03 

Freezing Point 

Accelerated Settling 

No settling after 30 

Vapor Pressure, Long Term 

Same as IRFNA 


Approximately 30 
Approximately 65 
Approximately 5 


1.71 

1.78 

1.85 

<- 65 °F 


minutes at 500 g 
Storage, Sensitivity 


TABLE 5 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MICOM AND IRFNA GEL VISCOSITIES 
(POISE = g/cm's) DETERMINED BY CAPILLARY FLOW VISCOMETER AND 
STRAIGHT TUBE FLOW MEASUREMENTS AT AMBIENT TEMPERATURE 


SHEAR RATE 

VISCOMETER 

STRAIGHT 

TUBE 

(sec“^ ) 

MICOM 

IRFNA 

MICOM 

IRFNA 

10^ 

1.5 

0.37 

13.2 

11.7 

10^ 

0.63 

0.24 

2.7 

4.3 

10® 

0.54 

0.22 

0.55 

1.61 


568 









C 04 iUI r»ce Shul-off 

|nj#»ctor inqint* 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram of a typical gel propulsion system 
with energy management capability. 


Fuel Grl 
Fi'pcl Linr 



Feed Hfie PUton Tenh 


Figure 2. Conceptual engineering sketch of a typical gel 
propulsion system showing how the subsystems can be integrated 
into a flight motor. 

















DIVERT ENGINES (41 


Figure 3. Schematic diagram of the ACES-X system that 
demonstrated reproducible 2 msec pulsing. 



Slicar Rate, I/mc Slicar Kale, l/scc 

Figure 4. Shear thinning property of MICOM and IRFNA gels. This 
Figure shows the decrease of gel viscosities with shear rate 
measured with a capillary flow viscometer. The variation of 
viscosity with per cent loading of aluminium (Al) and lithium 
nitrate (LN) is also shown. 


570 















Temperaliirc, F. 


Figure 5. Temperature dependence of MICOM and IRFNA gels showing 
the decrease of viscosity with increasing temperature measured 
with a capillary flow viscometer. The variation of viscosity 
with per cent loading of aluminum (Al) and lithium nitrate (LN) 
is also shown. 



Figure 6. The effect of orifices on MICOM gel flow properties 
showing increasing pressure drop with decreasing orifice 
diameter. Note that the 0.2 inch diameter orifice almost 
produces cavitation. 


571 







Figure 7. The effect of orifices on IRFNA gel flow properties 
showing increasing pressure drop with decreasing orifice 
diameter. Note that the 0.2 inch diameter orifice almost 
produces cavitation. Comparison of this Figure with Figure 6 
confirms that the rheology of the fuel and oxidizer gels are 
matched for flow through orifices. 



Figure 8. Engineering sketch of a tandem bonded rolling 
diaphragm tank showing the position of the piston before (above 
center line) and after (below center line) expulsion. 



































Figure 11. Demonstration of minimal throat erosion rate (0.0098 
in/sec) during a 1500 Ibf thrust engine test with MICOM and IRFNA 
gel propellants. 


Parameter 

PATRIOTfSolid 

PATRIOTIGer 

Fuel/oxidizer compositicn 

HTPB 

MICOM Gel/IRFNA Gel 

Mass of fuelloxidizer 

1098 Ihn^ 

1184 11)^ 

Total impulse 

100 

116 

Maximum thrust 

25,400 Ibf 

26,080 Ibf 

Specific impulse 

100 

105 

Throttling range 

NIA 

65- 100% 

Chamber pressure 

1500 psia 

2200 psia 

Timeofflight 

100 

127 

Intercept velocity 

2297 ft/sec 

3937 ft/sec 

Range 

100 

125 


*0ue to performance classification, gel system performance increase over solid system 
performance is shown as percentage increase 


Figure 12. System study results obtained by TRW Inc., showing 
the advantage of gel propulsion over solid propulsion for the 
Patriot missile. 


574 




