■■fjuj&u 'r/c^' 30 ' 

//J ' 'y t'A' 


(NASA-CR-1S7389 ) AdaNcT RESEARCH PROJECT 
Final Report ( Hounta i nNet ) 183 p CSCL 09B 


N91-13092 


unci as 

G3/61 0312533 

AdaNET 


Resear c h Project 


R. Michael Digman 

MountainNet, Inc. 


August 1988 


Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 
Research Activity No. SE.18 





Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems 
(j n i vers /fy of Houston - Clear Lake 



TECHNICAL REPORT 





ri 






a 


i 


The 

RICIS 

Concept 


The University of Houston-Clear Lake established the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information systems in 1986 to encourage NASA Johnson Space 
Center and local industry to actively support research in the computing and 
information sciences. As part of this endeavor, UH-Clear Lake proposed a 
partnership with JSC to jointly define and manage an integrated program of research 
in advanced data processing technology needed for JSC’s main missions, including 
administrative, engineering and science responsibilities. JSC agreed and entered into 
a three-year cooperative agreement with UH-Clear Lake beginning in May, 1 986, to 
jointly plan and ex ecute such research through RICIS. Additionally, under 
Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16, computing and educational facilities are shared 
by the two institutions to conduct the research. 

The mission of RICIS is to conduct, coordinate and disseminate research on 
computing and information systems among researchers, sponsors and users from 
UH-Clear Lake, NASA/JSC, and other research organizations. Within UH-Clear 
Lake, the mission is being implemented through interdisciplinary involvement of 
faculty and students from each of the four schools: Business, Education, Human 
Sciences and Humanities, and Natural and Applied Sciences. 

Other research organizations are involved via the “gateway” concept. UH-Clear 
Lake establishes relationships with other universities and research organizations, 
having common research interests, to provide additional sources of expertise to 
conduct needed research. 

A major role of RICIS is to find the best match of sponsors, researchers and 
research objectives to advance knowledge in the computing and information 
sciences. Working jointly with NASA/JSC, RICIS advises on research needs, 
recommends principals for conducting the research, provides technical and 
administrative support to coordinate the research, and integrates technical results 
into the cooperative goals of UH-Clear Lake and NASA /JSC. 




Ada NET 

Research Project 





Preface 


This research was conducted under the auspices of the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems at the University of Houston-Clear Lake, by R. 
Michael Digman, President and AdaNET Project Director, MountainNet, Inc., under 
the direction of Peter Bishop, RICIS /AdaNET Project Manager. 

Funding has been provided by the NASA Office of Commercial Programs 
through Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 between NASA Johnson Space Center 
and the University of Houston-Clear Lake. The Technical Director for this activity 
was Bob MacDonald, Assistant Director of Research, Education and University 
Programs, Mission Support Directorate, NASA/Johnson Space Center. The NASA 
Program Manager for this activity was Roy Bivins, Technology Utilization Division, 
NASA/JSC. 

The views and conclusions contained in this report are those of the authors and 
should not be interpreted as representative of the official policies, either express or 
implied, of NASA or the United States Government. 



AdaNET Research Project 


Final Report 






Executive Summary 

MountainNet, Inc. is researching and developing AdaNET in response to the 
needs of the United States industrial base. This NASA, Department of Commerce 
(DOC) and Department of Defense co-sponsored initiative will combine the strengths 
of software engineering and Ada technology. 

The U.S. Department of Defense recognized that proliferation of computers and 
resultant software was requiring an unacceptable level of funding and other resources 
to field and reliably maintain critical defense systems. In response to this, the Ada 
language was developed and introduced. Ada has achieved a successful introduction 
in the defense and space communities. In addition, experts in software engineer- 
ing have recognized the applicability of Ada in the commercial sector; most notably 
in process control applications, factory automation techniques, communications and 
management information systems. 

The goal of the AdaNET project is to transfer existing and emerging software en- 
gineering technology from the federal government to the private sector. As a change 
agent introduced into the infrastructure of US industry, AdaNET will provide a dis- 
tributed information base on software engineering and Ada as well as a library of 
reusable software. 

Reautomation is essential to maintain US industrial competitiveness in the global 
marketplace. AdaNET’s key service will be to significantly aid this process. First, the 
AdaNET Information Services ( A IS ) will provide users with insight into the Ada com- 
munity and it's related software engineering technology. This will be accomplished 
through value added information services detailing training opportunities, govern- 
ment initiatives, technology breakthroughs and marketplace information. Additionally, 
AdaNET will act as an automated "clearinghouse" gateway into other information 
sources. Second, the Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) will contain software “pro- 
files" and “parts" which can be used to build a portion of, or an entire, software 
subsystem. These components will be part of a software lifecycle inventory which 
will include requirements statements, software architecture design and components, 
or parts. Such documentation is extremely important in order for software reuse to 
be more widely practiced. 

Creating the environment to promote good software engineering practices is a key 
ingredient to AdaNET. Beginning with the existing Ada community, AdaNET will 
reach out to the U.S. business and manufacturing communities. This change agent 
function will serve to speed up the transition of technology and enhance the ability 


1 



of U.S. industry to integrate factory floor, management information and distribution 
systems. 

AdaNET is being designed and implemented by MountainNet, Inc., a West Virginia 
based software engineering and communications company. Funding is being provided 
by the NASA Technology Utilization Division and the DoD Ada Joint Program Office, 
through the Johnson Space Center, under subcontract to the University of Houston 
- Clear Lake. Support for the program is being provided by NASA’s Technology Uti- 
lization Division, the DoD Ada Joint Program Office, the Department of Commerce, 

Office of Productivity. Technology and Innovation, and the DoD Department of the 
Army. 



Disclaimer Notice 


The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors 
and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or rec- 
ommendations of the Technology Utilization Division of the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration, the Ada Joint Program Office of the U. S. Department of De- 
fense, the Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation of the U. S. Department 
of Commerce, or the U. S. Army. 


3 



Overview 


This is MountainNet, Inc.'s research report for The Initial Study of the Feasibility 
and Commercialization of an Ada Technology Transfer Network. The National Aero- 
nautics and Space Administration Technology Utilization Division and the Department 
of Defense Ada Joint Program Office, through the Johnson Space Center, are sup- 
porting this technology transition initiative, under the direction of the the University 
of Houston-Clear Lake. All participating government agencies look to use AdaNET 
in helping to extend software engineering and Ada technology beyond the aerospace 
and defense industries, to US business and manufacturing communities. 

As the initial feasibility study of the commercialization of an Ada Technology 
Transition Network, with plans for implementation of this network, this report details 
those components necessary for success. The objective of UHCL’s Research Institute 
for Computing and Information Sciences (RICIS) was to “obtain a comprehensive plan 
for organization and operation of an Ada technology transfer activity which, within 
a reasonable time, has a high probability of being self supporting and which will 
effectively promote the increased utilization of Ada in commercial applications." 

This report was prepared by MountainNet, Inc., a software engineering and com- 
munications company located in Morgantown, WV. MountainNet recommends that 
additional funding be designated for the purpose implementing and studying the use of 
AdaNET services. During the initial funding period for implementation, MountainNet 
will track revenues versus expenditures, with evaluation of resources utilization and 
user activity in specific services areas, so as to more clearly identify which services are 
most useful and how they can become self supporting. 

This report contains: 


Organizational Plan This report presents the planned organizational structure 
for services development and technology transition of AdaNET services to potential 
user communities; 

Business Plan The plan to operate the AdaNET service as a commercial ven- 
ture; 

Technical Plan The plan from which the AdaNET can be designed, including 
detailed requirements analysis; 

Analysis of User Fees and Charges and Proposed Fee Schedule 


4 


Report 
On The 

Initial Study of the Feasibility 
and 

Commercialization 
of an 

Ada Technology Transfer Network 

August, 1988 

Subcontract No. 002 
Cooperative Agreement NCC9-16 
Project No. RICIS No. SE. 18 

Submitted to: 

University of Houston - Clear Lake 
2700 Bay Area Boulevard 
Houston, TX 77058-1096 


Restricted Rights Notice 


Use, reproduction, or disclosure is subject to restrictions set forth in Government Co- 
operative Agreement Number NCC9-16 between the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration and the University of Houston-Clear Lake and a subcontract thereun- 
der, Number 002, RICIS No. SE.18 between the University of Houston-Clear Lake and 
MountainNet, Inc. 




Prepared by: 
MountainNet, Inc. 
Eastgate Plaza 
P. 0. Box 370 
Dellslow, WV 26531-0370 


AdaNET, MountainNet and the AdaNET logo are registered trademarks of MountainNet Inc. 







Report 
On The 

Initial Study of the Feasibility 
and 

Commercialization 
of an 

Ada Technology Transfer Network 

August, 1988 

Subcontract No. 002 
Cooperative Agreement NCC9-16 
Project No. RICIS No. SE. 18 

Submitted to: 

University of Houston - Clear Lake 
2700 Bay Area Boulevard 
Houston, TX 77058-1096 


James W. Rautner, Program Director 


Linda K. Braun, Contract Administator 


R. Michael Digman, President 
MountainNet, Inc. 


1 




Contents 


1 Organizational Structure 

1.1 Project Activity 

1.2 Organizational Structure 

1.2.1 History of the Concept . ...... 

1.2.2 Current Structure 

1.2 3 Internal Audit Controls 

1.2.4 For-Profit Development Model 

1.2.5 Internal Development Structure 

1.2.6 Advisory Panels 

Federal Advisory Panel 

Mission and Goal Statement 

The Business and Industry Council 

Mission and Goal Statement 

Technology Advisory Council 

Mission and Goal Statement 

1.2.7 Long Term Interaction with University of Houston - Clear Lake 

1.2.8 Interaction With SEAD 

1.2.9 Incorporation of New Project Sponsors 

1.2.10 Interaction with NASA Affiliates 

1.2.11 Incorporation of Private Sector Participants 

1.3 Outline of Project Activity "Tv'. . . ' 

1.3.1 AdaNET Project Meetings 


11 

12 

13 

13 

15 

16 
18 
20 
20 
22 
23 
25 

25 

26 
27 
29 
29 

31 

32 

32 

33 
33 


2 


1.3.2 Initial AdaNET Survey 34 

1.3.3 AdaNET Participant Communications 34 

1.3.4 Network Planning 3 g 

1.3.5 Current Network Implementation 37 

1.3.6 User Survey and Marketing Implications 37 

AdaNET Brochure 37 

General Impressions 3 g 

Initial Market Survey 39 

2 Business Plan 42 

2.1 Business Plan Summary 43 

2 . 1.1 The Company 43 

2 . 1.2 MountainNet’s AdaNET Services 43 

2.1.3 The Market 44 

2.1.4 Financial Projections 45 

2.2 Background 4 g 

2.3 The Market 4 g 

2.3.1 The Software Engineering and Ada Marketplace 48 

Ada in a Software Engineering Environment 48 

The Current Ada Marketplace 49 

2.3.2 Market Trends 51 

2.3.3 Market Participants 52 

2.3.4 Market Composition 53 

2.3.5 Market Segments 54 

2.3.6 Distribution Media 55 

2.3.7 Complementary Services 56 

2.4 Market Strategy 59 

2.5 Products 62 

2.5.1 Description 62 

2.5.2 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 63 

Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 63 


3 



2.5.3 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

Professional Information 

2.5.4 Spinoffs 

2.5.5 Revenue Classes 

2.6 Management 

2.7 Financial 


65 

65 

66 
66 
68 
69 


3 Technical Plan 

3.1 Scope 

3.1.1 Goal 

3.1.2 AdaNET System Overview . 

Participating Organizations Views 

Applicable documents . ... ...... 

3.1.3 Schedule Constraints 

3.2 AdaNET Functional Requirements 

3.2.1 Networking and Communications 

Existing Elements 

Planned Expansion 

3.2.2 Hardware 

Present Configuration 

Future Expansion 

3.2.3 Software 

Off-the Shelf 

Developmental Activities 

3.2.4 Data and Information Sources 

3.2.5 Operational Considerations 

Expected Volume 

Distribution Media 

User Assistance 

Service Revenue Structures _ 

Telephone Support 


70 

71 

71 

72 

74 

75 
75 

75 

76 
76 
76 
81 
81 

83 

84 
84 
87 

87 

88 
90 
90 

90 

91 
91 


4 


User Documentation 91 

On-Line Access 92 

Microcomputer Access 93 

3.2.6 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 94 

Background 94 

Reuseable Ada Software 94 

Other Life Cycle Objects 94 

Documentation 94 

Metrics 95 

Profile Information 95 

Reuse Database/Taxonomy 96 

Retrieval/Duplication 96 

Tutorials 96 

3.2.7 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 96 

User Forums 96 

AdaNET Bibliographic System 96 

Educational Materials 97 

Electronic Communications 97 

Full Text Information 97 

Directories/ Publications 97 

Other Repositories and Services 97 

3.2.8 Access Security 98 

3.3 Tasks and Deliverables 99 

3.3.1 AdaNET System Design 99 

3.3.2 Data Gathering 100 

3.3.3 System Documentation 100 

3.3.4 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 101 

3.3.5 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) Design 103 

Object Evaluation 104 

Object Inquiry 104 

Object Retrieval 105 


5 



Library/System Configuration igg 

3.3.6 Initial Ne tw ork Introduction 206 

3.3.7 Growth Plan for Additional Services . \ 207 

Spinoffs 107 

Medium Term 208 

Long Term Goals 210 

3.4 Quality and Standards Assurance 210 

3.4.1 Verification Requirements 210 

Networking and Communications 211 

Hardware 2 H 

Software • 2 n 

Data and Information Sources 212 

Operational Considerations 212 

Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 112 

Database 212 

AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 112 

3.4.2 Validation Demonstration . . 212 

3.4.3 Process Standards Compliance 113 

3.5 Additional Resource Requirements 

3.5.1 Hardware H 4 

3.5.2 Software H 4 

3.5.3 Networking and Communications 115 

3.5.4 Personnel H 5 

AdaNET Organizational Structure 115 

4 Revenue Plan 2.17 

4.1 Overview . . Hg 

4.2 Products and Services 119 

4.2.1 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 119 

Reusable Ada Software lig 

Other Life Cycle Objects lig 


6 


Documentation jjg 

Metrics 120 

Profile Information 120 

Retrieval/Duplication 12 0 

Reuse Database/Taxonomy 121 

Tutorials 12i 

4.2.2 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 121 

User Forums 12i 

AdaNET Bibliographic System 121 

Educational Materials 122 

Electronic Communications 122 

Full Text Information 122 

Directories/Publications 122 

Other Repositories and Services 122 

Consultant Services 123 

Seminars and Workshops 123 

4.3 Target Market 123 

4.3.1 Market Segments 123 

4.3.2 Market Composition 124 

4.3.3 Initial Market Survey 125 

4.4 Sources of Ada Software and Technology 127 

4.5 Revenue Structures 127 

Revenue Classes for AdaNET Services 130 

4.5.1 Defraying Costs of Operation 131 

4.5.2 Maintaining Commercial Competitiveness 132 

4.5.3 Standardizing Revenue Structures 132 

4.5.4 Implementing Incentive Programs 132 

4.5.5 Providing Economically Disadvantaged Discounts 132 

4.5.6 Reimbursing of Direct Contributions 133 

4.6 Comparative Pricing 133 

4.6.1 On-Line Services Delivery 133 


7 



Communications Fees 222 

Connect Time Charges 234 

Print or Display Charges 234 

Per Search Term Charges 234 

Flat Rates 135 

Annual “Password” Fees 235 

Deposit Account Charges 235 

Credits 135 

4 , 6.2 Alternate Distribution Media 235 

CD-ROM Products .... 235 

Floppy Disk Products 236 

Magnetic Tape 236 

Printed Media .... . “ . . . /...,. 236 

Workshops, Seminars and Consultants 136 

Acronyms 237 

5.1 List of Acronyms 237 

5.2 Appendix A: Initial Marketing Survey Results for the AdaEXPO-Boston, 

MA, December, 1987 241 

Respondent Profile 242 

Affiliation With Professional Organizations 142 

Survey Data-Raw Results 142 

Questions in Order of Perceived Importance 144 

Ranking of Importance I44 

Appendix B: Project Participants I45 

Appendix C: Project Deliverables 14g 

Appendix D: Ada Market Survey . 147 

Appendix E: Mail Registration Form 149 

Appendix F: Agenda 

Appendix G: Brochure "Step-Pages" 154 

Appendix H: Financial 


8 


Bibliography 


167 


9 



List of Figures 


1.1 New Organizational Chart 

1.2 AdaNET Service Implementation Model 

3.1 AdaNET Gateway/Clearinghouse Functional Overview 

3.2 AdaNET Network Connectivity 

3.3 AdaNET Proposed Systems Configuration 

3.4 Sources of Software Engineering and Ada Technology 

3.5 AdaNET Organizational Structure 

4.1 Source of Ada Software and Technology 


17 

19 

73 

82 

85 

89 

116 

128 


10 


Chapter 1 

Organizational Structure 


11 



1.1 Project Activity 


This chapter describes the organizational structure of the AdaNET project. As, such 
it reflects the views and inputs of the sponsoring government agencies and supporting 
organizations. Topics covered include: 

• Use of For-Profit Development Model 

• Internal Development Structure 

• Advisory Panels 

• Interaction with UHCl RICIS and SEAD 

• Incorporation of New Project Sponsors 

• Interaction with NASA Affiliates 

• Incorporation of Private Sector Participants 

Another section of this document outlines the current activity on the AdaNET 
project, including technical and network planning and team development, and initial 
assessments of the Ada community’s interests and needs. A description of AdaNET 
related activities at the AdaEXPO ’87 is also included, as well as the December 10 
1987 project meeting including a list of attendees, and information concerning: 

• the initial AdaNET survey, 

• facilitation of AdaNET participant communications, 

• network planning and implementation, and 

• marketing implications of the initial survey. 

An agenda of the this Project Meeting held in Boston during the Ada Expo is also 
included as Attachment F. 


1.2 Organizational Structure 

There has been much discussion about what organizational structure would best 
serve the mission and goals of the AdaNET project and promote effective interaction 
between its sponsoring agencies. AdaNET must serve both the public and private 
sectors, as both a catalyst and a clearinghouse for the acquisition and use of advanced 
software technologies. However, while encouraging re-use of Ada software technology 
by governmental organizations is obviously one of the project’s goals, its primary focus 
is to encourage the application and use of sound software engineering practices in the 
private sector. 

These are diverse goals, and may seem contradictory in nature. It is essential 
that the service develop cost recovery measures to insure its long term survivability; 
however, it is just as important that services be provided in such a way that small 
businesses, manufacturers and educational institutions with limited resources experi- 
ence no economic barriers to acquiring the information available. Such users represent 
those sectors which should experience the most benefit from the AdaNET service. 

In light of such considerations, it is critical that the correct mechanisms be put in 
place in the early stages of AdaNET's development to allow flexible interaction with 
public and private sector organizations. 

The following topics are discussed in this chapter: 

• Use of For-Profit Development Model 

• Internal Development Structure 

• Advisory Panels 

• Incorporation of New Project Sponsors 

• Interaction with NASA Affiliates 

• Incorporation of Private Sector Participants 

1.2.1 History of the Concept 

Mountain Net, Inc. was organized as a for-profit West Virginia corporation in 1983. 
The foundation of its business plan involves development of software, information 
services, and related telecommunications required for their delivery. MountainNet 


13 



presently offers access to Ada, artificial intelligence and expert systems software, and 
office automation software tools on its own host computer system. Access is provided 
through a private network consisting of 17 nodes within West Virginia, and nationally 
via the Telenet Public Access Dial Network. MountainNet also provides an inter- 
network gateway with The West Virginia Network for Educational Telecomputing 
(WVNET), and organization that provides host computer and telecommunications 
services for all state-supported higher education institutions in West Virginia. 

MountainNet first conceived the AdaNET service in 1986 in response to projections 
of explosive growth of Ada technology and related software engineering tools as part of 
its own business planning. Despite a large and growing investment by the government 
in Ada and software engineering, important elements of the infrastructure required to 
produce gains in real terms in software reuse and software engineering productivity 
have been lacking. 

MountainNet's concept involves building a set of services to be offered primarily to 
commercial software developers and government agencies to which those developers 
contract. Such a service would have three major components: 

Ada Information Services (AIS). A value-added information service de- 
tailing training opportunities, government initiatives, technology breakthroughs and 
marketplace inf ormati on. 

Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) Software parts which can be reused to 
build a portion of, or an entire system. The DSI will include related requirements 
statements, software architecture design and component (detailed) design. 

Host Systems and Telecommunications Infrastructure elements re- 
quired to deliver and support AIS and DSI. 

Design of these services would be driven by input from relevant commercial soft- 
ware developers and government agencies. The services would be operated by Moun- 
tainNet, with revenue from operations complemented by basic research funding from 
government agencies where appropriate. 

In October, 1987, federal funding for initial research and planning was announced. 
The DoD Ada Joint Program Office and the U. S'. Department of Commerce entered 
an interagency agreement with NASA to provide basic support for the AdaNET ser- 
vice. In March, 1988, the Department of the Army also entered into a cooperative 
agreement with NASA. 


14 


1.2.3 Internal Audit Controls 

It has been recognized that appropriate mechanisms to ensure accountability for 
federal and other funds be established, particularly to observe the need to avoid the 
appearance of impropriety resulting from comingling of funds or from unfair compe- 
tition with private businesses. To this end, MountainNet has implemented account- 
ing systems to ensure complete audit trail traceability of individual activity centers 
Therefore, MountainNet’s research activity with UHCL has an unique activity center 
designation, apart and separate from any other activity. While receiving government 
support for research into the development of this facility, MountainNet will provide 
Ada NET services on a no-fee basis to its governmental sponsors. 


16 


page blank 


PRECEDING 


not filmed 




Figure 1.1: New Organizational Chart 


17 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 

















1.2.4 For-Profit Development Model 

AdaNET has two primary purposes: 

1. to provide a transfer mechanism for government developed Ada and software 
engineering technology to the commercial sector, and 

2. to provide such services with cost recovery measures. 

Figure 1.1, Basic Federal Funding and Program Management of the AdaNET 
Service is the profile of funding requirements. Figure 1.2, AdaNET Service Imple- 
mentation Model shows how the AdaNET services would be delivered. 

There is specific advantage in the service maintaining a for-profit focus. Aggres- 
sive marketing approaches will be necessary to maximize the likelihood of success in 
achieving the stated goals of the service. This approach also allows a more active em- 
phasis in areas necessary to gain commercial recognition and use, such as marketing, 
advertising, revenue planning, and corporate teaming. 

Keeping a for-profit focus will avoid problems resulting from operation of a com- 
mercial service by a government entity. This is of particular concern when consider- 
ing: 

• the orientation of AdaNET towards commercial applications in addition to re- 
search; 

• AdaNET's level of visibility, commercial activities and interaction; 

• the number of different private sector entities that will be asked to participate; 

• the level of commercial influence possible, and 

• the long term goal of independent operational status. 

• difficulties arising from private use of government facilities 

While the service will concentrate on its for-profit mode of operation, some ac- 
tivities will emphasize areas that have traditionally been serviced by non-profit, ed- 
ucational entities. One such activity might be the development and operation of a 
national center for advanced software technology. This would require major support 
from the educational institutions that are already participants in the AdaNET service 
and from those institutions which may participate in the future. 

Commercial support will be provided through contracted work to develop specific 
services, or through actual use of the AdaNET service. This is in keeping with the 
goal of establishing other bases of support that are commercially based and longer 
term than governmental funding. It also serves to heighten responsiveness to the 


18 



NASA 
Dc D 
OX 

Academia 
US Industry 
Other Govt. Apancies 


Sources of Information 


A 


MountainNet, Inc. 
AdaNET 


AIS 

AiNET 


Information 

Services 


DSI 


Dynamic 

Software 

Inventory 


\ 


User 

Interface 


\ 


Distribution Modes 



a ns 













commercial marketplace; the service will not attain commercial viability without that 
responsiveness. 


1.2.5 Internal Development Structure 

The most critical element for successful implementation of the AdaNET service is the 
development of teams for administering data and library management, systems and 
telecommunications, strategic planning, market development, user services, and pro- 
totype development. These teams will be responsible for both internal development, 
as well as the coordination and delivery of services. 

Private sector participants represent another resource to which AdaNET users can 
be directed. AdaNET will utilize the resources of many commercial and educational 
organizations, thereby enlarging the available pool of expertise. MountainNet is en- 
tering into corporate teaming agreements with commercial organizations with areas 
of expertise that will also be valuable to development of the AdaNET service. Such 
agreements are of strategic importance in the development and long term support of 
the service; this concept will continue to be used as the service matures. As part of 
these agreements, private sector participants will be able to maintain their proprietary 
interests. 

In keeping with the role of AdaNET as both a catalyst and clearinghouse, it is not 
the intent of MountainNet to develop all required capabilities and expertise internally, 
or to offer only internally developed services. MountainNet’s goal is to provide an 
open architecture into which organizations providing valuable information, services 
or expertise can offer their resources as part of the total pool of services available. 
Likewise, the public information and technology available through AdaNET will not 
be held to any closed group. The success of the service is based on the interaction 
with as many participants as possible. Its use and growth are synergetic: information 
and technology are put into the service, and users take out what they need, in turn 
developing their own bases of expertise. Through continued participation, these same 
users can become additional resources available to other AdaNET users. 

1.2.6 Advisory Panels 

Much time has been spent trying to define organizational relationships that facili- 
tate effective interaction between MountainNet’s AdaNET service, its governmental 
sponsors, and the private sector organizations either providing support to or using the 


20 



services. Three panels will be formed. Earlier discussions referred to these panels as: 

• Board of Governors 

• Business and Industry Council 

• Technology Advisory Board 

After subsequent deliberation and inquiry into the various federal laws regulating 
governmental and private sector interaction, the following names will be adopted: 

• Federal Advisory Panel 

• Business and Industry Council 

• Technology Advisory Council 

Following sections will discuss the purpose of each of these panels. The Of- 
fice of Productivity, Technology and Innovation has researched the potential legal 
implications of these organizational structures with respect to public and private sec- 
tor representatives holding seats on the same panel, and has determined that the 
organizational structures defined in this document are well within allowable federal 
guidelines. 

The major difference in focus between the organizations defined early in the project 
and those defined in this document is the separation of governmental and private sec- 
tor interaction with the AdaNET service. The organizational panels have maintained 
the same focus; however, the governmental and private sector representatives have 
been separated on two of the panels. The Federal Advisory Panel is now composed 
entirely of governmental representatives, and the Business and Industry Council con- 
sists solely of private sector representatives. The Technology Advisory Council still 
has representation from both sectors. 


21 


The intent in creating the original Board of Governors was to facilitate participation 
by organizations committing resources or "sponsoring” AdaNET development. All 
organizations meeting this criteria are governmental organizations. 

The Business and Industry Council will serve as the main point of interaction with 
identified economic communities, industries, professional organizations, or individual 
companies that desire a higher level of input and involvement with the AdaNET 
service than that of being only an end user of services. It also provides an initial 
point for interaction with those organizations that represent additional resources for 
development and service offerings, and potential new user communities. 

The Technology Advisory Council will provide the focus for those organizations 
working more closely with development, providing technical focus in all areas neces- 
sary. ~hese include not just areas of competence within the field of hardware and 
software engineering and communications, but also include expertise in marketing, 
advertising, corporate teaming and partnering, finance, business plan analysis and 
strategic planning. The Technology Advisory Panel consists of representatives from 
both public and private sector organizations. 

The University of Houston - Clear Lake will serve as the focal point for communi- 
cations and coordination of the three advisory panels. 

Federal Advisory Panel 

A way to coordinate between the three sponsoring government agencies is needed. 
Cooperation and communication between these partners needs to occur to insure 
mutually successful returns on participation. Some structure is necessary to facilitate 
the process. 

Participation on the Federal Advisory Panel will provide this mechanism. Repre- 
sentatives from the three government agencies supporting the AdaNET service will 
determine the initial membership of this panel. 

The Federal Advisory Panel will consist of those government organizations with 
the highest levels of resources committed to the project. The individuals on this 
panel will hold positions within their organizations from which they can direct the 
resources that are to be applied to the AdaNET service. As was true of the previous 
structure, the Executive Council of this Federal Advisory Panel will likely be that 
subset of the participants that represent those government organizations who are the 
original stakeholder participants, and those organizations with the the highest level of 
committed resources. 


22 



The Federal Advisory Panel will: 

• provide a common forum for the resolution of questions relating to interagency 

inter actions . 

• provide input into the direction of project focus and deliverables, and 

• establish a common point for regular interaction and working sessions. 

Within the current government organizations supporting the Ada NET service, 
there is an ongoing need to explicitly define the deliverables and schedules that satisfy 
the goals of individual participants. Each organization has specific returns that are 
sought for supporting the service and specific milestones and deliverables are desired 
to build those returns. The Federal Advisory Panel will be used as the vehicle for such 
discussions. The agencies now participating in this interagency cooperative will use 
this forum to determine mutually acceptable project deliverables. 

These same agencies need to address general panel operating guidelines, especially 
pertaining to the admission of new project sponsors to the Federal Advisory Panel. 
Issues for consideration include: 

• Definition of criterion for new membership 

• Criterion for continuance or termination of membership. 

• Process of incorporation of new members' goals with those of existing members 

Discussion has indicated that it is the consensus of the agency participants that 
criteria for membership on this panel should be established. One generally accepted 
criterion is that all organizations represented must have made a substantial committ- 
ment to the AdaNET service of the types of resources described in the statement of 
mission and goals. This topic is further addressed in a later section entitled Incor- 
poration of New Project Sponsors. 

Mission and Goal Statement 

The mission of the Ada NET Federal Advisory Panel is to provide assistance and 
guidance throughout the development and operation of AdaNET services. The Federal 
Advisory Panel links the AdaNET service with the government organizations and 
communities it serves, reflecting the ideas, focuses, and needs of each sponsor. The 
panel is composed of k ey individu als from the go vernment al sector who have been 
instrumental^ in encouraging and committing their respective organization's suppoR 
of the ^daNET service. Each of the Federal Advisory Panel members shall hold such 
positions within their respective organizations to be able to govern, direct or allocate 



23 


111 


resources, including human, fiscal, informational and/or technical, as appropriate, to 
further the mission and goals of the service. 

The panel will give assistance and guidance in the following functional project 
categories: 

• Guidance in Organizational and Operational Policies 

• Determination of Milestones and Deliverables 

t Identification of Sponsors' Individual Goals 

• Identification of Sponsors’ Participation and Commitments 

• Coordination of Governmental Sponsors' Efforts 

• Incorporation of New Governmental Sponsors 

These recommendations will keep the Ada NET service responsive to its service 
base. 

The panel plans to meet quarterly to be apprised of the current status of oper- 
ations, as well as to provide assistance and guidance in the above referenced func- 
tional project categories. The use of electronic communications will provide on-going 
communications between all members of the panel. More active participation may 
be established by each member through the identification of representatives from 
within their respective organizations to provide concentrated technical support to the 
AdaNET service. The initial number of members of the Federal Advisory Panel shall 
be set at eleven (11) charter members. These charter members shall serve as the 
nominating committee for additional members. At no time shall the Federal Advisory 
Panel exceed twenty-one (21) members. Organizations will maintain representation 
on the Federal Advisory Panel for a period of up to nine months following the orga- 
nization's termination of support. 

A standing Executive Committee of no more than seven but at all times at least 
five members shall be initially constituted from the Charter organizations providing 
human, monetary and/or technology resources in support of the AdaNET service. The 
Executive Committee will make policy recommendations for ratification by a majority 
of the Federal Advisory Panel. 


Revised June 1988 
AdaNET Project Staff 


24 



The Business and Industry Council 


The Business and Industry Council shall serve as the mechanism for bringing 
commercial and other private sector entities into participation with the AdaNET ser- 
vice. Organizations looking for additional ways to utilize the technology available 
through the AdaNET service should initially interact at this level; such organizations 
may include major industry and manufacturing concerns, large and small businesses 
representing additional resources of Ada technology expertise, and professional orga- 
nizations. This provides an initial mechanism for their interaction, as well as allows 
those organizations not wanting higher level involvement to maintain a tie with the 
activities and developments. Representatives on the Business and Industry Council 
should somewhat parallel the authority represented on the the Federal Advisory Board. 
These individuals may elect to nominate representatives to the Technology Advisory 
Panel, to provide more technically oriented interaction with the AdaNET service. 

This panel provides direction for outreach and support activities. It will also provide 
a link between those industrial entities who currently have strong established bases 
of technology and those organizations trying to develop such expertise. Activity on 
the Business and Industry Council represents a more “arms-length" relationship with 
the AdaNET service than that of the governmental sponsors or the organizations with 
subcontract or corporate teaming agreements in place. Many organizations initially 
interacting only at these board levels may recognize that a higher level of interaction 
is warranted by their capabilities and expertise, as well as the recognition of how 
participation supports their individual self-interests. Such organizations may migrate 
into roles on the development and support team. 


Mission and Goal Statement 

The mission of the Business and Industry Council is to provide assistance and 
guidance throughout the development and operation of the AdaNET service. The 
Business and Industry Council links the services with the organizations and communi- 
ties it serves, reflecting the ideas, focuses, and needs of each participating and targeted 
segment of these organizations and communities. The council is composed of indi* 
viduals from key commercial sector organizations who have demonstrated leadership 
in innovation, research, development and the application of technology for America's 
productivity enhancement. Each of the Business and Industry Council members shall 


25 


hold such positions within their respective organizations to be able to influence the 
participation with or support for the AdaNET service by their respective industries, 
companies, or professional organizations. 

The council will give assistance and guidance to MountainNet in the following 
functional project categories: 

• Target sector identification and needs 

• Service recommendations 

• Organizational participation and resources 

• Productivity enhancement applications 

These recommendations will serve to keep the AdaNET service responsive to its 
service base. 

The board shall meet semi-annually, to be apprised of the current status of oper- 
ations, as well as to provide assistance and guidance in the above referenced broad 
based functional project categories. More active interaction may be established by 
each member through the nomination of representatives from within their organiza- 
tion to serve on the Technology Advisory Council. No limitation has been set on the 
number or organizations with representation on the Business and Industry Council. 

A standing Executive Committee of no more than seven but at all times at least 
five members shall be initially constituted. The Executive Committee will convey 
recommendations made by the Business and Industry Council. 


Revised June 1988 
AdaNET Project Staff 


Technology Advisory Council 

The Technology Advisory Council provides the technical applications interface 
between the AdaNET service and organizations represented on the Business and In- 
dustry Council, as well as organizations working more closely in subcontract/teaming 
arrangements as part of the development and support team. 

While interaction with and support of and the AdaNET service can occur without 
a formal structure, this council will help to organize and coordinate the efforts of this 
highly diverse and potentially very large group more effectively. Meetings will allow 
interaction of the whole council that would otherwise not occur. Such interaction is 


26 



valuable to both the AdaNET service and the members themselves in allowing for a 
wider ranging flow of communications, ideas, and creativity. 

Mission and Goal Statement 

The mission of the Technology Advisory Council is to provide technical assis- 
tance in specific areas of expertise throughout the development and operation of the 
AdaNET service. The Technology Advisory Council provides an interactive technical 
resource from each organization. The areas of technical expertise represented on the 
Technology Advisory Council will be maintained to reflect the diverse ideas, focuses, 
and needs of each participating and impacted segment of the organizations and com- 
munities served by the AdaNET service. The council is composed of individuals from 
each of the commercial and educational sector organizations 'supporting the AdaNET 
service, who possess areas of expertise needed to round out t he base of available talent 
and knowledge required for successful development and maintenance of the AdaNET 
service. Each Technology Advisory Council member shall provide regular and on-going 
technical support and input. 

The council will give technical assistance and guidance in the following functional 
project categories: 

• Research, development and maintenance of repository functions 

• Services development 

• Market research 

• Revenue planning 

• Fiscal planning and analysis 

• Operations res ea rch 

• Productivity enhancement measurements 

This technical input will provide a base of technical emphasis that would be un- 
available within any one organizatipfT^^:^ : -f- •: • • • 

Due to its diversity and potentially large number of participants, the board shall 
meet semi-annually, to be apprised of the current status of operations, as well as to 
report on each functional area of activity. The Technology Advisory Council shall be 
functionally segmented. Members of the Technology Advisory Council also may also 
serve as the active representatives of organizations with membership on the Business 
and Industry Council. No specific limitation has been set for a maximum number of 
members of the Technology Advisory Council. 


27 


Revised June 1988 
AdaNET Project Staff 


28 



1.2.7 Long Term Interaction with University of Houston 
- Clear Lake 

MountainNet has held discussions with representatives of UHCL RICIS to explore 
potential long term interaction of UHCL RICIS with MountainNet’s AdaNET service, 
once AdaNET is commercially self-supporting. The following are under consideration: 

• Support in coordination of the Technology Advisory Panel: MountainNet pro- 
poses that University of Houston - Clear Lake host its meetings. 

• A cc * ss to resources and information maintained by MountainNet in support 
of the AdaNET project to support RICIS research activities: this may include 
hardware, software, research library and staff resources. Such resources may be 
provided through telecommunications access, or on-site research at Mountain- 
Net facilities, under sponsored research programs. Continuing discussions will 
define the scope and structure of such arrangements. 

• Incorporation of RICIS programs as part of the service offerings available through 
AdaNET. In addition to interaction with SEAD (detailed in the following sec- 
tion), services provided by the Space Business Research Center and the Software 
Engineering Professional Education Center could be offered through AdaNET. 

1.2.8 Interaction With SEAD 

One of the topics for further discussion involves the RICIS Software Engineering and 
Ada Database (SEAD). Specifically, it is desired to increase SEAD’s commercial focus. 

Discussions with Morris Liaw, Principal Investigator of the SEAD project and 
others at UHCL have identified the following levels of potential interaction between 
MountainNet’s AdaNET Information Services (AIS) and UHCL’s SEAD: 


1. No integration; 

2. Communications integration: MountainNet provides a telecommunications link 
into the SEAD for access to the SEAD by AdaNET users; 

3. Data integration: AIS and SEAD exchange data on a regular basis; or, 

4. Full integration. Merging AIS and SEAD under same name, structure and user 
interface. 

The first option would indicate that no valuable interaction can occur between 
the two efforts and that the AdaNET service can do little to help expand SEAD or 
to provide commercialization support; this is believed to be false, and hence is not 
considered as a viable option. 

MountainNet believes a combination of both 2) and 3) to be the most effective 
level of interaction, for the following reasons: 

• The combination of choices allows MountainNet to achieve its goal of providing 
support in augmenting information available through SEAD (through regular 
updates to the SEAD of information collected in the AIS); and 

• Through establishment of telecommunications connections, provide additional 
commercialization support to SEAD, by expanding its base of potential users to 
include all users of the AdaNET service; 

• There would be very little restructuring of the service functions and goals of 
either SEAD or AIS; 

Complete integration as defined in 4) is not believed to be desirable for the fol- 
lowing reasons: 

• AIS and SEAD services are currently targeted to two separate user communi- 
ties. SEAD currently services internal NASA organizations and NASA contrac- 
tors/subcontractors who access SEAD via NASA internal telecommunications 
networks. AdaNET’s primary focus is on private sector users. Clarification has 
not yet been given on whether SEAD can expand its services for general pri- 
vate sector use, and still maintain its direct linkages to its NASA users (due to 
network security concerns); 

• Elimination of the AIS as a major service within AdaNET will radically reduce 
the value of information presented through AdaNET, and her- its commercial 
viability; the alternative, merging of SEAD into AdaNET, is not considered a 
reasonable alternative to the developers of SEAD; 


30 


• Presentational formats and retrieval mechanisms for information to be contained 
in the AIS differ from those of SEAD; MountainNet has evaluated various users 
interfaces and retrieval mechanisms for on-line information. The method chosen 
(text retrieval/ hypertext systems) is deemed to be the most desirable for the 
AdaNET environment. It is suggested that a quantitative study be conducted 
to assess relative user responsiveness/usage levels on both systems, to evaluate 
(where information may be duplicated) user-preferred methods of delivery. 

Before further planning of AdaNET/SEAD interaction can occur, additional plan- 
ning by the SEAD staff must be completed. As stated above, one major decision 
will be whether SEAD will be allowed to incorporate non-NASA private sector users 
while maintaining its linkage into NASA networks. Additionally, clarification as to 
the SEAD's ultimate host machine will aid greatly in determining the level of data 
exchange possible and specific requirements for establishing telecommunications link- 
ages. Further elaboration of RICIS goals for SEAD commercialization are necessary, 
in order to completely address how MountainNet, through its AdaNET service can 
help add other commercialization support services. 

1.2.9 Incorporation of New Project Sponsors 

New government sponsors may become active in supporting development of the 
AdaNET service. Such support could be provided through either interagency agree- 
ment and support through the existing cooperative, or through additional contracting 
mechanisms. In the prior case, a standard Memorandum of Understanding with NASA, 
(as the contracting agency), based on the one signed by the three original sponsors, 
will be established. 

It is agreed upon by all existing sponsors that as other governmental organizations 
apply their resources to development of the AdaNET service, those organizations 
should be given representation on the Federal Advisory Panel. This has positive results 
for both the newcomers and the existing sponsors, since all participants will have a 
common forum for sharing information about their respective goals in the project, and 
the resolution of potential conflicts in those goals. The new sponsors' agendas will 
need to be incorporated into the common agenda of the existing sponsors, and project 
milestones and deliverables will need to be adjusted and expanded accordingly. 


31 


1.2.10 Interaction with NASA Affiliates 


A strong working relationship is evolving with NASA affiliate organizations identified 
to support the AdaNET service. The support, participation and resources contributed 
by these organizations is currently being underwritten by NASA as part of its in-kind 
contribution to the service. This participation is intended to provide early returns to 
all participants: 


For example: 


• A base of resources and expertise will be made available to apply to various 
facets of development of the AdaNET service; sifch support will help in “lessons 
learned" and in applying existing technology solutions to planning development, 
and implementation. 

• These organizations represent additional sources of expertise and technology 
that will be made available to users of the AdaNET service. 

• Through markets identified, additional opportunities for commercial/ private sec- 
tor support will be afforded to participating affiliates. 

• MountainNet will perform catalyst and networking functions, placing entities 
needing specific technology solutions in touch with those organizations possess- 
ing such expertise. 

See Appendix 8 for a listing of those NASA affiliates currently providing support. 

1.2.11 Incorporation of Private Sector Participants 

MountainNet’s interaction with the private sector will be as both provider and 
user of services and expertise. The delineation between those organizations that are 
providers of resources and those that are users should be almost impossible. The same 
groups using services and utilizing the information, software and expertise available, 
should also represent, in time, an additional resource that can be added to the team 
of organizations supporting the AdaNET services. 

The AdaNET project staff will serve as the focal point for communications and 
coordination between governmental and commercial sector interests. This is appro- 
priate to the service’s main focus on commercial sector organizations; this will provide 


32 



the mechanism to recruit the involvement of commercial sector interests both as ad- 
ditional resources and as users of services. The AdaNET project staff will identify 
the needs of those private sector communities with which it interacts, and then work 
through the Federal Advisory Panel to bring those needs to the attention of the federal 
agency sponsors. Private companies listed as users of software and services should 
eventually come full circle in the process, until they are also providers of software and 
technology to the AdaNET user base. 


1.3 Outline of Project Activity 

Initial presentation of plans for the AdaNET service was made to attendees of the 
Ada Expo '87 and ACM SlGAda conferences. The week Vactivities were centered 
around: 

• AdaNET Project Meetings 

• Ada Users Survey 

• Network Planning and Implementation 

• Initial Market and Services Analysis 


1.3.1 AdaNET Project Meetings 

Project meetings were held on on the evening of December 10, 1987, following com- 
pletion of the Ada Expo 87. The first meeting held included only representatives 
of the sponsoring agencies. Specific points for discussion focused on the need for 
higher level coordination between governmental participants, Mountain Net, and the 
University of Houston - Clear Lake. Discussion was also held on the participation of 
the Department of the Army DISC4 in the AdaNET project. 

A second meeting was held, with the following in attendance: 


Virginia Castor - DOD AJPO 
Edward Liebhardt - DoA DISC4 
Charles McKay - RICIS 
Mike Digman - MountainNet 
Kevin Dyer - Financial Alternatives 
John Heizer - DOD OPTI 

Topics for discussion included: 


Roy Bivens - NASA TU 
Henry Clarks - NASA TU 
Paul McWilliams - NIAC 
James Rautner - MountainNet 
Frances Van Scoy - WVU 
Robert Wallace - TA 


33 


• Changes to Organizational Views report 

• General update on AdaNET s Ada Expo 87 activities; 

• Discussion of project deliverables; 

• Organizational planning. 

The views expressed in that meeting are reflected in this chapter. The agenda of 
this meeting is included as Appendix F. 

1.3.2 Initial AdaNET Survey 

An initial survey was conducted at Ada Expo '87; copies of the survey instrument 
were distributed at the Ada Expo '87 with brochures about the AdaNET project. 
This survey was intended to gather the following types of information: 

• general demographic information, 

• Ada applications areas represented at the conferences, 

• levels of interest in potential service offerings, and 

• current hardware and telecommunications utilization. 

The survey, while only a sampling of those in attendance, yielded interesting infor- 
mation about the current interests, among those participating in the Ada marketplace. 
The survey was designed with a limited number of very focused questions, to increase 
the likelihood of response, as well as to get initial information about those areas need- 
ing more extensive follow-up. The demographic information provided is enabling the 
AdaNET project staff to follow up with mailings and further survey activities. Some 
findings from the survey are noted in the sections which follow. 

1.3.3 AdaNET Participant Communications 

Two factors have created a need for a means of communication and exchange of 
textual information regarding the AdaNET project. There are: 

• the wide geographic distribution of participants in AdaNET project oversight 
and technical development, and 

• the difficulty in coordinating schedules for meetings and expense of travel to 
meetings. 

Many of the individuals involved already participate in one or more computer 
networks or services. These services include: 


34 



• Defense Data Network (DDN) 

• NASA s electronic mail system 

• ARPANET 

• BITNET 

• Dialcom 

• Telenet electronic mail 

• CompuServe 

• MCI mail 

• Source 

• Other commercial networks and private Host computer systems 

There is no practical method for creating inter-network gateways among all the 
different networks that would be required for every project participant to be able 
to use that participant’s own host system for electronic mail and document transfer 
activities. In view of this, the project team has implemented an electronic mail and 
document service for AdaNET project participants hosted on a DEC Vax computer 
system. The service is menu-oriented, very easy to use, and can be accessed at no 
charge to the user through Telenet. 

Terminal emulations that are presently supported include DEC VT series, Data 
General, Lear Siegler, Televideo, ADDS, and other video terminals and emulators. 
(Responses to an item on the Ada Expo '87 questionnaire suggest that DEC, IBM PC, 
and Apple computers and video terminals are by far the most common hardware used 
by the respondents.) Copies of the Kermit communication and file transfer protocol 
which typically provides DEC VT series emulation are available from MountainNet for 
virtually any model of microcomputer. 

An AdaNET Document Transfer and Electronic Mail Service User Requirements 
Documentation form has been prepared and distributed to the various agencies and 
organizations participating in the project at this point. Attachment D of this docu- 
ment is the standardized form developed for establishment of usernames for project 
participants. Completion of this form by each project participant is required prior to 
account activation. 


35 


1.3.4 Network Planning 

In order to ascertain the extent to which some of the various electronic mail and 
document transfer systems are used by potential AdaNET users, a question regarding 
network use was asked on the informal questionnaire distributed at the Ada Expo '87. 
The following table summarizes responses to that question: 


Electronic Mail and Networks Used 
by Ada Expo Attendees 


Network Name 

Frequency 

Percent 

DDN 

20 

23.3 

ARPANET 

32 

37.2 

NASA MAIL 

02 

02.3 

BITNET 

09 

10.5 

TELENET 

15 

17.4 

MCI 

00 

0 

COMPUSERVE 

12 

14.0 

DIALCOM 

02 

02.3 

SOURCE 

04 

04.7 

USENET 

03 

03.5 

TYMNET 

01 

01.2 

CSNET 

03 

03.5 

OTHERS 

09 

10.5 


Notes: Number of respondents = 86: respondents were asked to mark all those 
networks that apply. 


Though use of various network services for electronic mail and document transfer 
is common among this group, even ARPANET, the most commonly used network, 
was used by less than 40 percent of the respondents. As already noted, responses to 
a second item on the Ada Expo '87 questionnaire suggest that DEC, IBM PC, and 
Apple computers and video terminals are by far the most common hardware used by 
the respondents. 


36 



1.3.5 Current Network Implementation 

Two host computer systems are initially being used to support planning and develop- 
ment activities: a Digital Equipment Corporation Vax 11/780 located in Buckhannon, 
WV; and a Data General MV8000 located in Dellsiow, WV. 

These host computer systems are connected to MountainNet’s own telecommu- 
nications network. That network is linked to Telenet and the West Virginia Network 
for Educational Telecomputing, which is in turn connected to ARPANET, BITNET, 
and Suranet. Through these network gateways, host computer systems are available 
via local direct or dialup access from most of the continental United States. 


1.3.6 User Survey and Marketing Implications 

Approximately 550 project brochures with market survey forms included were dis- 
tributed, individually, at the conference. Eighty-six (86) completed market survey 
forms were completed at the conference, a response rate of 16 percent. Since the 
conference additional surveys have been returned, some with cover letters expressing 
further interest in becoming involved with the support and use of Ada NET. Some 
have also responded with telephone inquiries about the project. 

AdaNET Brochure 

Included with the market survey, the brochure incorporated three “step-pages" of 
information describing the AdaNET project, the government agencies and private 
businesses involved in its inception, and the value-added services and products it will 
provide. These are included as Attachment F. A summary of the intent of these pages 
follows: 


AdaNET 


The Advanced Development Network 
For Ada Software Applications 


This page explains the AdaNET service as an efFort Involving government, edu« 
cation and the private sector, and its reason for being; that is, to gather, refine and 
disseminate information regarding the Ada computer language and software engineer- 


37 


ing in order to encourage use of Ada for better software engineering and improved 
productivity. 


AdaNET 

The Ada Soft- Where- House 


This page outlines how the AdaNET services and products will be stored, classified 
and made available to the commercial market place, and academic and government 
organizations, and describes a few of these organizations that should benefit immedi- 
ately and directly. The Ada Soft- Where- House represents the focus for access to the 
reusable components, objects and information services. 


AdaNET 

Value-added Services and Products 


This page is a detailed Listing of the services and products that are to be ofFered. 


General Impressions 

The AdaNET project staff had discussions with many attendees of the Ada Expo’87 
Conference, both on the floor of the display area and in small informal discussion 
groups. The impressions gleaned from these discussions and from the communications 
which have taken place since the conference have resulted in the general impression 
that the primary questions regarding the AdaNET service are: 

1. How soon will it be available? 

2. How can one access AdaNET? 

3. How much will access cost? 

A fourth impression is that many attendees felt that the AdaNET project represents 
a needed and timely step. 


38 



Initial Market Survey 

A preliminary analysis of the initial market survey revealed some interesting charac- 
tcristics, which are under further analysis for distribution to the project participants in 
the near future. The complete form is included as Attachment C. Here is a summary 
of the three questions posed to survey respondents: 

1. With which Ada-related professional organizations are you affili- 
ated? 

2. Is your organization involved in Ada software development? If 
yes, please check all that apply (various categories were listed). 

3. Which AdaNET services or information would you find useful? 

(various services were listed; users responded that each service was “Not Useful", “Use- 
ful”, or “Very Useful”) 

The results to question one were as follows: 

YES NO 


N Percent N Percent 


SIGAda 

61 

70.9 

25 

29.1 

AdaJUG 

12 

14.0 

74 

86.0 

IEEE 

34 

39.5 

52 

60.0 


As was expected, considering the audience that was being addressed, a significant 
number of respondents, 70.9%, indicated a membership in SIGAda. The balance 


39 


of the respondents show H.0% membership in AdaJUG, and 39.5% membership in 
IEEE. The total adds to more than 100% due to multiple membership affiliations by 
some respondents. 

From these respondents, most of whom are members of professional Ada organiza- 
tions and who represent a sophisticated population, significant indicators are beginning 
to emerge. From the responses of this group to the third question, the most useful 
services are those listed below. These areas were the areas that elicited a "very useful" 
response from over 66% of the respondents. 

• Ada Faceted Classifications for Reuse 

• Ada-Specific Metrics 

• Software Engineering Methodology 

• Topical Search Categories for Reuse 

Services or information which were viewed as "useful" include: 

• Commercial products and services 

• Contracting opportunities 

• Documentation and information 

• Project management software 

• User Communications 

Services or information viewed as “not useful” are as follows: 

• On-line tutorials 

• Computer based training 

• Telephone Help Line 

Respondents who indicated that Ada-faceted Classifications for Reuse, Topical 
Search Categories for Reuse, and Software Engineering Methodology were "very- 
useful” tended to fall into the following software development categories: 

• Data Bases 

• Education 

• Engineering 

• MIS Functions 

• Process Control 

• Scientific 

• Telecommunications 

• Tools 

• Weapons 


40 



Ada-specific Metrics were found to be “very useful" for the following software 
development categories: 

• Scientific 

• Data Bases 

• Engineering 

• Telecommunications 

• Weapons 


Initial service offerings will be concentrated upon those categories which this pre- 
liminary survey indicates would have the highest tendency to be probable value-added 
migration paths for technology transfer offerings. 


Chapter 2 
Business Plan 


42 



2.1 Business Plan Summary 


This plan describes the development of the AdaNET service, the purpose of which 
is to disseminate software engineering and Ada technology and aid in the transition of 
this important technology. Since Ada’s first commercial availability in 1982, there has 
been continual development of Ada applications in both the public and private sectors, 
nationally and internationally. MountainNet, Inc., is developing AdaNET as a means 
to capture and reuse the increasing volumes of Ada software technology and related 
information being generated by public sector activities. Through value-added infor- 
mation services and reusable Ada software, AdaNET will offer technology solutions 
not previously available. AdaNET development is supported jointly by the Technology 
Utilization Division (TU) of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), 
the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) of the Department of Defense (DoD), and 
the Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation (OPTI) of the Department of 
Commerce (DOC). 

2.1.1 The Company 

MountainNet, Inc., is a communications and software engineering company formed 
in 1983. MountainNet currently serves the government, commercial and educational 
communities. In 1985, MountainNet recognized the vast potential market for Ada 
related services. The DoD developed the Ada computer language for mission-critical 
systems, but Ada technology seemed to have broad potential beyond the defense com- 
munity. This potential, plus the fact that very few companies existed with established 
expertise in Ada technology, combined to present an excellent market opportunity. 

In response, MountainNet developed AdaNET, a service designed to address the 
need for specialized software and information for the software engineering and Ada 
technology market, and submitted an unsolicited proposal for design and development 
of a prototype service. 

2.1.2 MountainNet ’s AdaNET Services 

MountainNet is using its telecommunications, information distribution and Ada tech- 
nology expertise to develop a system that will coordinate information from a multitude 
of sources for consolidated direct access by AdaNET subscribers. Services will include 
access through a variety of media to: 


43 


• Ada software; 

• Information about that software; 

• Communications among Ada professionals; 

• Retrieval systems for general Ada related information; 

• Catalogs of government sponsored Ada programs and technology; 

• Catalogs of existing software engineering/ Ada products and services; 

• Third party services representing areas of Ada related expertise. 

An important part of the AdaNET system will be the development and ongoing 
support of a Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI), a library of reusable Ada components 
and their associated life cycle products. Specialized value-added services to encourage 
reuse of this software will also be provided. These services include software classifi- 
cations, testing, performance metrics, documentation, tutorials, and quality ratings. 
Ada repositories currently exist, but the incorporation of these value-added services 
and accessibility to a wide market base make the AdaNET system unique. AdaNET 
will complement and augment existing related public and private sector services. 

The AdaNET service, will capture for reuse the growing amount of Ada technol- 
ogy being developed for NASA and DoD programs. This technology will be collected, 
organized, evaluated, and made available to the private sector to encourage transi- 
tion to use of Ada technology. Mountain Net through its Related Projects Working 
Group will also identify current activities within various government organizations to 
lessen potential duplication of effort. Another goal of the AdaNET system is to apply 
acquired software technology to Computer Integrated Manufacturing/Flexible Com- 
puter Integrated Manufacturing (CIM/FCIM) and industrial automation activities in 
the United States. 

The revenue structure will utilize standard subscriptions, incremental fees, and 
ongoing research contracts. Mountain Net will provide quality information at affordable 
rates to encourage widespread usage of software engineering and Ada technology. 

2.1.3 The Market 

Markets for AdaNET software and information services include: 

• Existing Ada community 

• International software industry 

• Manufacturing and automation communities 

• Educational communities 

• Government organizations 


44 



Initial technology transition efforts will be directed to the existing Ada community, 
as well as that portion of the traditional software industry seeking entry in the software 
engineering and Ada marketplace. 

Many of the services offered through AdaNET will be of use to all of these target 
user groups, and additional services will be offered to cater to other specific user 
communities. AdaNET services will be offered in many forms, including seminars, 
workshops, professional consulting, and the DSI with its supporting information. This 
information will be distributed through a variety of methods, including on-line, CD- 
ROM, diskette, and print. 

The market for Ada products will be several hundred million dollars in 1988, and is 
expected to exceed one billion dollars by 1991, surpassing four billion dollars by 1995, 
according to a survey conducted by IRDI. The most immediate potential user base 
is the current software engineering and Ada community. Preliminary market surveys 
conducted by MountainNet indicate that there is interest and perceived need for the 
types of services to be offered through AdaNET. 


2.1.4 Financial Projections 

Support for AdaNET development is being provided by a subcontract from the Uni- 
versity of Houston - Clear Lake (UHCL). Full implementation of planned services 
will enable research and development of computer based resources and value-added 
services, facilitate acquisition of necessary computer and network resources, and sup- 
port aggressive technology transition plans. Full financial projections are contained in 
section 2.7 of this document. 


45 


2.2 Background 


MountainNet, Inc., a West Virginia business, was incorporated in 1983 to provide 
telecommunications and software engineering services. MountainNet currently main- 
tains 17 dial-in nodes across the state, with internetwork linkages to the West Virginia 
Network for Educational Telecomputing (WVNET), a state supported network, and 
the commercial international Telenet network. The MountainNet network is used to 
access a variety of computer hosts and other networks by governmental, commercial 
and educational users of on-line information services. For example, MountainNet pro- 
vides telecommunications access to a computer hosting an on-line information system 
supported by the West Virginia Department of Energy. The Software Valley Bulletin 
Board, a free public access electronic bulletin board service, is made available through 
a cooperative effort of MountainNet and MPL Corporation, an affiliated computer 
services corporation. 

MountainNet is entering the software engineering and Ada technology information 
services market with development of the Ada NET system. Through Ada NET, Moun- 
tainNet will collect and disseminate software and information in the fields of software 
engineering and the Ada computer language. Interest in Ada technology has rapidly 
increased in both the public and private sectors, nationally and internationally, since 
Ada's first commercial availability in 1982. AdaNET's purpose is to encourage greater 
growth of the Ada community in the private sector, as well as to capture for reuse 
the vast, ever increasing amounts of Ada software and related information being gen- 
erated by public sector activities. The information available through Ada NET will be 
ofFered with accompanying value-added services, resulting in a source of information 
which will be unique in the Ada market. 

MountainNet has found that several major barriers exist for new companies trying 
to enter the Ada technology marketplace. Critical information about training and 
software engineering/Ada technology is difficult and expensive to obtain, and very 
few support services exist to aid in the collection and use of this information. In 
addition, the rapidly expanding base of public domain Ada software has not been 
organized effectively for widespread distribution and reuse. Such information has 
primarily existed in disparate centers serving focused user bases, with little information 
sharing between such activities. There is a market for efficient, reliable access to this 
information by both the existing Ada market and by new market entrants. AdaNET 
will provide such access. 

An important part of AdaNET will be the development and ongoing support of 


46 



an Ada software library, with accompanying specialized services to encourage reuse 
of this software. This library will be unique to the industry. Only recently has the 
software industry as a whole recognized the need for technologies supporting reuse of 
software. Current activities in developing software reuse technologies and methodolo- 
gies are primarily government supported. As these new technologies become available, 
MountainNet will apply them the AdaNET reusable software library. 

With software life cycle costs continuing to increase, and the need for new software 
systems in both the public and private sector rising each year, the demand for more 
efficient technologies to manage this software crisis has never been greater. Through 
AdaNET, MountainNet will provide a central information source for such emerging 
technologies, and will use these technologies in building its own reusable components 
libraries. Anyone producing software engineering or Ada software products in this 
market is a potential AdaNET user. AdaNET should also encourage new entrants into 
the software engineering and Ada market by making the technology more accessible, 
particularly in the area of CIM/FCIM software development. 

AdaNET will provide its user base with the following: 

• A telecommunication linkage for government, academic and commer- 
cial entities; 

• A clearinghouse of information for professional, educational, and cur- 
rent events news; 

• Contracting information to encourage greater competitiveness in the 
software engineering and Ada marketplace; 

• Access to other market participants for: 

— Potential teaming opportunities 

Expertise in a variety of areas related to software engineering and 
Ada technology 

• Access to Ada software libraries, aiding users in software reuse; 

AdaNET will be directed initially to two target markets: the existing Ada commu- 
nity; and the traditional software development community seeking entry into the Ada 
market. The buyers of AdaNET services will include: 

• Software engineers and developers 

• Software managers 

• Contractors and subcontractors 

• Government agencies 


47 


• Educational communities 

MountainNet currently has 12 full time equivalent (FTE) personnel, of which 
ten are assigned to AdaNET. During future phases of the project, MountainNet will 
add to its internal technical and technology transition staff, reflecting the shift from 
initial project planning to full scale AdaNET implementation. MountainNet will add 
approximately six people during the next year. Long term growth of the company is 
anticipated to peak between 20-30 FTE personnel. 

MountainNet has maintained controlled growth by subcontracting services when- 
ever possible. This approach has allowed a high degree of flexibility in response to 
market demands. MountainNet will subcontract with a variety of companies repre- 
senting areas of expertise essential to successful AdaNET development. MountainNet 
is currently working with eleven companies and organizations, and is discussing formal- 
izing relationships with several major technology and industry leaders, thus broadening 
the base of available resources. 


2.3 The Market 

This section describes initial marketing plan for the AdaNET service. It discusses 
the current marketplace, presents results of an intial market survey and describes the 
beginning implementation plan for AdaNET. 

2.3.1 The Software Engineering and Ada Marketplace 

This section discusses the use of Ada in a software engineering environment, describes 
the current Ada marketplace and offers a view of Ada as applied to the commercial 
sector of the economy. 


Ada in a Software Engineering Environment 

Ada is a tool for software engineering in embedded computer applications. Although 
initially defined as a language for DoD mission-critical computer resources, Ada is 
being recognized as a language which has much broader applications. For exam- 
ple, most process control systems in place on factory floors require the same degree 
of tightly controlled development as DoD applications. Implementation of object- 


48 



oriented design, information hiding and packaging concepts using Ada is appropriate 
for the development of the automated factory of the future. 

One of the most critical elements of Ada is that it encourages the use of good 
software engineering practices. When used properly, Ada can reduce costs and enhance 
the engineers' ability to reuse components in new systems. The AdaNET Information 
Service (AIS) will provide necessary information that will aid in the proper use of 
software engineering principles. 

While originally developed for embedded systems development, similar benefits 
from use of Ada are being experienced in development and support of applications 
software, such as management information systems, database systems, and software 
tools. 

The Current Ada Marketplace 

The initial Ada technology market was completely driven by the United States gov- 
ernment, and more particularly, by DoD demand. Development of the Ada language 
was sponsored by the DoD in an effort to control software costs in vital defense and 
weapons systems. Ada's development was intended to: 

• Establish one standardized language that would be used by all DoD agencies in 
the development of mission-critical systems; 

• Hold down the rising costs and improve the reliability of developing and main- 
taining software by encouraging good software engineering design; 

• Encourage reuse of software by including features that would enhance the po- 
tential for reuse of software components. 

The process of developing Ada, from its early specifications documents through 
the first commercial compilers, spanned the period from 1975 to 1982. Hence, the 
Ada market is just emerging from its infancy. Major development efforts using Ada 
in the United States have been, for the most part, government sponsored activities. 
Internationally, the use of Ada in the commercial market has been more widespread; 
banking, telecommunications, and aerospace systems have been developed using Ada 
technology. One of the largest companies to adopt Ada early on was the Japanese 
Nippon Telegraph-Telephone (NTT), which began developing their software in Ada 
shortly after the first commercial compilers became available. 

However, the market demand created by defense applications has been sign ifican t. 

A DoD directive issued in 1983 mandated that Ada must be used for all new mission- 
critical applications. In 1985, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) directed 


49 


that all NATO-developed systems developed after January 1986 must use Ada. In 
1986, a DoD directive expanded the use of Ada to all new weapons systems develop- 
ment. The defense market for Ada applications alone generated more than than 100 
million dollars per year. 

Three areas historically holding back Ada's widespread adoption were the lack of 
commercial compilers and tools for many popular computer systems, the general lack 
of trained professionals in the field, and the lack of technology and market information. 

Ada use is rapidly spreading to the commercial applications market, now that its 
advantages in software productivity and reliability are being realized. Major applica- 
tions in supporting real time control systems are being developed. Weirton Steel, in 
Weirton, West Virginia, is undertaking a 300 million dollar modernization project for 
new hot rolling mill technology that will use Ada as its control language. The devel- 
opment is being done by General Electric Corporation.* Ada is also being used in the 
United States to program microwave ovens, commercial aircraft navigational systems, 
telecommunications, database management systems, and many other applications. 

The government market continues to drive the process of Ada s adoption by the 
world s software industry: 

• In December 1987, NASA awarded a 1 billion dollar contract to Boeing Corpora- 
tion for the development of a space station, to be completed in the mid-1990's. 
The software will be written in Ada and is estimated to require 10.5 million lines 
of code. 

• A 508 million dollar contract was released by the DoD in January, 1988, to Mar- 
tin Marietta Corporation for the development of the Strategic Defense Initiative 
(SDI) National Test Bed. This project will be developed using Ada. 

• The Software Technologies for Adaptable, Reliable Systems (STARS) has so- 
licited proposals for major research to be conducted simultaneously by three 
major prime contractors for developing new technologies that will encourage 
software reusability in Ada. STARS has indicated that a centralized software 
repository to coordinate the results of this research is needed. 

• The Federal Aviation Administration (FA A) (Department of Transportation) has 
chosen Ada as its standard development language. 

Recent commercial sector activities are also significant: 

• Ada compilers and tools are proliferating: there are currently 123 commercially 
available compilers listed in the Ada Information Clearinghouse (AdalC), which 
run on the most common mainframe, mini and micro computers. 


50 



• Ada education is also expanding, with Ada and software engineering courses 
being offered at many small colleges, as well as at most major universities. 
The number of companies providing Ada education for the existing professional 
market has also increased. 

• The Software Productivity Consortium (SPC), a research consortium estab- 
lished by the nation s largest defense and aerospace companies to develop new 
automation, knowledge based systems, and reuse technologies, is using Ada as 
its primary development language. 

• Space Industries, Incorporated, a Texas company which proposed the develop- 
ment of the Industrial Space Facility (ISF). a parallel program to NASA’s space 
station, is using Ada technology to support its development. 

• A study released by International Resource Development. Incorporated (IRD) in 
December, 1986, has determined that Ada market opportunities for 1988 total 
several hundred million dollars. Such growth is introducing many newcomers to 
the Ada marketplace. The need for skilled Ada software engineers far exceeds 
the number currently available. Major corporations and leading defense con- 
tractors have undertaken internal training programs to develop enough expertise 
to meet their current contract demands. Newcomers to the market still have 
extreme difficulty locating educational and professional information, gaining ac- 
cess to currently existing technology and compilers, and finding contracting and 
subcontracting opportunities. 

It is apparent that the software engineering and Ada technology market is on a 
steep upward climb. The government market alone will continue to support steady 
growth, thus creating a base of long term stability in the Ada market. However, 
significant accompanying growth in private sector use of Ada is also probable, as the 
use of software engineering principles become more common and advantages in real 
cost and reliability savings are realized. IRD r s study indicates that the market for Ada 
technology in 1991 alone will have grown to more than a billion dollars. 

2.3.2 Market Trends 

AdaNET s immediate markets are the existing Ada community, and companies making 
entry to that community. New companies will continue to enter the market as the 
government demand for Ada software continues to grow and as the cost savings of 
using Ada technology are realized. Such savings include reduced life cycle costs, 
increased software reliability, and savings through reuse of software components. The 


51 


languages and technologies used in the past are now unable to meet the growing 
demands for larger, more reliable, longer term software solutions. Companies are 
finding Ada an attractive alternative. 

The heightened emphasis on interconnectivity and standardization in all facets 
of communications is causing many companies to favor use of the standardized Ada 
language. With the shift to Ada technology to support the government market, it is 
becoming more cost-effective for government software producers to use Ada for all 
their applications. 

As more software companies increase their competitiveness by adopting Ada, oth- 
ers will be forced to explore the transition to the Ada market in order to maintain a 
competitive market position or even to remain in the market at all. To support this 
transition, developers are seeking sources of software engineering/ Ada related technol- 
ogy, educational, and market information. In spite of radically increased use of Ada, 
such sources are still scarce. To realize the advantages of software reuse encouraged 
by software engineering/Ada technology, developers are seeking new tools, design 
and evaluation methodologies, and access to the millions of dollars of government 
developed Ada software that is in the public domain. 

2.3.3 Market Participants 

Current products in the Ada market are summarized as follows: 

• Ada Compilers 

• Applications Software (e.g., CRI's Relate 3000 relational database system) 

• Customer Specific Applications (e.g., Weirton Steel’s hot rolling mill) 

• Software Development Environments (e.g., CASE products) 

• Computers (e.g., Rational computers) 

• Educational Materials 

• Metrics (e.g., McCabe and Associates, Autometrics) 

• Newsletters (e.g., Ada Strategies, Ada Data, AdalC) 

• Seminars (e.g., EVB Software Engineering. Texel Putnam Associates) 

• Tools (e.g., program design languages, configuration management) 

While all the Ada product areas listed above represent potential users of AdaNET 
services, MountainNet views the producers of Applications/Customer Specific Appli- 
cations as the potentially largest group of AdaNET users. 


52 



Mountain Net is conducting an ongoing market assessment as part of the plan- 
ning to provide continuing refinement to the Technical Plan and Revenue Structures 
reports. The following questions are being researched for each of the service areas 
listed: 


• How many companies are producing software engineering and Ada training ma- 
terials? 

• How is the service made available to users? 

• What is the anticipated growth in this market by number of market participants 

and total market share? 

These statistics will be used as the basis for final revenue projections, by applying 
service revenue structures to each of these markets. Independent market growth 
projections in each area, coupled with final results of MountainNet's own market 
studies, will allow more accurate predictions of growth in each service sector. Current 
projections are made on baseline minimum use for each service area in the current 
market environment. 

« 

2.3.4 Market Composition 

MountainNet has identified several major professional areas represented within each 
of its potential market segments: 

• Software Engineers/ Developers 

• Managers/Administrators 

• Educators 

• Applications End Users 

The initial market survey conducted at Ada Expo '87. indicated that these indi- 
vidual user communities have interests in specific service areas: 

• Software Engineers/Developers already working with Ada tech- 
nology were interested in software engineering methodologies, Ada specific 
metrics, reusable software, and Ada faceted classifications for reuse. They 
had little interest in Education and Support, or Contract Opportunities/ Market 
Trend information. 

• Those representing Administrative or Business oriented functions within 
their organizations, whether governmental or commercial, registered interest in 


53 


services providing contracting/subcontracting information, current events, mar- 
ket trends, governmental activities with respect to the use of Ada, and informa- 
tion about companies and products in the Ada market. They had little interest 
in technically oriented services. 

• Educators, fewest in number of those groups represented in the sampling, 
indicated the strongest interest in technically oriented information, such as: 
Ada faceted classifications for reuse; software engineering methodology; topical 
search categories for reuse; and Ada tutorials. All other areas registered median 
interest, with the exception of contracting, products, and telephone help line, 
which were of little or no interest. 

• The last category includes potential Manufacturing/Industrial communi- 
ties examining Ada technology as part of an overall advance technology solution 
to aid in their productivity, competitiveness and reliability. Areas of interest to 
representatives actively involved in the development Ada applications include: 
information about current industrial applications, educational and professional 
information, and information about companies possessing specific areas of Ada 
technology expertise. 

This survey, along with more in-depth inquiries, is being distributed to a much 
broader sampling of both the Ada and non-Ada communities. For a more detailed 
analysis of the data collected at the Ada Expo, see appendix A. 

2.3.5 Market Segments 

Mountain Net has identified five separate market segments which represent the key 
areas in its implementation strategy: 

• Current Ada market participants 

• New entrants to the Ada market 

• Educational institutions 

• Government organizations 

• Industrial/Manufacturing 

The current Ada market represents the most immediate market for AdaNET ser- 
vices. MountainNet is gradually becoming established in that community, through 
activity in professional organizations and through MountainNet's expanding base of 


54 


government contacts. Based on preliminary surveys, the professional Ada community 
will comprise the initial base-line of services planned by AdaNET. Particular interest 
has been expressed in reusable software components and supporting value-added ser- 
vices, professional papers, and general information services such as market trends and 
contract opportunities. Development of these services must occur before expansion 
into later markets, such as the industrial and manufacturing markets. 

The educational community does not represent a potentially high level revenue 
base. However, those colleges and universities that have established bases of Ada ex- 
pertise will be some of AdaNET's most valuable sources of new research, development 
and emerging technology. For those institutions trying to gain Ada technology exper- 
tise, AdaNET s purpose will be to provide as much high quality, low cost information 
and support as possible, as they begin to incorporate Ada and software engineering 
into their curriculums. 

The government market represents a highly stable, proactive environment for 
AdaNET’s services. While AdaNET's stated purpose is the transfer of software engi- 
neering and government developed Ada software to the private sector, another implicit 
role that has emerged for AdaNET is to inventory available software within various 
government agencies. Much time has been spent in AdaNET's planning phase to 
determine the scope of existing Ada and software engineering information and related 
projects in progress at various NASA field centers. In discussions with DOC, NASA, 
and DoD organizations, it has become apparent that there is duplication of efforts 
within these organizations. AdaNET will provide a means by which these agencies 
can communicate to coordinate their Ada related activities. This information can be 
shared, allowing faster development and greater technological advances. 

Entry into the industrial/manufacturing market will require a more prolonged ef- 
fort. Significant pre-market education will probably be required for individual commu- 
nities to see the direct advantages of applying software engineering/ Ada technology to 
their specific applications. AdaNET will provide educational and consultant support 
for successful long term software engineering/Ada technology transfer in such areas 
as Paperless Order Processing (POP), Just In Time Inventory (JIT), CIM/FCIM, and 
other real time control systems. 


2.3.6 Distribution Media 

AdaNET services will be delivered through a variety of distribution media. On-line 
computerized AdaNET services will be available internationally through Mountain- 


55 


Net's network, as well as through internetwork gateways to commercial, educational 
and governmental telecommunications carriers. Other distribution formats will include 
hardcopy, magnetic tape, diskette and CD-ROM. A centralized point of distribution 
will be established for each medium. Wherever possible, MountainNet will seek alter- 
nate distribution channels, to increase the overall market base for its services. Moun- 
tainNet is currently in discussions with distributors of CD-ROM information about 
potential use of existing distribution channels for AdaNET’s CD-ROM based services. 
Similar possibilities will be examined in the diskette duplication market. 

2.3.7 Complementary Services 

Currently, there are few sources for the information services that MountainNet will 
be providing. Other sources of related information do exist, but those services either 
do not provide the same kinds of value-added services, or are limited in the range 
of information provided. MountainNet views the organizations listed below as poten- 
tial partners in building AdaNET resources and providing additional complementary 
resources to the AdaNET user base. It is a goal of the AdaNET project to form 
cooperative relationships with any organizations that can provide valuable services to 
AdaNET subscribers. MountainNet will seek to provide services that complement and 
augment existing services rather than duplicate their efForts. 

Publications and Bulletin Boards: 

AdaData: A monthly publication by IRD provides information about market trends 

and commercial development in Ada software, services and equipment. 

Ada Information Clearinghouse (AdalC): An activity sponsored by the DoD 

AJPO, publishes a quarterly newsletter with information primarily about DoD related 
activities, as well as current developments in the Ada compilers and software tools 
market, and current events updates. Newsletters and other information are made 
available on a PC-based bulletin board system operated by the AdalC. Since both 
AdaNET and the AdalC are projects sponsored by the AJPO, both groups will work 
to coordinate their activities to avoid duplication of effort. Discussions are in process 
now. 


56 



Software Engineering and Ada Database (SEAD): An on-line database 

service operated by UHCL for JSC, NASA. As part of MountainNet’s Phase I and II 
Statement of Work with UHCL, MountainNet has investigated ways in which AdaNET 
can augment the information contained in SEAD, and explore how SEAD could be 
made available through MountainNet's developing AdaNET network. 

Ada Strategies: A monthly periodical by Cutter Publications providing informa- 

tion about the commercial and governmental Ada market, current events and trends. 
Ralph Crafts, editor of Ada Strategies, has recently signed a teaming agreement on 
behalf of his company, Software Strategies and Tactics, with MountainNet to pro- 
vide marketing support to MountainNet for AdaNET development. These services 
may include general Ada market assessment, evaluation of AdaNET charges, services 
evaluation, and target marketing. 


Software service activities (providing access to public domain software): 


Aide Publishing: Operating a CD-ROM based service with duplications of the 

Ada Software Repository (ASR) and other public domain software, primarily serving 
the Minnesota market area, where its major users are Honeywell and CDC. No value- 
added functions are provided in analysis or support of the software. 

Initial discussions with Aide Publishing have indicated that Aide would be highly 
interested in serving as a distribution channel for the CD-ROM services MountainNet 
will be establishing. 


Army White Sands Ada Software Repository (ASR): Located on the 

Army’s SIMTEL-20 node of the MIL-NET, and serving as the major clearinghouse for 
public domain DoD Ada software. The service provides on-line access to subscribers 
for a $2000 annual fee. Remote software requests from accounts on the Defense 
Data Network (DDN) are serviced, as are remote requests from educational networks. 
SIMTEL-20 and DDN accounts are limited to DoD organizations and contractors. 
Due to resource limitations, restrictions are set on the volume of software transmitted 
per request. Low level testing is performed on software, with no verification, metrics, 
or evaluation for potential reusability of subcomponents being performed. Due to the 


57 


volunteer nature of much of the service, there is typically a backlog of duplication 
requests. 

Through discussions with Richard Conn, originator of the ASR, it was discovered 
that AdaNET can service the private sector with access to the the Ada software infor- 
mation that the ASR is providing to the defense market. ASR is currently receiving 
more electronic and written requests for software than it can effectively provide. Many 
of the incremental services AdaNET will ofFer, such as verification and metrics appli- 
cations, are not expected to become standard ASR offerings. MountainNet currently 
has copies of the ASR as well as other software collections, such as the Common Ada 
Missile Packages (CAMP), available on its computer systems. 

Computer Science Management and Information Center (COSMIC): 
NASA's repository for collected NASA software system that are general enough for 
redistribution to the public and private sectors. Both COSMIC and AdaNET receive 
funding from NASA's TU division. NASA TU has stated the need for cooperation 
between AdaNET and COSMIC. One way in which AdaNET could work with COSMIC 
is to provide on-line access to COSMIC's software directory, hence broadening COS- 
MIC's marketing channels. Discussions are being held with John Gibson, COSMIC 
Director, about possible cooperative relationships. A Memorandum of Understanding 
between University of Georgia (COSMIC’s operator) and MountainNet is currently be- 
ing put in place, to identify service areas addressed by each organization and specific 
areas of interaction. 


Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC): Currently under 

contract to STARS to provide no cost private sector access to ASR and Naval Ocean 
Systems Command (NOSC) software. This software is made available on magnetic 
tape. No value-added functions are provided in analysis or support of the software. 


Proprietary Ada Software Libraries: 


EVB Software Engineering’s Generic Reusable Ada Components for 
Engineering (GRACE): Some proprietary Ada software libraries are now being 

marketed, of which GRACE is the most widely known. The components supply fun- 


58 



damental data structures and functions, indexed by a taxonomy refined from that 
proposed in the book. “Software Components with Ada", by Grady Booch. The com- 
ponents are tested, supported, and are highly portable. Costs for the system depend 
on the buyer s host computer. MountainNet believes that more companies will enter 
the reusable components market as that market matures. 


2.4 Market Strategy 

Based on the five key market segments previously identified. MountainNet has chosen 
two specific areas in which to establish its initial AdaNET service base: 

• Ada Information Services (AIS), technology information services 

• Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI), Ada reusable software and associated life 
cycle products 

MountainNet is utilizing the following strategies to develop its technology base 
and gain exposure to the most current trends and developments, as well as to become 
integrated into the Ada culture: 


• Identification of existing NASA technologies: This includes collection 
of publications and standards produced by various NASA field centers and di- 
visions, identification of related projects and technologies, and communication 
with the individuals involved in such activities. 

• Development and broadening of AdaNET’s support infrastruc- 
ture: MountainNet is creating organizations for the formal interaction of public 
and private sector entities with AdaNET. These organizations are the Federal 
Advisory Panel, the Technology Advisory Council, and the Business and Industry 
Council. Discussions with representatives of other NASA organizations, as well 
as other government agencies, will be ongoing. As part of this effort, AdaNET 
is participating in NASA's Software Management and Assurance Workshop and 
in the National Bureau of Standards' FEDMAIN working group. As a result 
of continuing discussions with the executive council of the ACM's SIGAda, the 
council has indicated interest in using AdaNET as their electronic communica- 
tions medium. 


59 


MountainNet approach in developing AdaNET revenue structures is to offer af- 
fordable, general baseline services to a wide user audience and to provide incremental 
services at additional cost for high end or specialized user requests. The three major 
goals of this fee structure are to be able to provide a large amount of information 
across a wide variety of media, to keep individual user starting costs low, and to 
distribute part of the high costs of expense services across other low cost categories. 

In order to stimulate AdaNET customers to become new sources of Ada technology 
for the AdaNET information base, the AdaNET services information group will develop 
special incentive programs. One possibility would be a system of AdaNET credit 
points. Users who submit new, reusable objects or refinements to existing objects 
could be awarded points based on the quality and quantity of their submissions. Point 
values could be periodically adjusted to reflect changing supply and demand needs in 
the inventory of reusable components. For example, bonus points could be offered 
during a specified time period to users who submit a particular component lacking in 
the DSI but in high demand from subscribers. These points would make the holders 
eligible for special recognition, additional benefits, and special services. This creative 
method of soliciting high-demand components has the potential to make AdaNET 
highly responsive to user needs. 

In order to attract the professional markets previously identified, the AdaNET 
system must be established as a highly professional, “cutting-edge” technology service. 
To achieve this, AdaN ET will demonstrate easily accessible information that is truly of 
value to computer professionals. Presentation of the DSI will emphasize the wealth of 
software available, as well as the inherent value of the AIS to the software development 
process. Presentation of AdaNET services will be of high quality and will set AdaNET 
apart from current information services. 


MountainNet will promote AdaNET services through: 

• Attendance at related major trade shows and conferences. 

• Direct marketing to: 

- corporate organizations; 

- professional organizations; 

- consortia, such as the Software Productivity Consortium (SPC). 


60 



• Expanded technology transfer activities with additional government organiza- 
tions. 

• Survey and advertising materials in professional and trade publications. 

• Utilization of existing distribution channels for the types of media provided by 
MountainNet through AdaNET. 


61 



2.5 


Products 


2.5.1 Description 

Implementation of AdaNET services will continue over a two year period, with new 
services being phased in as other services are under development. The following is a 
listing and description of services currently planned. 



Description 

Target Service Date 

Low Level < Prototype 

Standard 

High-End 

Dynamic Software Inventory 

Reusable Ada Software 
Other Life Cycle Objects 
Documentation 
Metrics 

Profile Information 

Reuse Database/ Taxonomy 

Tutorials 


01/90 

01/91 

01/92 

AdaNET Information Services 
User Forums 

AdaNET Bibliographic System 
Educational Materials 
Electronic Communications 
Full Text 

Directories /Publications 
Other Repositories k Services 

01/88 

10/88 

01/90 

01/91 

Professional Support 

Consultant services 
Seminars and Workshops 



02/89 

07/89 



2.5.2 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

The Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) will provide access to both software and asso- 
ciated life cycle products, along with value-added services relevant to that software. 
Its design will allow users to view these objects across and within the phases of the 
life cycle. MountainNet uses the term Dynamic Software Inventory to distinguish this 


63 









service from that of a "repository”. Like a repository, the DSI will store reusable 
components. However, unlike other repositories, The DSI will also store other life 
cycle products associated with the reusable components, such as requirements docu- 
ments, design documents, and test plans. Also, the contents of the DSI will undergo 
constant improvement through the application of value-added services that include 
quality and performance testing, portability reports, and extended profile information. 
Furthermore, the DSI will contain built-in mechanisms by which users of the reusable 
components will be encouraged to make refinements to the components and resubmit 
them to the inventory. 

Reuseable Ada Software: An inventory of public domain Ada software from NASA, 
DoD, other government organizations, and private sector sources will be evalu- 
ated for inclusion in the DSI. Wherever possible, associated life cycle products 
will also be incorporated in the DSI. 

Other Life Cycle Objects: In later phases of the project, the inventory of reusable 
components will be expanded to include other objects from the software life cy- 
cle, such as requirements documents, test plans, and software specifications. 

Documentation: Standard documentation accompanying software components and 
related life cycle products will be stored in the DSI. Standards or guidelines under 
evaluation for possible adoption include NASA's DID's (Ada version) and MIL- 
STD-2167A. For standard life cycle and AdaNET specific documents, AdaNET 
developers are considering the adoption of the SGML ISO standard to develop 
Document Type Descriptions (DTD) representational markup. 

Profile Information: Each inventoried software object will have an associated pro- 
file. Current profile attributes include abstract, author, hardware/OS require- 
ments, size, documentation status, portability report, etc. 

Reuse Database/Taxonomy: Objects in the DSI will be stored in the reuse 
database using a faceted classification scheme, which will allow for a flexible 
design. The design of this database will be independent of the data model used 
to ensure that it will not be constrained by the current “state of the practice". 

Tutorials: This consists of instructional information on the use of the DSI, and on 
the use of inventoried components. 


64 



2.5.3 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

User Forums: A variety of bulletin board services, each relating to a general topic 
area will be developed. Current events, Special Interest Groups (SIGsj, discus- 
sion forums, news, and product information will be ofFered. 

AdaNET Bibliographic System: A bibliographic retrieval system for texts of 
interest to the software engineering/Ada community will be available. Informa- 
tion will be accessed by key field/key word search categories, including article 
and periodical/publication references and abstracts. 

Educational Materials: Access to or information about educational books, video 
courses, overhead slide presentations and CAI tutorials and other types of edu- 
cational materials about software engineering and Ada will be provided. 

Electronic Communications: Standard electronic mail and document transfer 
services are available. 

Full Text Information: Full text information relevant to software engineering, 
Ada and related technologies in the AdaNET library, that MountainNet is au- 
thorized to make available to AdaNET users, will be provided. 

Directories/Publications: Printed information about software objects in the DSI, 
and regular user updates concerning new and/or improved AdaNET services and 
activities will be available. 

Other Repositories and Services: Information about known public and private 
software repository activities throughout the country for both Ada and non 
Ada software will be provided. Such repositories include the ASR, and NASA's 
COSMIC. 

Consultant Services: Mountain Net’s staff and those companies comprising the 
AdaNET support infrastructure will be available via AdaNET for specialized 
software engineering/Ada technology consultant services. 

Seminars and Workshops: MountainNet will sponsor workshops, working groups, 
and conferences. 


65 


2.5.4 Spinoffs 


As the AdaNET system evolves, other spinoff services will be pursued. Such services 
include: 

• Consultant services to aid manufacturers in their transition from traditional 
technologies to Ada based CIM/FCIM technologies. 

• Consultant services to private sector organizations in their development of reus- 
able software components inventories. 

• Expansion to the international Ada technology market; AdaNET may be able 
to serve as a technology transfer medium for software engineering and Ada 
technology developed overseas to the United States market. 


2.5.5 Revenue Classes 

Three revenue classes are being examined. Some services will be offered on a subscrip- 
tion basis, where levels of services are available for fixed rate fees; these services are 
denoted by an "S" in the following table. Other services are offered for incremental 
fees, denoted by an “I”, allowing users to "pay as they go" for services not standard 
to their regular subscriptions. A third potential structure is full purchase of product, 
denoted by a "P", in which users buy a working application or other specific AdaNET 
product. The revenue classes listed below are for discussion purposes only at this time; 
final recommended revenue structures will be provided in the final report on Revenue 
Structures, which will be reflected in the final draft of this business plan. Services will 
be provided across a variety of media, which include: on-line computer access; CD- 
ROM distribution; magnetic tape; diskette; hardcopy; misc (including Teleconference 
and video media); and live support. 


66 



Revenue Classes for AdaNET Services 



Distribution Medium 

Description 

On- Line 

c [>.fio\! 

f ape 

Oiskrf l <• 



Live 

Dynamic Software Inventory 

ISP 

SP 






Ada Software Components 

IS 

SP 

p 

PS 




Documentation 

IS 

SP 

p 

PS 

p 



Metrics 

IS 

SP 

p 

PS 




Profile Information 

IS 

SP 



p 



Reuse Database/ Taxonomy 

IS 

SP 






Tutorials 

IS 

SP 

p 

P 

p 



Information Services 






■ 

■ 

User Forums 

IS 




S 

1 

1 

Bibliographic System 

IS 

PS 



PS 

1 


Educational Materials 

IS 

PS 

p 

PS 

PS 

1 


Electronic Communications 

S 





II 

■ 

Full Text 

I 

PS 

p 

p 

PS 

II 

Ml 

Directories/Publications 





PS 


■ 

Outside Services 

S 





■ 

■ 

Professional Support 








Consultant services 







p 

Seminars and Workshops 







p 


I = Incremental S = Subscription 


P = 


Purchased 


67 








2.6 Management 

MountainNet's management team for the AdaNET project includes: 


James W. Rautner 
Donn Philpot 
Kevin J. Dyer 
Linda K. Braun 


Project Director 
Technical Director 
Strategic Planning 
Contract Administrator 


68 



2.7 Financial 


The following pages detail MountainNet’s projections for the first five years of the 
development of AdaNET. As can be seen, support for development of AdaNET services 
is provided by Univeristy of Houston - Clear Lake. Revenue generating services are 
phased in early in the second year of development. By year three, a strong base 
of services will be available and generating approximately 30 percent of the total 
operating costs. By year four, UHCL funding will account for less than 30 percent of 
the total AdaNET operating budget. By the fifth year, UHCL funding will account 
for less than 10 percent of Ada NET’s total operating expenses. Major cost items, as 
MountainNet moves into prototype development, 


Chapter 3 
Technical Plan 


70 


3.1 Scope 


This chapter is the Technical Plan for AdaNET Project Services implementation: 
The intent of the Technical Plan is to describe how MountainNet, Inc. will establish 
a software engineering and Ada technology transfer network. Further, it takes into 
account that the University of Houston - Clear Lake (UHCL), Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems (RICIS) Has an in-place network of computing 
facilities. Additionally, this plan accounts for other networks which may be instrumen- 
tal in the formation of this network. The network is called: "AdaNET: The Advanced 
Software Engineering Network for Ada Applications” to inform potential users of the 
general-purpose nature of the network. 

This document first discusses AdaNET, including it's current configuration. Next, 
the functional requirements are detailed, followed by a statement of the tasks and 
deliverables MountainNet expects to produce. Additionally, quality and standards 
assurance are specified as part of this plan Finally, the plan details the additional 
resources required to successfully implement this important technology transfer mech- 
anism, including an organizational structure and a milestone and deliverable schedule. 


3.1.1 Goal 


The goal of AdaNET is to act as a change agent by transferring existing and emerging 
software engineering and Ada technology from the federal government to the private 
sector. 

Attainment of this goal is based upon accomplishment of three primary objectives: 

1. Develop a service center offering a wide spectrum of software engineering and 
Ada technological information services. 

2. Achieve long term commercial independence through cost recovery measures. 

3. Create a broad-based intergovernmental and private sector infrastructure to 
ensure continuing AdaNET services. 


71 


This plan concentrates on specifying implementation of the first of these objec- 
tives. Other documents generated during the first and second phases of this project 
will address remaining objectives. 


3.1.2 AdaNET System Overview 

AdaNET is divided into two main categories: 

1. AdaNET Information Services (AIS), which will incorporate user forums, bibli- 
ographic and full text information, educational materials, electronic communica- 
tions, directories and publications, and information about other Ada repositories 
and libraries. 

2. Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI), which will be comprised of libraries of 
public domain Ada software components and their associated life cycle objects. 
Accompanying value-added services, such as the tracking and classification of 
these objects across and within the life cycle, will encourage and aid in the reuse 
of these objects. 

These services will be provided on a wide spectrum of distribution media that 
include: 

• CD-ROM 

• Diskette 

• Magnetic Tape 

• On-line Access 

• Printed Media 

Figure 3.1 depicts the AdaNET Gateway/ Clearinghouse Functional Overview 


72 




Figure 3.1: AdaNET Gateway /Clearinghouse Functional Overview 


73 











Participating Organizations Views 

One of the earlier deliverables for this project was a report describing the views of 
several key organizations involved in the Ada NET program. These organizations were 
interviewed and their comments incorporated into that document. The organizations 
are: 

• National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Technology Utilization 
Division (TU) 

1. Computer Software Management and Information Center (COSMIC) 

2. NASA Industrial Applications Center 

3. NASA Technical Applications Team 

• University of Houston - Clear Lake, Research Institute for Computing and In- 
formation Systems 

• Department of Defense Ada Joint Program Office (DoD AJPO) 

• Department of Commerce, Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation 
(DOC OPTI) 

• Beckley College 

• Software Valley Corporation (SVC) 

• West Virginia University/WVU Research Corporation 

To sum up the results of the meetings and information exchange, three federal 
government organizations funded the Ada NET project to: 

"increase U.S. competitiveness through the transfer of software engi- 
neering technology and government developed Ada software, to benefit 
the manufacturing, industrial, educational and other private sector com- 
munities" 

These three organizations are the NASA TU, DoD AJPO, and DOC OPTI. 


74 



Applicable documents 

The following list of documents have been previously delivered under the subject 
contract. This list is included for reference, and individual documents will be referred 
to by name in the body of this report. 

• Subcontract No. 002, UHCL to MountainNet 

• AdaNET Electronic Mail Service, Draft Users Guide 

• AdaNET Organizational Structure and Report of Project Activity 

• AdaNET Organizational Documents 

• AdaNET Business Plan 

3.1.3 Schedule Constraints 

This section provides an overview of potential obstacles to the proposed schedule 
(See Section ??). This does not mean the schedule will change, only that Mountain- 
Net is aware of these possible disruptions and is taking management action to ensure 
schedule adherence. 

Potential constraints that would serve to alter and extend the schedule of deliver- 
ables include: 

• Interruptions in funding; 

• Expansion or addition of elements in the statement of work (SOW); 

• Delays in coordination and direction from government/private sector partici- 
pants, where such interaction is necessary for deliverable development; 

• Deferred developmental schedules in other federally funded projects whose de- 
liverables support technical development of AdaNET services. 


3.2 AdaNET Functional Requirements 

This section describes the functional requirements for the AdaNET system. These de- 
rived requirements arebasetf on Input from the principal organizations supporting the 
project. (Section 3.1.2 delineated those organizations.) Requirements are discussed 
for: 

• Networking and Communications; 

• Hardware; 

• Software; 


75 


• Data and Information Sources; 

• Operational considerations; 

• The Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI): 

• The Reuse Database; 

• The AdaNET Information Services ( AIS ). 

3.2.1 Networking and Communications 

This subsection addresses the need AdaNET has to establish and operate a network 
system in order to communicate with a potentially large population. It considers 
that in some instances, AdaNET will act as a stand-alone network with it's own dial- 
in capability. In other circumstances, AdaNET will be required to be a part of a 
larger, heterogeneous network. The latter will be discussed in subsection 3.2.1 and in 
section 3.3.7, "Growth Plan for Additional Services". 

Existing Elements 

MountainNet's current telecommunications configuration provides on-line computer 
access to host systems available within the MountainNet telecommunications network, 
as well as host systems located in state supported telecommunications networks. Ac- 
cess is provided through remote user node sites connected directly into the Moun- 
tainNet network with dedicated data circuits, and through local dial-in telephone lines 
located throughout West Virginia. 

Access to MountainNet host systems, such as those forming the AdaNET host 
configuration, is currently available through MountainNet's own dial-in lines, through 
all state educational network (West Virginia Network for Educational Telecomputing 
(WVNET)) dial-in lines, and by cooperative agreement, through a Telenet connection 
currently providing direct access to the WVNET DCA network server. Current volume 
capabilities for the Telenet link are 15 simultaneous users; this number will be increased 
as usage justifies further expansion. 

Planned Expansion 

Systems Interconnectivity: Plans are being finalized for internal network inter- 
connection of all host systems used to develop AdaNET. A configuration which 
allows a high level of interconnectivity includes use of a commercial off-the- 


76 


shelf star network controller. This controller supports Ethernet and TCP/IP 
(Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) communications. Addition- 
ally, layered communications software, supporting electronic mail transfer be- 
tween many vendors hardware products and operating systems is also included. 
Specialized software is under development to support electronic mail transfer 
between Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) Virtual Memory System (VMS) 
and Data General (DG) Advanced Operating System/Virtual System (AOS/VS) 
host systems currently in the configuration. For full support of direct intersys- 
tem disk access and data transfer, an additional package would be layered on 
top of the star controller, providing complete DEC/DG compatibility. This con- 
troller may be connected directly into the MountainNet network, to provide 
network level single point access to Ada NET users for all on-line services. 


Direct Telenet Connection: This service provides direct connection to Moun- 
tainNet's network at the Telenet prompt level for AdaNET users. A final step is 
to route users directly to AdaNET specific front-end network controllers. The 
user is then prompted for specific AdaNET systems. 


MountainNet Network Expansion: For those areas where a substantial base 
of AdaNET users exist, MountainNet will establish dedicated lines to support 
them with a higher level of telecommunications service than that provided by 
Telenet. Direct connections are currently being discussed for: 


Washington, D.C.: For Government Access - . 

Clear Lake, TX : For U HCL and Johnson Space Center (JSC) 

Other potential areas of high level usage during subsequent phases of imple- 
mentation include: 

Huntsville, AL : For Marshall Space Flight Center (SFC) 

Boston, MA : To provide computer vendor coverage 
Pittsburgh, PA : For the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) 


77 


NASA Networks Interconnection: AdaNET is serving the diverse Ada commu- 
nity which includes NASA, DoD, academia and the private sector. However, the 
majority of AdaNET users already communicate on one or more electronic mail 
systems. The users of AdaNET include key individuals from diverse (and un- 
connected) telecommunications systems. Introduction of another autonomous 
mail system presents an obstacle to the community already using these other 
networks. Therefore, in addition to building its own internal base of AdaNET 
user accounts, MountainNet is studying how inter-net vork connections can be 
established to provide electronic mail transfer as a minimum level of service, 
without compromising system security. 

The volume of development activities using Ada technology at various field 
centers is radically increasing. The inter-netwock connection would facilitate 
communications with these centers and heighten the availability of Ada tech- 
nology developments to AdaNET users. 

MountainNet is currently studying the NASA network structures in place at 
various field centers and the network architectures which currently link those 
centers together. MountainNet will determine the feasibility of this network 
connection. 

The NASA Scientific Network, which is also supported in part by the National 
Science Foundation (NSF), is an example of a gateway which will be pursued 
because it is intended to provide a mechanism for public/private sector tech- 
nology exchange. This network is TCP/IP based, and so connection will be 
supported by the equipment currently being integrated into the configuration. 
Administrative and policy issues regarding approval for connection is also being 
pursued. 


Internet/DDN Connection: A connection to the DoD Defense Data Network 
(DDN) is essential to maintain and enhance the base of support being pro- 
vided by various DoD organizations. The majority of the national Ada com- 
munity is affiliated with the DoD, either as military, government, or contrac- 
tor/subcontractor personnel. With ongoing and proposed expansions in DoD 
based Ada programs, this linkage will facilitate a higher level of activity and 
cooperation between AdaNET and the Ada community. SIGAda, whose exec- 
utive council is trying out the AdaNET as their major communications source, 
has indicated that such a connection is essential for continued use, since a large 


78 



percentage of their membership currently use the Internet. Discussions with 
the U.S. Army Office of the Directorate for Information Systems for Command, 
Control, Communications and Computers (0DISC4) led to the recent signing of 
a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between NASA and the Army to sup- 
port AdaNET development. A key objective of this MOU is to expand the base 
of support for AdaNET’s connection to the Internet with other Army activities 
such as the Information Systems Engineering Command (ISEC). MountainNet 
is currently evaluating the telecommunications and software requirements nec- 
essary for this connection. 


USENET Communications: USENET information transfer occurs through a WVU 
DEC/VAX system. As the AdaNET Information Services (AIS) system is de- 
veloped, MountainNet will task one individual to conduct regular checks of the 
USENET information. Information which is relevant to the AdaNET user com- 
munity will be transferred to the AIS. An expansion of the AdaNET level of 
service includes direct connection of USENET into the MountainNet network. 
This will provide regular access to this resource. 


SEAD Connection: By establishing a data line with local dial-in in the Houston 
area, MountainNet will be able to provide a direct link for interconnection of 
the SEAD (Software Engineering and Ada Database) system operated by UHCL. 
This connection will make SEAD available to any AdaNET user at the network 
prompt level as another available host node and service. Building this distributed 
network of host services enhances the direction of growth and increases the value 
of AdaNET as a single point of access to a multitude of diverse services. 


OSI Integration: As the Open Systems Interconnect (OSI) protocol is implemented 
at all levels, we will study the feasibility of integration of that protocol into 
AdaNET. An applications gateway between the mail layer and the file transfer 
layer of the TCP/IP and OSI protocols is being developed for the DoD. DoD 


79 


plans to require that all future procurements be based on OSI protocols. Integra- 
tion of an OSI implementation for AdaNET would most likely occur sometime 
after such requirements became mandatory. 


80 



Figure 3.2 depicts AdaNET Network Connectivity. 


3.2.2 Hardware 

This subsection describes the current hardware configuration for AdaNET. It describes 
each element and details future hardware requirements to ensure continuing viability. 


Present Configuration 

MountainNet utilizes a multi-vendor systems environment for services implementation. 

The following resources for early prototyping and implementation are planned: 

• (1) Digital Equipment Corporation VAX 11/780 (VMS). 

• (1) Digital Equipment Corporation VAX 11/750 (VMS/UNIX) 

• (1) Data General MV8000 (AOS/VS) 

• Various micro-computers (Apple & IBM PC compatibles) 

The systems are being used in the following capacities: 

DEC VAX 11/780 (VMS): This resource is MPL Corporation's VAX time-share 
service. The system is configured on-line into the MountainNet network. It 
is initially being used to provide access to the AIS Prototype. However, the 
addition of AdaNET services on this resource intensive service will tax the sys- 
tem beyond manageable limits. Although AdaNET's internal administrative 
computing will continue to be performed on this system, additional resource 
requirements are expected. 

DEC VAX 11/750 (VMS): A DEC VAX 11/750 may be merged into the AdaNET 
configuration for dedicated AdaNET use. This system will initially provide a 
migration point from the VAX currently in use, and will offer services for pro- 
totyping and development. 

DEC VAX 11/750 (UNIX): Use of a DEC VAX 11/750 UNIX is being provided 
as part of the WVU Statistics and Computer Science in-kind contribution to 
AdaNET development. This system will be used to develop initial software 
testing and analysis for the Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) components. 
The system will be available through AdaNET. 


81 



Figure 3.2: AdaNET Network Connectivity 


82 












Data General MV8000 (AOS/VS): MountainNet’s system, equipped with mul- 
tiple disk controllers, high volume storage and DG’s Ada Development Envi- 
ronment (ADE) is being used for storage, compilation and evaluation of Ada 
Software Repository (ASR) components. Through planned network expansion, 
this system will serve as the main resource for implementation of the object 
retrieval system of the DSl.The systems interconnection allows development of 
applications to support data transfer between the DG storage system and the 
DEC VAX/VMS system, with complete transparency to DSI users. Low level 
access to components is being established so that users can obtain copies of 
repository software which have not been entered into the DSI. 

Future Expansion 

Service expansion will require continuing system enhancement and development. Moun- 
tainNet’s long term systems strategy is to study the possibility of utilization of a 

combination of the following hardware resources: 

DEC VAX 8500 (VMS): As the first tier of services are developed and made 
commercially available, volume usage is expected to exceed the capacity of the 
VAX 11/750. It will either continue to serve as an internal development ma- 
chine, or be networked with other Ada NET host systems and provide continuing 
services support. The main user interface system(s) used to access the Dynamic 
Software Inventory (DSI) and Ada NET Information Services (AIS) will require 
the level of resources provided by a machine of this class. After analysis of 
the mix of users of various services, an alternate strategy may be to establish 
multiple host systems providing one or more related services and to segregate 
those services which require competing types of resources. 

Harris HCX9 (UNIX): Network access is being expanded for this system in the 
WVU configuration. Resources will be utilized on this system to support AdaNET 
as part of WVU's in-kind support. This machine may also be utilized for devel- 
opment of automated code testing and evaluation processes. 

Terradata DBC/1012: MountainNet expects growing storage requirements within 
the next two years of development. We are looking at various mass storage and 
database machine technologies to support the DSI software library. Currently, 
both the relational and object oriented database models are being researched. 
If the relational model is chosen, the Terradata machine will be considered. 


83 


Terradata represents one of only two major producers of database machines (the 
other being Britton-Lee). Use of this type of machine architecture is preferable 
to use of other mass storage technologies, such as Optical Disk/ WORM (Write 
Once/Read Many) Storage and Retrieval systems, which are not designed for 
dynamic use. Terradata's Shared Information Architecture system provides con- 
nectivity to a variety of processing environments and information tools. The 
DBC/1012 can be connected to multiple host mainframes at the same time. 

Figure 3.3 depicts the proposed AdaNET configuration. 

3.2.3 Software 

This subsection describes software acquisition and development activities for AdaNET. 

It includes software which may be available in the public domain. 

Off-the Shelf 

The following Commerical OfF-the Shelf software is either required or being evaluated 

to support services delivery: 


Digital Equipment Corporation DECnet network software: This soft- 

ware will be supported on all MountainNet VAX systems in its configuration, which 
will provide DECnet-level connectivity between VAX and Data General system re- 
sources, allowing disk to disk information access. 


Ki Research DEKnet network software: This software, layered on top of 

an Ethernet carrier, will integrate with DEC DECnet software, providing systems 
interconnectivity between AdaNET host DEC and DG systems. It will be supported 
on MountainNet's Data General MV8000 (AOS/VS) system. 


Relational Database Management System: Commercially available relational 

database management systems (RDBMS) are being evaluated for supporting the de- 
sign and implementation of the reuse database, which provides the object inquiry 
facility of the DSI. Should a database machine become available, the design of the 


84 



Figure 3.3: AdaNET Proposed Systems Configuration 








4 


database would be easily transferable to that machine. Should the relational model 
be chosen, only RDBMS’ that support Structured Query Language (SQL) will be con- 
sidered. As part of the evaluation, RDBMS’ implemented in Ada will be examined, 
such as CRTs Relate 3000. 


Ada/SQL Binding: The development of satisfactory Ada/SQL bindings has be- 

come a major topic in the Ada marketplace. Should they become available, AdaNET 
will utilize Ada/SQL bindings that are being developed as part of the Software Tech- 
nologies for Adaptable, Reliable Systems (STARS) tools development programs. 


Configuration/Library Management: The AdaNET staff will utilize, wher- 

ever possible, tools developed in other government supported programs for configu- 
ration, and library management. Programs sponsored by STARS, such as the Army 
Institute for Research in Management Information, Communications, and Computer 
Science program (AIRMICS), may yield valuable toolsets. 


Text Retrieval System: To support the provision of specific areas of the AdaNET 

Information Services (AIS), evaluation of various text retrieval database systems are 
being conducted. One package that is being closely evaluated is the IN MAGIC pack- 
age, developed by INMAGIC, INC. 


DCDS/Ada: Members of the AdaNET staff are currently beginning evaluation of 

the DCDS/Ada (Distributed Computing Design System) distributed Ada development 
environment, whose development is being supported by the Army STARS initiative. 


SGML Implementation: A commercially available copy of Standard Generalized 

Markup Language (SGML) will be obtained. 


Development Tools and Environments: AdaNET is also evaluating other 

support tools and environments that may support internal software development ac- 
tivities. Such products will include EVB Software Engineering's Ada MacHost product, 


86 


Iconix Software Engineering’s Powertools system, and the Distributed Ada Program- 
ming Support Environment (DAPSE) project software under development by the Army 
STARS initiative. 

Developmental Activities 

Software to be developed for Ada NET includes: 

• User interfaces 

• Automated Software Testing Tools 

• Software Retrieval System Applications Software 

• Configuration/Library Management Tools 


3.2.4 Data and Information Sources 

This subsection details the sources of life cycle products which will become part of 
the Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI), specified in subsection 3.2.6. It describes the 
known repositories to which MountainNet has access and permission to include. 

Life cycle products are being solicited from a variety of sources that include public 
domain libraries, software projects which are obtained directly from developers as they 
evolve, and proprietary sources. 

Current sources of non-classified components include: 


NASA sources: 

• Space station software (Software Support Environment (SSE), etc.) 

• Products of Software Reuse Environment 

• COSMIC 

• Other major NASA development activities 
DoD - ST ARS 

• Foundations 

• Competing Primes 


87 


• Shadows 

• Future repositories established by STARS Army 

• SiMTEL-20 Ada Software Repository (ex.. Worldwide Military Command and 
Control System (WWMCCS)) 

• Reusable Ada Packages for Information Systems Development (RAPID) 

• Specific software development programs (ex., MAFIS) Air Force 

• Naval Ocean Systems Command (NOSC) library (primarily included in the ASR) 

• Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) STARS Foundations software 

• Specific software development programs (ex., AWHMS) 

DOC 

• National Bureau of Standards (NBS): automation primitives and tools tax- 
onomies, CIM/FCIM (Computerized Integrated "Manufacturing/Flexible Com- 
puterized Integrated Manufacturing) Ada systems development 

Department of Transportation 

• Federal Aviation Administration (FAA): All new systems will be developed using 
Ada 

Private sector sources with whom MountainNet is establishing opera- 
tional agreements. 

AdaNET is continually working to increase new sources of Ada components and 
repositories. 

Figure 3.4 depicts the initial sources of life cycle products. 


3.2.5 Operational Considerations 

In addition to the purely technical considerations for requirements, the AdaNET 
project must also address the boundaries of day-to-day operations. This is due to 
the outreach nature of AdaNET. In order to implement the service, items must be 
addressed which are not necessarily germane to the successful operation of a networked 
database systems. 

This section addresses eight important operational considerations and their impact 
on AdaNET. These are: 

• the expected volume of data and usage; 

• distribution of information beyond on-line computing; 

• a user-assistance function; 


88 






• user billing; 

• telephone support for user questions; 

• user documentation; 

• on-line access methods; 

• microcomputer access. 

Expected Volume 

MountainNet expects a user base of 250 usernames by 12/88. Based on statistical 
samples of current accounts/users, we can expect approximately 20 simultaneous users 
on AdaNET. 

AdaNET will track usage profiles over time in order to determine the optimum 
mix of resources for future expansion. 

Distribution Media 

Users of AdaNET will not only be able to access information on-line, they will also 
be able to receive information through other media, in a variety of formats. Media 
currently planned are: 

. CD-ROM 

• Diskette 

• Magnetic Tape 

• Printed matter 

Additional media will be made available as the desire for them is expressed. The 
information will be made available on CD-ROM/Magnetic tape to interested parties, 
thus allowing users to reduce on-line access and connect time charges. As preferences 
for formats shift over time, MountainNet will modify its support accordingly. In this 
way, the value-added nature of AdaNET will be free to expand the boundaries of 
service in response to user needs. 

User Assistance 

Due to the service-oriented nature of AdaNET, we can expect a high level of client 
interaction. This means that MountainNet plans to establish administrative and op- 
erational procedures to ensure that each AdaNET client receives the service necessary 
to promote usage, goodwill and expanded knowledge of AdaNET environment. 


90 



From a revenue perspective, user support must be included as a key element in 
billing algorithms. Most likely, AdaNET will spread the cost of user support among 
all clients, as a percentage of system access usage. In this way. we can be sure that 
full service will be provided to each client and that no client will suffer from a lack of 
human resources. 

Service Revenue Structures 

The AdaNET project will gather usage information whenever clients log onto the 
system. This data will account for: 

• Log-on time; 

• Log-off time; 

• Number of disk accesses; 

• Amount of data down-loaded to users’ systems; 

• Different types of information retrieved. 

Mountain Net will use this information to examine different pricing algorithms. 


Whenever possible, revenue structures will be established that will allow simple 
and affordable low-level access charges using combinations of subscription, purchase, 
and incremental charges. For a more complete discussion of revenue structures, please 
refer to the AdaNET Revenue Support Structure report prepared as another deliverable 
item to UHCL. 


Telephone Support 

On-line telephone support will be provided as needed to AdaNET users, givingliefp 
in the use of system services, with more detailed help available for use of specific 
services (such as the DSI and other library services). This support is available now, 
and is being provided for the services currently available. As new services are made 
available, support requirements are expected to increase. 

User Documentation 

User documentation is one of the most important requirements for AdaNET. Primarily, 
it is the means by which each user will be able to access and utilize the AdaNET 
resource. 


91 


On-Line Access 

The AdaNET system user interface being developed satisfies several major require- 
ments [Shneidermanj: 

• proper functionality 

• reliability 

• availability 

• security 

• integrity 

• schedules 

• budgets 

The development team is determining the tasks and subtasks the interface needs 
to perform. Functionality of this interface includes those tasks needed to tie users 
to applications and/or databases. Compatibility of the interface with different vendor 
machines that may be used to access AdaNET services will be a major consideration 
during interface design. 

Human factors determined through MountainNet's experience in analysis of be- 
havioral patterns and responses of the many diverse interactive user groups in its 
user base, as well as current research, form the foundation for design of the AdaNET 
interface. These factors include: 

• time to learn 

• speed of performance 

• rate of errors by users 

• subjective satisfaction 

• retention over time 

The AdaNET interface will be designed for both ease of learning in a short period 
of time and full functionality for the experienced user. Rules governing this interface 
design are: 

• Consistency: Response conventions will be the same throughout the system. 

• Shortcuts: Frequent users will be able to use shortcuts to more rapidly traverse 
the system. 

• OfFer informative feedback: Respond to all the user actions. 


92 


• Design dialogs to yield closure: Each group of actions has a beginning, middle, 
and an end. Users receive proper feedback at the close of the group of actions. 

• Simple error handling: The system will be designed to avoid serious errors by 
users. If errors are made, easy error handling mechanisms will be provided. 

• Easy reversal of actions: Actions will be reversible wherever possible. 

• Internal locus of control: Give users a feeling of control over the system, making 
them initiators of actions rather than responders. 

• Reduce short-term memory load: Users should not have to remember more than 
seven plus/minus two items at any given time. Help will always be available to 
assist users with code mnemonics and sequences of actions. 

AdaNET’s standard interface environment will use elements of most of the major 
current interaction styles at various levels of the system. Current interaction styles 
include: 

• Menu selection: Allow users to choose among several options. 

• Form fill in: Users fill in blanks and the cursor is automatically moved using 
predefined keys. 

• Natural language: Users construct queries in their natural language, which are 
then interpreted by the system. 

• Direct manipulation: Users are allowed to manipulate objects on the screen 
directly using a pointing device. 

Microcomputer Access 

In addition to providing on-line access to repository c omponents, t he A daM ET devel- 
opment team plans to implement a stand-alone microcomputer version of the Dynamic 
Software Inventory (DSI), utilizing graphic, windowing, and mouse interface capabili- 
ties. ' - ''“tlr ' 1 -i: 

This interface will initially be developed for the Apple Macintosh, using thu Tool- 
box provided by Apple. The Toolbox supports design of windows, dialog boxes, drop 


93 


down menus and some direct manipulation techniques. The Telegen2 system, devel- 
oped by Telesoft, is being considered as a way to develop this interface. The Ada 
Compiler and related tools developed by Meridian Software Systems, Inc. and Alsys, 
Inc. are also being investigated. Telesoft and Meridian are developing an interface to 
the Macintosh Toolbox, and have developed a compiler for the Macintosh II system. 


3.2.6 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

This subsection describes design parameters for a Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI). 
It discusses the background and rationale for the DSI. 

Background 

The DSI will provide access to both life cycle objects and value-added services relevant 
to those objects. Its design will allow users to view objects across and within the 
phases of the life cycle. Furthermore, mechanisms will be developed within the DSI 
to encourage users to submit their own life cycle objects for inclusion in the DSI. 

Reuseable Ada Software 

An inventory of public domain Ada software from NASA, DoD, other governmental 
organizations and private sector sources will be evaluated for inclusion in the DSI. 
Wherever possible, associated life cycle products will also be incorporated in the DSI. 

Other Life Cycle Objects 

In the process of software development, various life cycle products are generated, such 
as requirements documents, design documents, and test plans. In later phases of the 
project, the inventory of reusable objects will be extended to include these products. 

Documentation 

Standard documentation accompanying software components and life cycle products 
will be stored in the DSI. Standards or guidelines under evaluation for possible adop- 
tion include NASA SMAP DID's (Ada version) and MIL-STD-2167A. For standard 
life cycle and AdaNET specific documents, AdaNET developers are considering the 


94 



adoption of the SGML ISO standard to develop Document Type Descriptions (DTD) 
representational markup. 

Metrics 

As objects pass through quality and performance tests, metrics will be collected to 
yield relative values in specific areas tested. Such information will be provided to users 
searching for objects in the reuse database as part of the extended profile information 
for objects in the DSL Such information may help users to restrict their selection prior 
to making requests for object retrieval. 


Profile Information 

Each inventoried software object will have an associated profile. Current profile at- 
tributes being examinedare: 

• Identification Code 

• Abstract 

• Author 

• Developing Organization 

• Point of Contact 

• Hardware/OS Requirements 

• host 

• target 

• integration 

• Compiler/Version 

• Size 

• Documentation Status . .. 

• Portability Report 

• pragma usage 

• dependencies on vendor supplied systems 

• usage of low level I/O, memory addressing, etc. 

• Problem Report 


95 


Reuse Database/Taxonomy 


Objects in the DSI will be stored in the reuse database using a faceted classification 
scheme. This scheme will allow for a flexible database design. The design of the 
database will be independent of the data model used to ensure that it will not be 
constrained by the current "state of the practice". Guidelines for design will closely 
follow the EA/RA model and IRDS. 

Retrieval/Duplication 

Objects inventoried in the DSI may be retrieved through either on-line access or 
distribution media such as magnetic tape, diskette, or CD-ROM. For objects not 
available on-line in the DSI, on-line order processing will be provided. 

Tutorials 

This consists of instructional information on the use of the DSI, and on the use of 
inventoried components. 


3.2.7 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

This subsection describes the requirements for the AdaNET Information Services. 
Each of the separate databases will be structured according to the information con- 
tained in them. A common command structure will provide the powerful text retrieval 
access necessary and will function at the level of expertise desired by the user. 

User Forums 

A variety of bulletin board services, each relating to a general topic area will be 
developed. Current events, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), discussion forums, news 
and product information will be offered. 

AdaNET Bibliographic System 

A bibliographic retrieval system will be available for texts identified as related to 
Ada and software engineering technologies. Some of the covered topics will comprise 


96 


technical subject areas, costing and market information, and information available on 
related subject areas such as CIM/FCIM. Information will be accessed by key field/key 
word search categories, including article and periodical/publication references and 
abstracts. 

Educational Materials 

Access to or information about educational books, papers, video courses, overhead 
slide presentations, CAI tutorials and other types of educational materials about soft- 
ware engineering and Ada will be provided. 

Electronic Communications 

Electronic mail and document transfer services are available. 

Full Text Information 

Full text information relevant to software engineering. Ada and related technologies 
in the AdaNET library, that MountainNet is authorized to make available to AdaNET 
users will be provided. News and current events information will be included here. 

Directories/Publications 

Printed information about software objects in the DSI, and regular user updates con- 
cerning new and/or improved AdaNET services and activities will be available. 

Other Repositories and Services 

Information about public and private software repository and inform at ion activities 
throughout the country for both Ada and non Ada software will be provided. Such 
repositories include the SIMTEL-20 ASR, NRL STARS repository, and NASA's COS- 
MIC. Such information will include general information about the services provided 
by each of these facilities. Information regarding access and/or ordering, and in some 
cases, on-line or distribution access to software obtained from these sources (such as 
the ASR) will be supplied. However, software provided at this level of service will be 
virtually in an "as-is, buyer beware” format, and should not be confused with services 


97 


provided through the DSI. This service is being made available to provide early access 
to Ada software currently in demand by the private sector, in the interim period during 
implementation of the DSI. Other information services may include access to SEAD 
and the Ada Information Clearinghouse (AdalC). 

3.2.8 Access Security 

All systems now available on the MountainNet network have implemented tight sys- 
tems security measures to insure the integrity and reliability of user data and applica- 
tions. Security measures currently in place provide satisfactory protection; no breach 
of security has ever been experienced. However, as systems in the AdaNET configu- 
ration establish increasing visibility in the computing world, the highest level security 
possible must be implemented. As was stated earlier, the information on host systems 
available on the MountainNet network is unclassified. There are no plans to incorpo- 
rate systems carrying classified information. Systems security measures are in place 
to insure privacy, integrity, and safety of user information stored on host systems, and 
in protecting host systems from the introduction of "worms" and "viruses into the 
systems. Prior to making AdaNET services commercially available, it is anticipated 
that a security audit, conducted by an outside consulting firm, will be run, to reinforce 
current measures. 

Current systems security for systems in the AdaNET configuration include: 

• Regular mandatory password changes 

• Multiple passwords for privileged accounts, or accounts where requested. 

• Restricted system privileges to a very few users in administrative positions and 
with a need for such privileges; on all systems currently in the configuration, 
only three users have such privileges for each system. 

• Tightly controlled public accounts: accounts that are “public” (that have no 
password required for entry) give tightly controlled access to specific applica- 
tions. Defensive measures are in place to ensure that users cannot crash these 
applications and obtain system entry. For planning of AdaN ET systems services, 
public accounts (for applications for information or market survey collection), 
may be established on stand-alone systems (such as microcomputers) to insure 
main host systems security and internetwork systems security. 


98 



• Tightly controlled user accounts: as with public accounts, defensive measures 
are in place to provide secure user interactions. 

• Archiving and backup that includes: 

1. Daily incremental backups of all systems 

2. Weekly system wide backups of all systems 

3. Off-site storage of backup tapes in secure environments 

4. Off-site storage of copies of archived information 

5. Contingency plans for backup systems to support the critical users, in case 
of disaster. 

Continuing study and implementation of enhanced security measures should be 
performed . 


3.3 Tasks and Deliverables 

This section describes the tasks to be performed and the deliverables to be generated 
for this Technical Plan. It details the work to be performed and MountainNet's 
approach to its completion, which is in the form of specific deliverable items. These 
are: 

• AdaNET System Design 

• Data Gathering 

• System Documentation 

• AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

• Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

• Initial Network Introduction 

• Growth Plan for Additional Services 

• Spinoffs 


3.3. i AdaNET System Design 

MountainNet views the design objectives of the AdaNET system as; 1) the storage of 
data and information in the most efficient manner for retrieval, and 2) the enhance- 
ment of interface functions to allow users to perform inquiries in the most effective 


99 


manner. The AdaNET system is comprised of two main functional areas; the AdaNET 
Information Services (AIS) and the Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI). Each of these 
are dealt with in subsequent portions of this document. 


3.3.2 Data Gathering 

Data gathering will be an ongoing, dynamic process for AdaNET. Initial efforts will 
be important to the successful introduction of the service. To that end, MountainNet 
expects to perform a marketplace survey to determine the optimum mix of information 
for inclusion. In this way, early efforts can be expected to provide useful data to the 
user community and ensure AdaNET's early acceptance. This marketplace survey will 
be conducted among the most likely current users of software engineering and Ada 
technology. Specifically, MountainNet expects to survey and interview key individuals 
and organizations involved in SlGAda, AdaJUG, and academic institutions with ties 
to Ada and software engineering such as UHCL, Carnegie Mellon University, WVU, 
the University of Georgia, and the University of Maryland. 

Interviews will be conducted with NASA TU and field center programs developing 
Ada technology applications, AJPO, STARS program and other DoD organizations 
including service labs and operational programs. Finally, MountainNet will contact it’s 
largest potential constituency, aerospace and defense contractors. In order to ensure 
future potential growth, we will also interview the commercial divisions of these same 
companies. This will help determine the potential for commercial applications such 
as industrial and manufacturing automation. 

3.3.3 System Documentation 

System documentation for AdaNET will take the form of descriptive, operational and 
maintenance information. 

Descriptive information will include all organizational, business and technical plans 
called for under Subcontract No. 002 for RICIS project No. SE 18. These documents 
also include a schedule of user fees, and the agreement documents required to conduct 
AdaNET business activities. 

Operational documentation will include the users guide; preliminary and detailed 
database design documentation; operational manuals for communications, data en- 
try and update; and hardware/software Configuration and operational instructions. 
Maintenance information includes those items necessary to correct, enhance, or adapt 


100 


the system. In addition to design documentation, detailed design requirements will 
be supplied. This documentation will be delivered as AdaNET is funded and the de- 
velopment program is underway. These documents will form an early deliverable on 
future program phases. 

3.3.4 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

This section discusses the design of the AdaNET Information Services. The AIS is 
the cornerstone of the AdaNET system. It represents that portion of AdaNET that 
we believe will yield immediate benefits as a technology transition and cost recovery 
mechanism. Further, AIS will provide a gateway function into the Dynamic Software 
Inventory (DSI) and other AdaNET services. 

Clearinghouse functions are primarily dependent on the information and data pro- 
vided by the clearinghouse itself. Therefore, a key element in design of the AIS is 
the data gathering and database design functions discussed in section 3.3.2 and in 
section 3.2.6. Planning these functions is tantamount to the preliminary design. The 
following paragraphs describe the minimal design frameworks for the AIS. 

The following services have been defined: 

• Bibliographic Information 

• Electronic Communications/Document Transfer 

• User Forums 

• News & Current Events 

• Other Repositories and Services 

• Special Interest Groups 

• Full Text Information 

• Educational Materials 

• Directories/ Publications 


The AdaNET Information Service (AIS) will provide a wide spectrum of informa- 
tion services to its user community. These services will be provided through on-line 
access and a mix of prlntecT, CD-ROM, diskette and magnetic tape media. 

The following paragraphs describe each service category and the projected first 
stage service offerings. 


101 


Bibliographic Information: This need will be met through a combination of 

AdaNET s library references and with existing library catalogues such as the SEI's 
library and publication lists from user forums and workshops. This feature will allow 
the user to glean information specifically regarding Ada, software engineering and 
related subjects and applications. 


Electronic Communications/Document Transfer: Systems mail utilities will 

form the core service mechanism, linked to the applications user interface. When in- 
ternetwork gateways are established, internetwork mail transfer will be established 
through use of standardized mail server protocols. 

User Forums: AdaNET will keep an updated list, with accompanying information, 

of user forums available on the system. This list is intended to be a quick reference as 
well as an announcement medium. Software to support the actual forums is currently 
in place. 


News ic Current Events: This service will provide the user with excerpts from 

the press and highlight special events such as the International Conference on Soft- 
ware Engineering, Ada Expo, National Conference on Ada Technology, Ada contracts 
awards, and significant technology developments. This service will be designed using 
a text retrieval database system. 

Other Repositories and Services: This information will guide the user toward 

existing repositories of reusable software systems and components. It will extend 
beyond Ada per se in that repositories of a more general nature such as NASA’s 
COSMIC system of components will be referenced. Initially, only Ada software will be 
provided for distribution through AdaNET. Due to market demand, some software will 
be made available through AdaNET in "as is" form, taken from other public domain 
repository sources such as the ASR and NRL. 

Special Interest Groups: Special interest groups abound in the Ada world, the 

most visible of these being SIGAda. However, groups are formed based on “birds of a 
feather" sessions at conferences and workshops. Other non Ada specific groups require 
information about the current status of Ada. The Electronic Industries Association 
and the National Security Industrial Association each have software subcommittees 


102 


concerned with Ada and software engineering. Further, Ada may become a significant 
factor in the DoD's Computer-aided Aquisition and Logistics System (CALS) initiative. 
Each of these special interest groups will most likely be willing to share data and 
become users of Ada NET. 

Full Text Information: This is one of the most significant services Ada NET will 

offer. It will provide information on Ada projects throughout the industry and act 
as the host for abstracting certain items of documentation from those projects. For 
example, if a management overview of the Space Station SSE were to be available 
through AdaNET, its dissemination to the marketplace would be enhanced. In addition 
to project information, public domain documents basic to Ada, such as standards, will 
be made available as is possible. 

Educational Materials: Because use of software engineering and Ada technology 

requires an extensive re-education effort, educational information will /be provided. 
Actual course description and curriculum designs, as well as references to a whole 
range of educational materials including Computer Based Training (CBT), video tapes, 
films, etc., will be available. 

Directories/Publications: In order to make the AdaNET system as easy to use 

and widely familiar as possible, a set of printed information is being developed. These 
publications will include a catalog of services available, user reference guides, and 
brochures describing AdaNET. 

3.3.5 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) Design 

The design of the DSI has been divided into the four functional areas: 

• Object Evaluation 

• Object Inquiry 

• Object Retrieval 

• Library/Systems Configuration Management 

During first stage of DSI design the majority of work will concentrate on implemen- 
tation of the first three categories, with development of a Configuration Management 
Plan. The following sections describe planned design implementation for each of these 
component areas. 


103 


Object Evaluation 

Each candidate object must undergo testing and evaluation as part of its incorporation 
into the DSI library. Software objects will be evaluated for: 

• Completeness: Determine if all necessary components have been provided to 
allow successful compilation and execution of the software object; 

• Portability: Check for features that compromise portability; 

• Errors/ Constraints: Determine constraints placed on variables and types; test 
robustness of error handling; 

• Complexity: Determine the component’s relative code complexity; 

• Performance: Run benchmarks against software components; 

• Classification: Assign facet terms; 

Results of each phase of the evaluation will yield the unit’s profile, which is entered 
into the reuse database for user retrieval and evaluation. 

The following steps will be taken to develop the software evaluation process; 

• Identify initial parameters/procedures for evaluation; 

• Document such parameters in an AdaNET Reuse Policy and Guidelines manual; 

• Develop procedures for completeness testing; 

• Identify features to test for portability analysis; 

• Develop procedures for object portability analysis; 

• Develop automated portability analysis procedures; 

• Identify complexity analysis tool(s) to be used; 

• Develop method for applying tool(s) to software objects; 

• Develop automated methods to generate the object testing framework; 

• Develop method for facet terms assignment; 

• Develop procedures for object classification. 

Object Inquiry 

Access to objects available or inventoried by AdaNET will be provided through a reuse 
database. The database will contain results of evaluation testing to provide potential 
reusers with a profile of the software object. Information such as object type, function, 
functional area, algorithm and system information will be provided as terms defined 
for the various facets that make up an object descriptor. Key design activities include: 

1. Domain analysis of objects; 


104 


2. Facet definition; 

3. Assignment of initial facet terms; 

4. Classification of a representative sample of programs; 

5. Design database. 

Object Retrieval 

To form an object descriptor, the user chooses facet terms under each facet. In 
order to examine specific objects resident in Ada NET libraries, one of two actions, 
depending on object size and other criteria, is taken: 

1. On-line object retrieval initiated 

2. On-line ordering request initiated 

For objects that can be provided on-line, the files referenced by the object de- 
scriptor will be returned to the user. The user may then select which specific objects 
are desired. The associated files are then transferred to the retrieval system to be 
downloaded. Items that must be ordered become open orders and are entered into 
Ada NET's distribution center. Accounting information provided by users will allow 
direct billing for all distribution requests. 

Development of the retrieval system will consist of: 

• System requirements definition; 

• Top level design of object retrieval system; 

• Systems communications design; 

• Database/retrieval system interface design; 

• Retrieval system/distribution system integration design; 

• Retrieval system implementation. 


105 


Library/System Configuration 

A Configuration Management Plan defining policies and procedures for DSI manage- 
ment will be developed. Issues to be addressed in this document include such areas 
as: 

• Object insertion into reuse database: 

• Object modification/revision: 

• Multiple version tracking; 

• Life cycle object collection management; 

• Maintenance history; 

• User problem report notification. 

3.3.6 Initial Network Introduction 

The initial introduction of AdaNET will be based on one overriding principal: only 
that which is available and operational will be included. In this way, AdaNET can 
ensure that user expectations don't exceed the systems capabilities prior to feature 
availability. Clearly one of the most important aspects of the introduction process is 
the public announcements about the service. In order to clearly specify the overall plan, 
we will state the shorter range goals and follow that with longer term commitments. 

The primary goal for the short term (through 12/88) is the implementation of 
services to be offered on a prototype basis beginning with the TRI-Ada '88 meeting. 
The TRI-Ada '88 meeting will be held in Charleston. West Virginia, October 24-28. 
Services to be announced at the meeting are: 

• The existing Ada Software Repository currently on the SIMTEL20 system at 
White Sands Missile Range with some value-added services and other software 
inventoried at that time; 

• Electronic mail linking members of the Ada community; 

• User forums and information services. 


106 



Activities Activities during this period will be in the following areas: 

• Implementation of commercially available AdaNET Information Services ( AIS): 

• Preparation for TRI-Ada '88 marketing effort; 

• Planning for additional services to be made available in future phases of imple- 
mentation; 

• Identify other repositories to be referenced through AdaNET; 

• Identify software tools useful in performing software evaluation and configuration 
management functions for AdaNET; 

• Build a list of potential additional services to be offered by AdaNET; 

• Attend relevant conferences and trade shows. 

3.3.7 Growth Plan for Additional Services 

This section specifies the plans for AdaNET s growth and the additional services that 
will be incorporated. It includes medium and long term goals for spinoffs, additional 
repositories, software and communications. 

Spinoffs 

As AdaNET evolves, other spinoff services will be pursued. Such services include: 

• Consultant services to aid manufacturers in their transition from traditional 
technologies to Ada based CIM/FCIM technologies. 

• Consultant services to private sector organizations in their development of reus- 
able software components inventories. 

• Expansion to the international Ada technology market; AdaNET may be able 
to serve as a technology transfer medium for software engineering and Ada 
technology developed overseas to the United States market. 


107 



During first stage implementation of the D5I. inventoried objects will be exclu- 
sively from the coding and unit testing stages of the software life cycle. This limitation 
is a consequence of the fact that we will be first evaluating existing Ada source code 
components obtained from public domain sources such as the ASR, NOSC Ada tapes, 
and other identified existing Ada repositories. Initial minimal evaluation criteria are 
being developed, and will form the basis for quality evaluation for potential reusability 
at this components/subcomponents level. These requirements will be detailed in the 
document AdaNET Reuse Policy and Guidelines during this first stage of implemen- 
tation. It is anticipated that this document will be expanded to include all life cycle 
products incorporated into the AdaNET inventory during future phases of DSI imple- 
mentation. From these guidelines, standard procedures for component evaluation will 
be developed to analyze quality. 

MountainNet's long term goal for implementation of the DSI is to develop a 
system that will implement the life-wide object representation model proposed by 
Dr. Charles McKay, Director of the Software Engineering Resources Center (SERC) 
at the University of Houston at Clear Lake City. MountainNet's development team 
recognizes that the benefits of reusability will come only when life wide information 
about available software components can be offered to AdaNET users. 

MountainNet is balancing the longer term development of this model against the 
current need to provide access to reusable software in a fairly short time. For this 
reason, we emphasize in the current document the planning for a DSI of reusable 
software designed to provide growth and expansion that will allow later evolution 
to Dr. McKay’s proposed taxonomy of taxonomies, but that can be realistically 
implemented within the time frames described herein. 

Medium Term 

The following subsection describes medium term (1-2 yrs) goals for AdaNET services. 
The primary goals over the medium period (November 1988 - December 1989) include: 

• Provide additional value-added services for the AIS; 

• Identify and/or develop tools for decomposition and recomposition of total soft- 
ware systems into reusable components and modules: 

• Incorporate other repositories within the AdaNET taxonomy; 

• Identify existing Ada software that can be used for CIM/FCIM applications. 


108 


The following list of planned activities is grouped according to the four goals listed 
above. 

Additional Value-Added Services: Activities related to the provision of addi- 

tional value-added services to the repository include: 

• Testing for correct behavior 

• Classifying according to Booch's taxonomy — • 

• Improving user documentation and tutorials 

• Widening the range of evaluation applied to units 

Tools for Decomposition and Recomposition: It is anticipated that large 

systems of Ada software developed for the federal government will eventually be 
delivered to the AdaNET project for evaluation, decomposition into reusable units, 
and inclusion in the DSI. To assist in this activity, the technical team will need access 
to software tools for detecting reusable portions of code and for decomposing large 
systems into smaller ones. Initially, tools for measuring cohesion and coupling would 
be useful. The necessary procedures are: 

1. Identify candidate tools and metrics; 

2. Learn to use these tools; 

3. Determine their utility in assisting with the decomposition of systems; 

4. Construct other needed tools. 

Other Repositories: Several collections of reusable Ada code are well-known 

in the Ada community. These include the ASR, CAMP, STARS Foundations, the 
Booch Components, and GRACE components. Each of these collections has its own 
organization. AdaNET will provide references to units in other repositories. AdaNET 
will attempt to provide a thesaurus to support context dependent specifications used 
by each affiliated repository and add unit references to the reuse database. 


109 


Existing Ada Software: The DOC OPTI support of AdaNET is provided to stim- 

ulate leadership in development of CIM/'FCIM Ada technology applications. AdaNET 
will attempt to work with mature leaders in CIM/FCIM applications, to build a base 
of Ada technology in support of this technology. 

Long Term Goals 

The goals over the long term period (through 1993) are: 

• Link services provided directly by AdaNET with those provided by other systems 
such as the AdalC bulletin board and SEAD; 

• Develop and provide support and expertise for companies making transition to 
the use of automation technologies; 

• Develop expertise to provide help in selection of computer hardware and software 
development tools best suited for specific applications development. 

3.4 Quality and Standards Assurance 

This section of the technical plan states AdaNET's verification requirements and 
details a validation demonstration to meet those requirements. MountainNet plans to 
follow basic software engineering principles in the evolution of AdaNET. To this end, 
a section on "Process Standards Compliance” is included. 

3.4.1 Verification Requirements 

This subsection addresses the way in which AdaNET requirements will be verified 
as complete. Since AdaNET is more than the software which drives it, this subsec- 
tion also deals with those items which are important to the overall implementation 
of AdaNET, but not necessarily software. For example. AdaNET's requirement to 
distribute information in printed, CD/ROM and diskette format will be proven to be 
complete through the creation of information using these formats, which will then be 
forwarded to UHCL. 

This subsection first lists each requirement as stated in section 3.2 of this docu- 
ment, then follows that with the plan for proof the requirement has been met. Please 


110 


note that an overall system demonstration is planned and is covered in section 3.4.2 
"Validation Demonstration 


Networking and Communications 

This requirement will be verified through remote login to AdaNET through the existing 
network schema. The logins will take place at the UHCL facility and will be performed 
in the following manner: 

• Login through the Telenet access to AdaNET; 

• Login to MountainNet directly: 

• Login to AdaNET directly. 

In each case, the record of the login sequence will be saved and printed to show 
proof of performance. 

Hardware 

Verification of existing hardware cannot be accomplished in the traditional sense, nor 
does it need to be. Since AdaNET is using existing services, MountainNet plans 
to provide initial signature pages for the agreements between MountainNet and the 
vendors of those services. 

Software 

There are two types of software verification for AdaNET. One is the testing of software 
which is to be included in the Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI). Since this is a 
separate subject, it will be dealt with in subsequent deliverables. The second is 
verification of the software developed for AdaN ET. MountainNet will follow standard 
testing procedures for software. Standard testing procedures include: 

• Unit test all code during development. These tests will be conducted by the 
software engineer responsible for that piece of code; 

• Build tests that wiTT be conducted using stems and stubs, as appropriate; 

• Sub-system testing will be conducted as supersets of each build test; 

• In all cases, software engineers will follow internal MountainNet Software Test 
Plan. 


Ill 


Data and Information Sources 

Verification of Data and Information sources will be verified by supplying UHCL with 
duplicate copies of the agreements signed by the supplier with AdaNET. 


Operational Considerations 

Operational aspects of AdaNET will be confirmed through copies of required deliver- 
ables from this subcontract. 

Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

The DSI will be a constantly changing entity. However, verification of it's robust- 
ness will be accomplished through publication of the contents and internal monthly 
reports detailing problem areas, new additions and deletions and planned activities for 
expansion. In this way, a running record of the DSI will be kept, allowing an historical 
perspective for future changes. 

Database 

Database access and security will be tested and proven through the Validation Demon- 
stration. Although MountainNet has not chosen a specific database management sys- 
tem vendor, it is anticipated that a key element in vendor selection will be the access, 
security and record/element administration functions available. 

AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

Beyond the testing for software discussed in section 3.4.1, the AIS will be tested for 
clarity and ease of use. Most of this testing will take place in preparation for the 
Validation Demonstration discussed in the next subsection. 

3.4.2 Validation Demonstration 

The ultimate test of any service-oriented endeavor is the application itself. Since 
fielding a new system will always uncover unanticipated problems, the most valid test 


112 


for such a system is a validation demonstration. MountainNet plans a two-phased 
approach to this demonstration. These are: 

1. Demonstration to UHCL/RICIS and; 

2. Demonstration to NASA headquarters and the liason office for Sen. Robert 
Byrd. 

Primarily, the demonstration will take the form of accessing AdaNET then allowing 
the user to browse through the services offered. In this way two key elements will 
be addressed; one, access and availability and; two, ease of use. MountainNet will 
perform these tests internally with non computer-literate personnel prior to the live 
demonstration. 


3.4.3 Process Standards Compliance 

Processes have helped most engineering disciplines overcome the problems associated 
with the design and implementation of a given system. Although the term “software 
engineering" was coined more than twenty-five years ago, the process of software engi- 
neering is just beginning to become a practiced method of development. MountainNet 
plans to comply wjth NASA’s SMAP methodology in devel op ment of Ad aNE T. Al- 
though not entirely a software subsystem, AdaNET can benefit now and in the future 
by compliance with this disciplined approach to development. 

Quality Assurance practices will take into account each phase and step of SMAP, 
and ensure that each is measurable and accurate. Additionally, MountainNet will em- 
ploy the practices espoused by Dr. Roger Pressman in his book, Software Engineering 
- A Practitioners Approach. 

Process standards compliance will be measured based on the stated goals in Dr. 
Pressman's volume. Finally, MountainNet recognizes the need to track this measure- 
ment, and will do so with modified versions of a “module development folder . Each 
functional area will receive it’s own folder which will be kept by the chief programmer 
or administrator for the team charged with accomplishing the goals of that functional 

entity. 


113 


3.5 Additional Resource Requirements 


This section of the technical plan delineates additional resources needed in order 
to meet the objectives surrounding a viable Ada NET service. It specifies the needs 
associated with hardware, software, networking and communications and personnel 
and administration. 

At this point in time, it's understood that additional resources are contingent upon 
additional contracting dollars not yet allocated MountainNet is also pursuing further 
corporate partnering agreements with an eye toward baseline funding for expansion. 


3.5.1 Hardware 

Specific hardware additions are: 

• VAX 8500 and/or other VAX systems to support a greater number of users and 
distribution of services requiring competing resources; 

• Harris HCX9 to expand the in-kind services currently being supplied by WVU; 

• Terradata DBC/1012 to serve as a standalone Reuse Database system; 

• IBM 9370 (MVS) to support the Terradata. 

3.5.2 Software 

Software required to expand AdaNET is: 

• COTS software for to provide compatibility between DEC and DG computers; 

• COTS implementation of SGML; 

• COTS implementation of IRDS; 

• COTS development tools and environments; 

• Relational Data Base Management software (prior to incorporation of dedicated 
database machines. 


114 



3.5.3 Networking and Communications 

Networking and Communications needs are: 

• A star network controller; 

• Direct connection between AdaNET and Telenet for ease of access; 

• Direct lines to the RICIS at UHCL, Washington. D.C.. Huntsville, Boston and 
Pittsburgh; 

• A link into the NASA network; 

• A link into the DoD’s DDN. 

• A direct connection between AdaNET and 5EAD. 


3.5.4 Personnel 


Development team personnel required for first stage implementation of the DSI 
are 10 FTE staff members plus senior level software engineering consultants. These 
staff positions will be divided among: 


• 6 Software Engineers 

• 1 Library Information Systems Specialist 

• 1 Systems Analyst 

• 2 Programmers 


115 


III 1 




DOC OPT! - Deportment of Common:*. Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation' 
DoD * AJPO - Deportment of Defense - Ado Joint Program Office 
DoO - DA - Deportment of Defense - Department of the Army 

NASA TU - Notional Aeronautic* and Space Administration - Technology Utilization 
'JHCL- RiCIS - University of Houston, Clear Lake - 

Research Institute for Computing ond Information Systems j 


Figure 3.5: AdaNET Organizational Structure 


116 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 

















Chapter 4 
Revenue Plan 


117 


YT1JAU0 m 


4.1 


Overview 


This chapter describes the Revenue Plan for implementation of Mountain Net’s Ada NET 
project. 

The information available through Ada NET will be offered with accompanying 
value-added services, making it a gateway and clearinghouse for software engineering 
and Ada technology that is unique. These services will be offered through a cost 
recovery structure that provides for migration to full commercial viability. 

This chapter describes what is to be offered to defined market segments, sources of 
Ada software and technology, revenue structures, reimbursement of direct contribution 
and comparative pricing. 



4.2 Products and Services 


Services to be offered are defined as one of two specific services categories: 


• Dynamic Software Inventory 

• AdaNET Information Services 

The following subsections provide descriptions of specific services to be offered 
under each of these categories: 


4.2.1 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

The Dynamic Software Inventory consists of software (and other life cycle objects) 
within an environment developed to support ease of definition and access to informa- 
tion about objects for reuse. 


Reusable Ada Software 

An inventory of public domain Ada software from NASA, DoD, other government 
agencies and private sector sources will be evaluated for inclusion in the DSI. Wherever 
possible, associated life cycle products will also be incorporated in the DSI. 


Other Life Cycle Objects 

In the process of software development, various life cycle products are generated, such 
as requirements documents, design documents and test plans. In later phases of the 
project, the inventory of reusable objects will be extended to include these products. 


Documentation 

Standard documentation accompanying software components and life cycle products 
will be stored in DSI. Standards or guidelines under evaluation for possible adop- 
tion include NASA SMAP DID's (Ada version) and MIL-STD-2167A. For standard 
life cycle and AdaNET specific documents, AdaNET developers are considering the 
adoption of the SGML ISO standard to develop Document Type Descriptions (DTD) 
representational markup. 


119 


Metrics 


As objects pass through quality and performance tests, metrics will be collected to 
yield relative values in specific areas tested. Such information will be provided to users 
searching for objects in the reuse database as part of the extended profile information 
for objects in the DSI. This information may help users to restrict their selection prior 
to making requests for object retrieval. 

Profile Information 

Each inventoried software object will have an associated profile. Current profile at- 
tributes being examined are: 

• Identification Code 

• Abstract 

• Author 

• Developing Organizations 

• Point of Contact 

• Hardware/OS Requirements 

• host 

• target 

• integration 

• Compiler/Version 

• Size 

• Documentation Status 

• Portability Report 

• pragma usage 

• dependencies on vendor supplied systems 

• usage of low level I/O, memory addressing, etc. 

• Problem Report 
Retrieval/Duplication 

Objects inventoried in the DSI may be retrieved through either on-line access or distri- 
bution media such as magnetic tape, diskette or CD-ROM. For objects not available 
on-line in the DSI, on-line order processing will be provided. 


120 



Reuse Database/Taxonomy 

Objects in the DSI will be stored in the reuse database using a faceted classification 
scheme. This scheme will allow for a flexible database design. The design of the 
database will be independent of the data model used to ensure that it will not be 
constrained by the current "state of the practice". Guidelines for design will closely 
follow the EA/RA model and IRDS. 

Tutorials 

This consists of instructional information on the use of the DSI, and on the use 
of some specific inventory components (such as tools, training systems or complete 
operational systems). 

4.2.2 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

This subsection describes the requirements for the AdaNET Information Services. 
Each of the separate databases will be structured according to the information con- 
tained in them. A common command structure will provide the powerful text retrieval 
access necessary and will function at the level of expertise desired by the user. 

User Forums 

This service consists of a variety of bulletin board services including current events, 
Special Interest Groups (SIG’s), forum discussions, news and product information. 

AdaNET Bibliographic System 

A bibliographic retrieval system will be available for texts identified as related to 
Ada and software engineering technologies. Some of the covered topics will comprise 
technical subject areas, cost and market information, and information available on 
related subject areas such as CIM/FCIM. Information will be accessed by key field/key 
word search categories, including article, periodical and publication references, and 
abstracts. 


121 


Educational Materials 


Access to or information about educational books, papers, video courses, overhead 
slide presentations, CAI tutorials and other types of educational materials about soft- 
ware engineering and Ada will be provided. 

Electronic Communications 

Internetwork electronic mail and document transfer services will be provided to support 
communication with other Ada software engineering professionals. 

Full Text Information 

Full text information relevant to Ada software engineering and related technologies 
in the library, that MountainNet is authorized to make available to users of AdaNET. 
News and current events information will be included here. 

Directories/Publications 

Printed information about software objects in the DSI and regular user updates con- 
cerning new and/or improved AdaNET services and activities will be made available. 


Other Repositories and Services 

Information about known public and private software repository and information ac- 
tivities throughout the country for both Ada and non-Ada software will be provided. 
Such repositories include the SIMTEL-20 ASR, NRL STARS repository and NASA s 
COSMIC. Such information will include general information about the services pro- 
vided by each of these facilities. Information regarding access and/or ordering, and 
in some cases, on-line or distribution access to software obtained from these sources 
(such as the ASR) will be supplied. However, software provided at this level of service 
will be virtually in an “as is, buyer beware” market composition format, and should 
not be confused with services provided through the DSI. This service is being made 
available to provide early access to Ada software currently in demand by the private 
sector, in the interim period during implementation of the DSI. Other information 
services may include access to SEAD and the Ada Information Clearinghouse (AIC). 


122 


Consultant Services 

MountainNet's staff and companies comprising the project support infrastructure will 
be available for specialized software engineering and Ada technology consultant ser- 
vices. This service will be key to successful use of the AdaNET services, and will be 
essential to the catalyst role of encouraging transition to use of Ada technology in 
private sector initiatives. 


Seminars and Workshops 

Seminars and workshops will be provided to educate and train the user base. 


4.3 Target Market 

The following sections define target markets identified as potential users of the AdaN ET 
services: 

4.3.1 Market Segments 

The target market can be divided into the following categories: 

• Current Ada users 

• New entrants into the Ada market 

• Industrial and manufacturing organizations 

• Government agencies 

• Educational institutions 

The current Ada users market rep resents the m ost immedia te market for AdaNET. 
Based on preliminary data, the professional Ada community has specific interest in 
baseline services planned. Of particular interest is reusable software components, 
supporting value-added services, professional papers and general information services 
such as, market trends and information about contract opportunities. Major users in 
this area are currently the aerospace industry and defense contractors. 


123 


Market entry into the industrial and manufacturing areas will require a more pro- 
longed effort. Significant pre-market education will probably be required for industry 
segments to see the direct advantages of applying Ada technology to their unique ap- 
plications. Specific component taxonomies relative to manufacturing primitives, will 
be adopted, similar to the approach used in presentation of the Common Ada Mis- 
sile Packages (CAMP) software to inventory software parts primitives. Educational 
and consultant support for successful long-term Ada technology migration in such 
areas as Paperless Order Processing (POP), Just-In-Time Inventory (JIT), Computer 
Integrated Manufacturing (CIM), Flexible Computerized Manufacturing technologies 
(FCM) and other real time control systems will also be provided. 

The government market represents a stable, proactive environment for AdaNET 
use. Although AdaNET's purpose is the transfer of government developed Ada tech- 
nology to the private sector, available technology and applications within various 
government agencies and even within various divisions of the same agency will also 
be inventoried where appropriate. For educational institutions interested in gaining 
Ada technology expertise in order to introduce strong Ada and software engineering 
curriculums, high quality information will be available from AdaNET. 


4.3.2 Market Composition 

Several major professional areas within each market segment have been identified: 

• Software Engineers/ Developers currently working with software engineering and 
Ada technology have expressed interest in Ada and software engineering, method- 
ologies, Ada specific metrics, reusable software and faceted classifications. 

• Managers/ Administrators within commercial and government organizations have 
shown interest in services that provide contracting and subcontracting informa- 
tion, current events, market trends, governmental activities with respect to the 
use of Ada and information about companies and products in the Ada market. 

• Educators indicated interest in educational and technically oriented information 
such as, faceted classifications for reuse and Ada tutorials. 

• Members of manufacturing and industrial communities are interested in the 
place of Ada technology as part of the overall advanced technology solutions to 
increase productivity, competitiveness and reliability. Areas of interest include 


124 



information about educational and professional information, current industrial 
applications and information about companies that possess specific areas of Ada 
technology expertise. 


4.3.3 Initial Market Survey 

An initial survey for AdaNET was conducted at the Ada Expo ’87 held in Boston in 
December 1987. The survey, while a small sampling of those in attendance, yielded 
information about the Ada community’s current interests. The survey gathered the 
following types of information: 

• General demographic information 

• Ada application areas represented at the conference 

• Levels of interest in potential service offerings 

• Current hardware and telecommunications utilization 

Following are charts which summarize the data collected in the initial market 
survey. 


Survey of Ada Expo '87 Attendees 
Areas of Ada Software Development 


AREA FREQUENCY 

PERCENT 

Weapons/C31 

39 

16.9 

Engineering 

35 

15.2 

Tools 

28 

12.1 

Scientific 

21 

9.1 

Telecommunications 

20 

8.7 

Education 

18 

7.8 

D&t abases 

18 

7.8 

Business/MIS 

17 

7.4 

Compilers. 

14 

6.1 

Process Control 

8 

3.5 

Financial Applications 

6 

2.6 

Consumer 

6 

2.6 

Chemicals /Petroleum 

1 

0.4 


125 


Survey of Ada Expo ’87 Attendees 
Networks Utilized 


NETWORK 

FREQUENCY 

PERCENT 

ARPANET 

32 

33.3 

DDN 

20 

20.8 

Telenet Mail 

15 

15.6 

CompuServe 

12 

12.5 

BITnet/Mailnet 

9 

9.4 

The Source 

4 

4.2 

Dialcom 

2 

2.1 

NASA Mail 

2 

2.1 


Survey of Ada Expo '87 Attendees 
Usefulness of Service Categories 

USAGE SUM OF RATINGS 


SW Eng. Methodology 130 
Ada-Specific Metrics 112 
Reuse Classifications 100 
Topical Search 97 
Documentation 93 
Project Management 91 
Commercial 77 
User Communications 69 
Contracting 67 
On-Line Tutorial 57 
Telephone Help Line 51 
CBT 50 


0 = Not Useful; 1 = Useful; 2 = Very Useful 


126 


4.4 Sources of Ada Software and Technology 

4.5 Revenue Structures 


Careful consideration is being given to the approach taken in planning for services cost 
recovery (or revenue) structures. Current thoughts and approaches being taken in de- 
velopment of this structure are discussed below. This document does not attempt to 
define specific dollar amounts for services structures. Such activity is premature, due 
to a lack of information about total investment in development of services; specific op- 
erational costs of supporting services delivery; resource requirements and allocations 
necessary for delivery of various services and specific information about potential mar- 
ket demand for individual or group services. Such information will become available 
and realistic projections possible in future phases of the project, as it moves from plan- 
ning, research and early prototyping into full scale services implementation. Criteria 
that must be met by the revenue structure include: 

• Defraying costs of operation 

• Maintaining commercial competitiveness 

• Standardizing revenue structures 

• Implementing incentive programs 

• Providing economically disadvantaged discounts 

• Reimbursing of direct contributions 

The revenue structure will utilize standard subscriptions, incremental charges, pur- 
chase fees and a differential fee structure as described below. These structures will 
be based on high volume usage, rather than charging individual users premium prices 
as the service goal is to provide reliable information services at cost effective rates. 
The most common structures to be used will be: 


Subscription Rate 

An annual, quarterly or monthly base rate allowing access to services (or groups 
of services) through on-line connect, CD-ROM, diskette and printed media. 


127 




Incremental Rate 

Users "pay as they go” for on-line services not standard to their regular services 
subscriptions. 

Purchase Price 

Users purchase products on an individual unit basis. 

Differential Fee Structure 

Usage information will be collected as clients log onto the system. This data will 
include: 

• Log-on time 

• Log-ofF time 

• Number of disk accesses 

• Amount and kind of data down-loaded to user's system 

• Types of information retrieved 

In all cases, MountainNet understands that the difference between data and in- 
formation will make a difference in billing for a given session. For example, if a client 
retrieves data which points him toward another resource for information, he will be 
billed less than if the retrieval nets information which is unavailable elsewhere. This 
logic follows an automated path for traditional information and data services; i.e., the 
Auerbach Report. Although not automated, a substantial fee is charged. The differ- 
ence with this service is that the user will be billed for only the information retrieved 
and not for all of the information in the database. 


129 



Revenue Classes for AdaNET Services 



Distribution Medium 

Description 

On-Lint' 

niiioM 

U|M 

! I I r 

1 lanic. *py 

Misc. 

Live 

Dynamic Software Inventory 

ISP 

1 

SP 

1 

1 





Ada Software Components 

IS 

SP 

p i 

PS 




Documentation 

IS 

SP 

p ' 

PS 

p 



Metrics 

IS 

SP 

p 

PS 




Profile Information 

IS 

SP 



p 



Reuse Database/Taxonomy 

IS 

SP 






Tutorials 

IS 

SP 

p 

J 

P 

p 



Information Services 








T ’5er Forums 

IS 




S 



Bibliographic System 

IS 

PS 



PS 

1 


Educational Materials 

IS 

PS 

p 

PS 

PS 



Electronic Communications 

S 







Full Text 

I 

PS 

p 

p 

PS 



Directories/Publications 





PS 



Outside Services 

S 

- - 







Professional Support 








Consultant services 







p 

Seminars and Workshops 



1 




p 


I = Incremental S ~ Subscription P = Purchased 


130 





4.5.1 Defraying Costs of Operation 

As a minimum requirement, revenue structures established for services must provide a 
realistic basis for cost recovery for a given target number of users. Below are estimated 
resource requirements at full staffing. Costs for these resources do not include variable 
costs associated with specific services delivery. 

Human Resources 


Type of support 


Number of FTE* 


General information services 4 

Library information services 1 1/2 

Software evaluation 5 

Configuration management 2 

Database 2 

Distribution personnel 3 

Marketing/Advertising 2 

Network and systems 3 

Infrastructure support services 4 


*FTE = Full Time Equivalent 

Hard ware/ Software 

• Six (6) Large scale computer systems 

• Network support 

• New acquisition and maintenance of software 

• Administrative and travel expenses 


Notes: 

The estimated number of FTE’s in various activity centers are based on current 
knowledge of staffing needs, as well as comparative staffing requirements in similar 
programs, such as the USAISEC SDC-W RAPID program. Estimates on other expense 
areas are projected for current operational costs. 


131 


4.5.2 Maintaining Commercial Competitiveness 

AdaNET must be competitive (as a minimum) with comparative commercially avail- 
able services. The difference between minimum charge scales necessary for cost re- 
covery and current market rate structures for similar services establishes a margin 
within which there is flexibility for determination of revenue structures (see Section 6 
for comparative pricing rates). 

4.5.3 Standardizing Revenue Structures 

Revenue structures must be standardized with few "add-on" charges for specific ser- 
vices usage (see Section 6 for comparative pricing structures). For most on-line 
services, standardized subscription services will be introduced, at levels that will allow 
cost recovery of resources expended for services delivered at average usage levels. Ser- 
vices would be "packaged" in incremental subscription levels. This will allow delivery 
of highly affordable general services (hence removing economic barriers). It will also 
allow alternate cost recovery structures (such as those listed in Section 6) for services 
delivering strategically valuable or resource intensive information. 

4.5.4 Implementing Incentive Programs 

Attractive pricing and/or special incentives to induce use of services and reinsertion 
of information by U.S. and foreign businesses and government organizations will be 
provided. Such programs may include introductory service “credits” to organizations 
providing valuable technology reinsertion, hence providing an additional incentive to 
encourage continued use of the services. 

4.5.5 Providing Economically Disadvantaged Discounts 

Special pricing discounts to remove economic barriers to access of information by 
qualifying educational or small business users will be provided. These market segments 
generate potentially less expendable revenue that can be used for investment in new 
technology areas, this may present an economic barrier to entry in new technological 
markets. Use of software engineering and Ada technology by these market segments 
will be encouraged. Specific qualifications for such discounts remain to be determined; 
criteria used must be easily obtainable and verifiable, and not represent high resource 


132 


requirements in supporting such verification. By establishing such a pricing structure in 
the form of a discount, the established standard pricing structure is not eroded by non- 
standard fee structures available to special groups of users. Not all small businesses 
and educational institutions will meet criteria established for these discounts, and 
should legitimately be charged standard rates. 


4.5.6 Reimbursing of Direct Contributions 

Reimbursement of direct contributions of sponsoring governmental agencies will be 
made. This reimbursement will be realized through the value of technology transferred 
for reuse by public and private sector users of Ada NET. Methods are currently being 
developed to analyze the relative value of various information components distributed 
so that a reuse value of that information can be established. Within ten years, the total 
value of that information should be greater than or equal to the original governmental 
investment. 


4.6 Comparative Pricing 

Below is a description of pricing strategies used by various companies that offer similar 
types of information services and products. These do not reflect the proposed fee 
structure for the AdaNET services, but rather are indicative of existing market pricing 
strategies. These services include on-line information services, information provided 
through alternate distribution media, and consultant and educational services. 

4.6.1 On-Line Services Delivery 

The following revenue categ ories are related to delivery of on-line communications 
networks, provided through telecommunications network access. 

Communications Fees 

Pees associated with communications networks access, such as TYMNET and TE- 
LENET. These fees vary based on geographic location, data transmission speed and 
the availability of a local dial-in number to access services. Fees generally range from 


133 


a few dollars per Hour to over $30.00 per hour depending on data transmission speed 
and which subservice is accessed. 

Connect Time Charges 

Connect time charges are based on the amount of time the user is actually connected 
to the system. Rates are quoted on a per hour basis and are dependent upon the type 
of information and subject matter required. Business and technical information are 
available at higher rates than citations and abstracts. Databases that provide citations 
and abstracts to publications usually cost less than those that provide information 
such as, a company’s name or address or a history of stock quotations for a particular 
industry. Connect time fees can range from $15.00 for access to subsets of several 
files for teaching purposes to $300.00 for access to citations for chemical patents. 


Print or Display Charges 

Print or display charges are assessed for each record displayed on the screen or printed 
offline. The fee varies as a function of the amount of information provided. Little 
or no charge is associated with viewing the title and subject headings for a record. 
Fees ranging from $.10 to $4.00 can be associated with viewing enough information 
to allow user to obtain the item which is being searched or for actually displaying 
the information. Files that allow the user to create reports are charged per item, per 
record listed. 

Per Search Term Charges 

This is a new approach introduced by database producers. This option is not yet 
available to users. Use of search terms as a charge base has many implications for 
vendors and users. Searchers always attempt to minimize on-line search costs. To 
minimize costs which are based on the number of keywords used to conduct the search 
has different implications than minimizing costs based on the amount of time the user 
is actually on line and the number of items retrieved. 


134 



Flat Rates 

This can be set up as a monthly minimum fee to be paid, regardless of whether 
searches are actually performed. 


Annual “Password” Fees 

“Password" fees are designed to cover the cost of maintaining the account and costs 
involved in the billing process. Fees are usually between $25.00 and $100. 00 per year. 


Deposit Account Charges 

A deposit account (or pre-paid account) often ofFers discounts, usually "stepped" 
according to the amount of the deposit. Sometimes fees, other than connect time 
charges, are deducted from the deposit account. 

Credit?, 

Some systems issue credits for certain transactions on the system. An example is 
OCLC, an interlibrary loan system. A fee is incurred for use of a record. A credit 
equal to the fee incurred for such a use is given for input of a catalog record not 
already in the system or for lending an item. 


4.6.2 Alternate Distribution Media 

CD-ROM Products 

Products associated with on-line search services are usually licensed on an annual 
basis with updates on a quarterly basis. Annual subscription fees cover updates to 
the search software necessary to access the information on the CD. Discs with older 
information on them are sometimes made available for purchase. Prices vary widely 
in products marketed to the general public or to libraries. These prices range from 
$300.00 for an outright purchase to $18,000.00 for a yearly licensing fee. 


135 


Floppy Disk Products 

Floppy disks are produced on a one time basis and are not normally updated. The 
distribution is usually an ASCII file to be used with a word processor and generally 
sells for less than $100.00. 

Magnetic Tape 

As with floppy disk products, magnetic tape products are usually produced on a one 
time basis and are not normally updated. Formats available generally include Unix 
TAR and ANSI labeled, in densities ranging from 800 bpi to 6250 bpi. Comparable 
services include: ASR (Ada Software Repository) ANSI labeled duplications for $200 
(user supplied tapes); COSMIC software duplications, where prices range from $50 to 
$10,000 per individual software system (tapes and documentation supplied). 

Printed Media 

Printed media include directories of available software and services, news and in- 
formation newsletters and full text information. COSMIC’s charges for its software 
directory runs from $25.00 for printed media to $50.00 for magnetic tape version of 
that directory. 

Workshops, Seminars and Consultants 

Costs for technical workshops and seminars can range from free to $4,000 per day plus 
cost of course materials and travel expenses for the instructor. Technical workshops 
are usually limited in size (15 to 20) people. Business oriented courses are normally 
unlimited in size and can cost $4,000 depending on the nature of the lecture. Seminars 
open to the public are generally on a per person cost scale and range from $1,200 
to $1,500. Consultant fees can be as much as $500.00 per hour for highly technical 
information. 


136 


Chapter 5 
Acronyms 


5.1 List of Acronyms 


ABS 

ACE 

ACM 

ADAM 

ADE 

AFATDS 

AdalC 

AIRMICS 

AIS 

AJPO 

ALS/N 

AOS/VS 

ANSI 

ASR 

ATC 

ATSE 

AWHMS 

CALS 


A list of acronyms used by the Ada NET project: 

AdaNET Bibliographic System 
Ada Center of Excellence 
Association for Computing Machinery 
Automated Data Manipulation 
Ada Development Environment 
Advanced Field Artillery Data System 
Ada Information Clearinghouse 

Army Institute for Research in Management Information, 
Communication and Computer Science 
AdaNET Information Services 
Ada Joint Program Office 
Ada Language System/Navy 
Advanced Operating System,/ Virtual System 
American National Standards Institute 
SIMTEL-20 Ada Software Repository 
Air Traffic Control 

Army Test Program Set Support Environment 
Aircraft Wire Harness Manufacturing System 
Computer-aided Acquisition and Logistics System 


137 


CAMP 

CBT 

CD-ROM 

CIM 

COSMIC 

COTS 

DA 

DAPSE 

DASD 

DBMS 

DCDS/Ada 

DDN 

DEC 

DET 

DG 

DID 

DOC 

DOC OPTI 


DoD 

DSI 

DTD 

EA/RA 

ESA 

FAA 

FCIM 

FTE 

GRACE 

IRD 

IRDS 

ISEC 

ISF 

JSC 

MAFIS 

MIMS 

MIS 

MOU 


Common Ada Missile Packages 

Computer Based Training 

Compact Disk - Read Only Memory 

Computerized Integrated Manufacturing 

Computer Software Management Information Center 

Commercial-ofF-the-shelf 

Department of the Army 

Distributed Ada Programming Support Environment 

Direct Access Storage Device 

Database Management System 

Distributed Computing Design System/Ada version 

Defense Data Network 

Digital Equipment Corporation 

Design Evaluation Tool 

Data General 

Data Item Description 

Department of Commerce 

Department of Commerce Office of Productivity, 
Technology and Innovation 
Department of Defense 
Dynamic Software Inventory 
Document Type Description 
Entity Attribute/ Relation Attribute 
European Space Agency 
Federal Aviation Administration 
Flexible Computerized Integrated Manufacturing 
Full Time Equivalent 

Generic Reusable Ada Components for Engineering 
International Resource Development, Incorporated 
Information Resource Dictionary System 
Information Systems Engineering Command 
Industrial Space Facility 
Johnson Space Center 

Mobile Automated Field Instrumentation System 
Mobile Information Management System 
Management Information Systems 
Memorandum of Understanding 


138 


NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

NASA TU National Aeronautics and Space Administration Technology Utilization 

NASA TUNS National Aeronautics and Space Administration Technology Utilization 

Network System 

NATO National Atlantic Treaty Organization 

NBS National Bureau of Standards 

NIAC NASA Industrial Applications Center 

NOSC Naval Ocean Systems Command 

NRL Naval Research Lab 

NSF National Science Foundation 

NTT Nippon Telegraph-Telephone 

ODISC4 Office of the Directorate for Information Systems for 

Command, Control, Communications and Computers 
OSI Open Systems Interconnect 

OPTI Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation 

RAPID Reusable Ada Packages for Information 

Systems Development 

RDBMS Relational Database Management System 

RICIS Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems 

SDI Strategic Defense Initiative 

SE Software Engineering 

SEAD Software Engineering and Ada Database 

SEI Software Engineering Institute 


SERC@UHCLSoftware Engineering Research Center at 
University of Houston Clear Lake City 
Space Flight Center 

Standard Generalized Markup Language 
Special Interest Group 

ACM Special Interest Group on Ada 

Software Management Assurance Program 
Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command 
Software Productivity Consortium 
Statement of Work 
Structured Query Language 
Software Support Environment 

Software Technologies for Adaptable, Reliable Systems 
Software Valley Corporation 


SFC 

SGML 

SIG 

SIGAda 

SMAP 

SPAWAR 

SPC 

SOW 

SQL 

SSE 

STARS 

SVC 


139 


TCP/IP 

TCSEC 

TU 

UHCL 

VMS 

WIS 

WORM 

WVNET 

WWMCCS 


Transmission Control Protocol, Internet Protocol 
Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria 
See NASA TU 

University of Houston at Clear Lake City 
Virtual Memory System 
WWMCCS Information System 
Write Once/ Read Many 

West Virginia Network for Educational Telecomputing 
Worldwide Military Command & Control System 


140 


5.2 Appendix A: Initial Marketing Survey Re- 
sults for the AdaEXPO-Boston, MA, De- 
cember, 1987 

This document represents the results of a survey of participants at the Ada Expo '87, 
held in Boston, MA during December of that year. MountainNet recognizes that two 
key elements exist regarding the participants and respondents: 

1 The largest majority ( 45%) of survey respondents were from the Aerospace and 
Defense contractor community. This represents a bias which cannot be ignored. 

2. Although this bias exists, the results of this survey are significant because 
the Aerospace and Defense contractor community represent the baseline con- 
stituency for the AdaNET service. 

Each form receives it's own page and accompanying analysis in order to make the 
results readable and the analysis more understandable. Finally, conclusions are drawn 
from this survey which explain the view espoused in the business plan. 


i 



141 


Respondent Profile 


Affiliation Count 

Aerospace and Defense 44 

Software Companies 12 

Government 12 

No Affiliation Listed/ Other 12 

Educational Institutions 9 

Hardware Manufacturers 9 

TOTAL 98 


Affiliation With 
Professional Organizations 


Affiliation 

Count 

SIGAda 

68 

IEEE 

36 

None or No Response 

17 

AdaJUG 

15 

Other* 

9 


TOTAL 145 

* "Other" = one response only. Represented were: SIGPLAN, AIAA NSIA, etc. 


142 



Survey Data 
Raw Results 

Questions Asked 
by Order 


* Note: Responses to each question were; Very Useful, Useful, Not Useful. In some 

cases, no response was given. All Responses were ordered by % of responses without 
regard for no response. 




Kr 

^p- >n*«( 


flank 



Question 

Wry l 

I'M* 

\<-1 l M ' 

V ery l.’sr 



Commercial Products and Services 

24 

41 

13 

8 

2 

4 

Contracting Opportunities 

29 

19 

26 

6 


3 

Ada Faceted-Classifications for Reuse 

40 

25 

9 

4 

9 

6 

Topical Search Categories for Reuse 

45 

25 

10 

2 

9 

5 

Documentation and Information 

32 

40 

6 

5 

3 

7 

User Communications 

21 

39 

13 

9 

4 

4 

Ada-Specific Metrics 

44 

35 

3 

3 

5 

8 

On-Line Tutorials 

15 

34 

26 

10 

6 

3 

Computer Based Training 

15 

30 

26 

10 

6 

3 

Telephone Help-line 

15 

30 

29 

10 

8 

2 

Project Management Software 

25 

53 

9 

7 

1 

6 

Software Engineering Methodology 

54 

33 j 

3 

1 

1 

■ 

8 

Total Responses 

359 

404 

178 





143 








Based on Percentage of Response 


Question % Response 

1. Software Engineering Methodology 91.83 

2. Project Management Software 88.77 

3. Ada Specific Metrics 83.67 

4. Topical Search Categories for Reuse 81.60 

5. Documentation and Information and 

Commercial Products and Services 79.59 

6. Computer-Based Training 77.55 

7. On-Line Tutorials ' 76.53 

8. Contracting Opportunities and 

Ada Faceted Classification for Reuse and 

Telephone Help-Line 75.50 

9. User Communications 74.48 

Ranking of Importance 

Topic Rank 

1. Software Engineering and Methodology 256 

2. Ada Specific Metrics 228 

3. Topical Search Categories for Reuse 200 

4. Ada Faceted Classifications for Reuse 180 

5. Documentation and Information 150 

6. Project Management Software 94 

7. Commercial Products and Services 61 

8. User Communications 49 

9. Contracting Opportunities 17 

10. On-Line Tutorials -33 

11. Telephone Help-Line -47 

12. Computer Based Training -67 

* Note: Ranking Methodology. Very Useful = + 10: Useful^ + l; Not Useful=-1. 

• Highest possible score = 275 

• Lowest Possible score = -239 


144 


Appendix B 

Project Participants 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 

Technology Utilization Division 

• NASA Industrial Applications Center (NIAC) 

University of Pittsburgh, PA 

• NASA Technology Application Team 
Research Triangle Institute, NC 

• Computer Software Management and Information Center (COSMIC) 
University of Georgia, GA 

University of Houston-Clear Lake (RICIS) 

Research Institute for Computer and Information Systems 

• Space Business Information Center 

• High Technologies Laboratory 
Department of Commerce (DOC) 

• Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation (OPTI) 

Department of Defense (DOD) 

• Ada Joint Program Office 

Department of the Army (0DISC4) 

• Office of the Secretary of the Army, Directorate of Information Systems for 
Command, Control, Communications and Computers 

West Virginia University/WVU Research Corporation 
Morgantown, WV 



Beckley College 
Beckley, WV 


145 


mil 


Appendix C 

Project Deliverables 


Report on participant 
organizational views 

November 30, 1987 

Draft organizational plan 

December 21, 1987 

Final organizational plan 

January 25, 1988 

Draft business plan 

February 22, 1988 

Draft organizational documents 
and agreements 

February 22, 1988 

Draft technical plan 

March 7, 1988 

Draft schedule of user fees and 
charges and associated analysis 

March 14, 1988 

Final organizational documents 
and agreements 

April 25, 1988 

Final technical plan 

April 25. 1988 

Final schedule of user fees and 
charges and associated analysis 

April 25. 1988 

Final Business Plan 

May 30, 1988 

Final Report on Phases 1 and II 

May 30. 1988 


146 


by MourtoHicf 


AdaNET 

Ada Market survey 


The accompanying packet of materials describes AdaNET-The Advanced 
Development Network for Ada Software Applications. The few minutes you spend 
answering the questions below will provide information to be used in the 
planning and implementation of AdaNET. services. If you wish to receive more 
information about AdaNET. please attach your business card or provide your 
name, address, and telephone number at the bottom of this survey form. Unless 
you indicate otherwise, all information you provide will remain confidential 
and will be reported in summary form. 

By taking the time to answer the questions below, you identify yourself 
as candidate for participation in onsite user tests of AdaNET services. 


1. with which Ada-related professional organizations are you affiliated 7 
SiGAda AdaJUG IEEE Other 


2 . is your organization involved in Ada software development 7 

No Yes. please check all types that apply: 

Consumer Scientific Engineering 

Business/ Data Bases Telecommunications 

MIS Func t ions 


Education Financial Applications Weapons/C3i 

Process Control Chemicals/Petroleum Compilers 

Tools 


3. Which AdaNET services or information would you find ..seful 7 

( C i r c i e One ) 

mot useful Useful very use‘u 


Commercial Product and Services 

Contracting Opportunities 

Ada Faceted Classifications for Reuse 

Topical Search Categories for Reuse 

Cccumen tat i on and Information 

User Commun i cat i ons 

ida-Spec i f i c Metrics 

On-Line Tutorials 

Computer-Based Training 

T e i ephone Help Line 

Project Management Software 

Software Engineering Methodology 


0 


i 

i 

i 

l 

l 

l 

i 


2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

9 


147 


Page Two 


4(a). Tc which data/telecsmr.unicat ions networks do you have access 7 

OQM ARPANET Nasa Mail S i TNET/Ma i I ne t Telenet Mail 

MCI Mail CompuServe Qialcom Source Other^ 





AdaNET , , 

Electronic Mail Service and Document Transfer 
User Registration Form 


Please type your information at the " >" 


1. Name, address, telephone: 


Person's Name: > 

Organization: > 

Address (#1): > 

Address (#2): > 

City and State: > 

Zipcode: > 


Primary Telephone Number: > 

Alternate: > 

FAX Number: > 

(Continued on next page) 


149 


2. Network ID's (e.g.: BITNET: VM5521 @ WVNVM. DIAICOM, COMPUSERVE 
etc) 


Preferred AdaNET userid: 

> 

DDN userid: 

> 

NASA Mail userid: 

> 

BITNET userid/node: 

> 

DIALCOM userid: 

> 

COMPUSERVE userid: 

> 

SOURCE userid info: 

> 

MPL userid: 

> 

other (specify): 

> 


3. From what location will you normally be accessing AdaNET? 

4. What device will you be using to access AdaNET (e.g.. IBM-PC, Televideo 924 
video terminal, etc) ? Please be specific as to the manufacturer and model number. 

5. What type of telephone modem do you have connected to the device listed in #4 
above? Please be specific as to the manufacturer and model number. 


Thank you. Please return this questionaire to: 
AdaNET 


150 



Appendix F 

Agenda 

AdaNET Project Meeting 
December 10, 1987 

6:00 P.M. - 7:00 P.M. 

• Specific responsibilities of each of three sponsoring agencies 

• Review specific objectives for the combined effort 

• Define specific goals for each of three sponsoring agencies 

• Coordination between three sponsoring agencies 

• Direction to contractor 

7:00 P.M. - 9:00 P.M. 

• Discussion of current AdaNET activities 

1. Outline of status report 

2. Marketing and Imaging 

3. Marketing Survey 

• Project Management 

1. Expanded discussion of deliverables 

2. Accountability of contractor & sponsoring agencies 

• Role of other government agencies 

1. Methods for incorporation of additional agencies 

2. Criteria for consideration 

• Federal Advisory Panel 

1. Role of Panel 

2. Criteria for Membership 

• Technology Advisory Council 

1. Role of Council 

2. Criteria for membership 


152 


• New Business 


1. Next Scheduled meeting 



153 


AdaNET’ 

The Advanced Development Network 
For Ada’ Software Applications 

AdaNET is a cooperative effort between 
government, education and the private sec- 
tor to create a resource that will aid in facil- 
itating the wide-spread use of Xda technol- 
ogy. 

AdaNET will be a gateway to Ada and ad- 
vanced software technology information. It 
will be a resource to aid in the identification 
and acquisition of information needed at all 
levels of expertise. 

AdaNET will serve as a test bed for new Ada 
training methodologies and will be acces- 
ible via established telecommunications 
linkages with existing government, educa- 
tional and commercial networks. 



by Mou^C^^nct , 


AdaNET will provide continuous refinement 
of Ada software and software engineering 
information and technology, and will pro- 
vide a system for identifying and acquiring 
needed information. 

AdaNET will serve as a source for advice re- 
lating to specifics of the Ada language and 
its usage, and what tools are essential for 
good software development practices. 

By organizing and enlarging the scope of 
knowledge available and the ease with 
which it may be obtained, AdaNet can give 
business, industry, government, and the in- 
dividual many of the tools needed to make a 
transition into the Ada culture. 


AdaNET* is a registered trademark of MountainNet, Inc. 

Ada* is a registered trademark of the U S. Government (AJPOJ 


154 


AdaNET’ 

The Ada" Soft-Where-House 


AdaNET is a facility providing centralized 
accumulation of Ada information and tech- 
nology. 

This free flow of information will allow ad- 
vances in technology that have been made, 
primarily through government funded de- 
velopment , to be disseminated throughout 
all levels of the private and public sectors. 

With a gateway, such as AdaNET, with the 
various attendant services that will be of- 
fered, the road will be opened to rapid ad- 
vancement in many fields. 

Some of those organizations that will ben- 
efit almost immediately include: 

• Traditional industries faced with the need 
to automate in order to re-establish a com- 
petitive position in the international mar- 
ketplace 



• The academic community for the educa- 
tion of Ada trainers and software engi- 
neers, as a tool for research and develop- 
ment. and for academic/industry transfer 

• Commercial developers concerned with 
applications and "embedded" software 
for commercial products development 

• Large and small industries exploring the 
transition to Flexible Computerized Man- 
ufacturing (FCM) 

• NASA, the U S. Department of Defense, 
and the U.S. Department of Commerce 

• Contractors developing Ada systems and 
programs for Federal agencies 


AdaNET* a registered trademark of MountainNet. Inc. 

Ada* is a registered trademark of the U S. Government (AJPOl 


155 


AdaNET* 

Value-added Services and Products 



by Mounlainrict 



T 1 


AdaNET will offer a wide array of services 
and products designed to enhance the appli- 
cation of Ada'technology at all levels of ex- 
pertise. 

AdaNET Information Services will include: 

• On-line Repositories Access 

• Taxonomic Classifications 

• Repository Reproductions 

• Easy to Use Topical Search Categories 

• Electronic Bulletin Boards 

• User Communications 

• AdaNET Telephone Help Line 

• Ada "Starter" Packages 

• Services and Products Publications 

• Validation and Verification 

• Documentation and Tutorials 

• Libraries of Reusable Modules 

• Life Cycle Identification 

Collateral and Supplemental Products and 
Services will include: 

• Seminars and Workshops 


• Development and Management Tools 
Needed to make Optimal Use of Ada Soft- 
ware 

• Industry Transition 

• Proprietary Software 

• Special Interest Groups 

• Specialized Libraries 

• AdaNET Publications and Newsletters 

Those interested in Ada technology and its 
applications will be able to acquire the infor- 
mation available from AdaNET through a 
variety of methods; telephone, telecommun- 
ications, electronic media or by hard copy. 

AdaNET is an interactive partnership. Ada- 
NET will identify new information on Ada 
technology, provide access to it in usable 
formats, and support its transfer to any in- 
terested party. This will create a wide-open 
forum that will provide a free flow of infor- 
mation in an active, rapidly expanding field. 

From government agencies to private bus- 
iness, AdaNET will be a dynamic tool in 
working with Ada technology and the appli- 
cation of this powerful technology. 


156 


AdaNET* is a registered trademark of MountainNat. Inc 
Ada<* is a ragistarad trademark of the U S Government (AJPO) 




MaNtLT First Year Projections 


5 ; 


o O sr o o r- O ^ 

o-, 1 

so o ® ® o so mr- , 

2; -Q 5 

C O r cs/i O mm l 

O' O j 

m m ■<z* — ^ co m m 

! m, rr j 

m m ! 

i 

! 3 j 


o 

3 


C*\ 


m O 

^ o 

SO O m 


o r 


O m 
rs m 


— i rs CO O O p- 

CO [ o **r ^ O O 

- • O w -i fN O 


c — « o 


o 


m o 

— •■ sr 

m r- 

CO o 

m m 

rs r- 

m m 

-r m 


| ? 

— o i 

O O 1 

m O ! 

0 3 <1 

m o j 

^ ^ s 

m rs | 

> m? 8 


so .! 

i 

3 


o 

O 


o o 

zo o 


m o I r- 


— s 

- ft 


t 


' rs ® rs o 
r" | ri > ^ 5 


o ~ o 
m o 
m o 


\A o 
o rs: 


S* 

rs 


> ■ <® rs cP rs 
| i - N 




Si ! 


c a- 


a 


0003000 I o 


o o o o o 

'C- 

o 


o o o o o o 




ooooooo ;o 
rs ! rs 


O w' c ^ 

- *j - ft S 


q 3 u 
C > 3 


O C >1 

u o c 

CJ — 


= > S > i 



rs^crsroor-omo 

_ M i 

m m o O O O O O 

CO 

p- — o O vo r* O 

JP m 

CO CO 

- 

O O rs co VO m !jr 

so rs 

co co 

• ! 

* ! 

'w < 

cr rs co m : j 

rs 

! j 

| 

^ _a" i 

j o o j 


o 

cs 


3 i * - ~ ~ *5 


CJ 


5 


JS 


3 

GQ JO 

St y 

r-l O W 

C — *3 
> w o 

10 -J CO 


U *-* C 

w o > 

C CJ 
c C; 

a > ■-• 

Sii5 


a a a s 


3 
£ a 


-sc 

O 


(J 

CJ 


£ 

K 




! £ P 


o 

> 

JS 


• -< ** CJ •-* -0 [ 

_J > S Jl ~ 5 -a: i 
U - CJ CLC^ w : 

C O '-i 3 £ i 

0 | < i 2 

5 2 5-x ?5 S5 ; ? 

y shirts ; s 

g £ 5 § 1 1 -i !" 


I y 
d 

> 


■>f 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 


I' First Year Projections (cont'd) 


03 

> 


(Z 

r— f 

3 


m 

o 


8 


a 

go 


co 

CO 


3 

"0 


CO 

CO 


CO 

CO 

V 

£ 


ON CO O ^0 o VC O 
rr uo o m cn o 

H N if) m ON o 


ON CN 
m m 


r- on *<r 

O UN (N 

m 


m cn 

ON O 


o 

o 

o 

r- 

ro 

o 

o 

uo 

r-H 

o 

o 

CN 


UO 

o 

<N 

un 

m 



o 

o 

o 

r- 

m 

o 

o 

uO 

r-H 

o 

o 

CN 


** 




o 

uO 

CN 

lTN 

m 



o 

o 

o 

uO 

m 

o 

o 

r-H 

o 

o 

<N 





»T 

o 

o 

CN 

Lo 

m 



O 

o 

o 

r- 

m 

o 

o 

uO 

»-H 

o 

o 

CN 


X 



r- 

uo 


rvi 

un 

m 




o o o 
o o 
o o 

o o' 

cn —I 


o o o 
o o 
o o 

o' o' 

rvi -h 


o 

o 

o 


o 

o 

o 


m 
m 
m 

m m 


o o o 
o o 
o o 

o o 

Gn 3 r-l 


m o 
m o 
m O 


O O O 
O O 
O O 


O O 

CN r-H 


on co 

CN O 
un m 

l n 

co — < 


O on 
m in 
r- o 

o 

m cn 


O ON 
m un 

r-H O 

r- o' 
m rs 3 


O on 
m lO 
r— o 

o' 

m cn 


oo^oor-ocnun 

ON r-C I 

uooooouo m r- 

cn lH I 

a o n cun vo mm 

O uO 1 


*» ^ H 

m m *-h co mm 

m ht | 

m m 

ON I 


CO 

oo'coor-omun 

ON **H 

co 

OOCnooo m n- 

CN uO 


co o m on un uo mm 

O O 



— 

w 

S* 

m, ro c h ^ a mm 

m m 

: 

m rr 
ON 


o 

ON 

co 

ON 

CN 

<N 


O 

CN 


O 

ON 


CO 

uO 


o 

ON 

m 


CO 

un 


m o 

O ON 

o 

m o 

m uO 

on 

m o 

r- uO 

m 

««. «* 



m m 

r- o 
m cn 

rH 

co 

in 

m 


o 

o 

o 


CN 


o 

<0 


co o o o o o o 

CN 

co 


o o o o o o o 


o o o o o o o 

CN 

m 

o 

lT 

1 -H 

o o o o o o o 


o o o o o o o 

CN 


co 

JN 


o o o o o o o 

CO 

o 


co 

ON 

CO 

ON 

CN 

cn 


i CO 


o 

lT N 


° 
I ON 
m 

I CO 

1 £ 

l *H I 


o 

ON 


CN 


o o o o o o o 

CO 


r— 

CN 


CO 

UN 


o 

co 

o 


o 

co 

o 

r- 

ON 


1C 

r~ 

C5 


u: 

c 

g 

0> 

fcj 


03 

8 

u 

o 



8 

co 

8 


u 

0) 


4 j a> 

P a> 

C - 1 &U 


UC 

as 

03 

c 
8. 
2 
— H 

8 

p 


o 

> 



C 0 

w c 




U 

a o 

a: 



*rH 

vJ *rH 

3 

lA 

L*3 


-rH Ur> 

U 


a 

u 

1 

> co 

C u 
o — 1 

* ^ 
2 

ST 

"35 



c 

03 

> 


3 

p 


,=)S 


ORIGINAL page is 
OF POOR QUALITY 


AdaNET Second Year Projections 


cd 

CO 




u 


cd 

co 

s' 

n 


o 

CD 


CJ 

s 


CD 

CD 


OOOr^OOOmo 
OOOOOO m O 

>^r^ooui coo 


CD 

o 


O N ^ H 
»— < 


O O O O O >C ^ O 
OOOOOO mo 

p- o vo © cd coo 


CD 

VO 


h o n n 

(X 


OOOI^OOOmo 

oooooo 2g 

oin coo 


cd 

vo 


< o rs: m i 


m m 


©oor^ooomo 

o cd H 

m o © vo o o mo 

m ltd y 

r-fOoesJOO mo 

p- vo y 

t% ^ ^ ^ 


r- vo vo rsj o O mm 

p* o 8 

CD m fN h 

m N I 


r— ^ 1 


ooor-ooomo 

O CD 

mooooo mo 

m cd 

i — i O O (N c O mo 

r- vo 

% ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

** 

© O O O O mm 

r- o 

CD m tN H 

m (nj 


r— ( 


o 

© 

m 

CD 

CD 


o 

cd 

m 

CD 

CD 


C 

CD 


o 

r-l 

0 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

TT 

CD 

m 

m 

o 

o 

o 

o 



CD 

vC 

vO 

VO 

■CD 

o 

CD 

o 













r- 

m 



m 

rv 



i-H 



CD 

rs 

CO 

© 







r-f 










o 

i— H 

o 

O 

0 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

TT 

CD 

m 

m 

o 

o 

o 

CD 


■ 

CD 

o 

vO 

CD 

o 

© 

m 

© 












j 


m 

*— i 

m 


CD 





CD 

<N 

CD 

© 






i 

H 


<!— i 

1—5 







O 

i— < J, 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

1 

o 

rr 

CD 1 

m 

m 

o 

o 

CD 

CD 



© 

O 

vO 

©; 

o 

UD 

*— » 






% 

*»■ 







r- 

m [ 

— H 

vO 

rs 

rs: 





CD 

rsi f 

CO 

© 







— < 


. — 1 

—4 








O 

m 


o o o o o o o 

TT o o CD 

<-h CD CD r-> 

r h (N 

CD 


o o o o o o o 
O O O 
o Mfl CD 


CD 


O 

m 

VO 


O 

© 

m 

© 

cd 


o 

© 


CD 

CD 


CD 

CO 


8 


ooor^ooomo 
moOOOO mo 

^hOOCsJOO mo 

^ ^ n o O m m 

CD m (N h 


o 

CD 

o 

o o o o o o o 

m 

CD 

CD 

tt CD 

© 

vO 

m 

CsJ 





© 

o 

CO 

CO 

m 

<N 

CD 

CD 

mf 


— H 

•n 


o 

© 


CO 

CD 


LC 

-U 

C 

a 

4 J 

U5 

8 

u 

O 



U vuj 

S 5 


J3 

w 

8 


u 

QJ 


8 

p 


o 

C 

a 

a 

i— i 

3 

p 


W 

QJ 

3 

c 

o 

> 

a 




w Q 



u 

o o 




CJ 

CJ 

wD 

s 


u 

O 

> ^ 

■ ~4 

U 

■— < 

s 

cz 

C u 

1J -»H 



-J > 0 W H 0) 

cj w cj a* uo 

2o^ a||| 

g 2 5-2 ¥5 

t) fQ Uj ^-1 

^ Jj *3 ^ 3 

< j -> u L> C 03 

CQ VI—! a D — < c 

< 0 — • *3 ^ o 

z w a 3 i u 


w 

_x: 


2 

*e 


CJ 

> 

2 


CJ 

p 


i;>n 


ORIGHVAL Paqc ie 
OF POOR QUALITY 


1000 ^ 000^00 
0 0 0 0 0 0 CT\ O 

O VO H fN O -^r o 
rsj o o o n* m 

0 0 0^00 TT m 
r- 'C* (N i-H 


nj o o o o o o 

m o in o o o 

Ol (N U*l O o O O 

O' v ^ c o 

o r o h 

op 


ooor-ooomo 
OOOOOO mo 

r- rr o ’O o lO coo 

lP r-( o <n h mm 

O OnJ r-H 


o o o o o o o 
m O O O O O o 
h O O d iO o o 


ooor^ooomo o m o 
OOOOOO mo rr op m 

r^-^oooLD coo op so o 

os h o n m h mm p- m — ( 

o ^ hj io in a 


o o o o o o o 
m o O O O O 
lO o lO lO o o 

cr> CO CO rn m r-1 
lO 


TO 

op 

1 O 

o 

O 

r- 

o o 

O 

m 

o 

o 

rH 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 


CO 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o o 


m 

O 

"C 

OP 

m 

m 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

4-1 


r- 


OP 

lO 

o in 


CO 

o 

op 

vO 

vO 

vO 

o 

o 

in 

m 

o 

C 



















0 

> 

in 

»H 

UD 

CNJ 

m rH 


m 

m 

r** 

m 

rH 

H 

r- 

co 

rH 

nj 

rH 

u 

rH 

vO 

rr 



rN rH 




in 

<N 

CO 

VO 







3 









H 


r-H 

»H 






£ 

n 


















o 

c n 

O 

o 

o 

r- 

O O 

o 

m 

O 

O 

rH 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

•H 

co 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O O 


m 

o 


OP 

m 

m 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

4-1 


r- 

• 4 T 

OP 

lO 

o in 


CO 

o 

OP 

vO 

lO 

rH 

in 

in 

in 

o 

O 

u 


«* 



«» 














0 ) 

fl 5 

LO 

rH 

VO 

nj 

m rH 


m 

m 

r- 

m 

rH 

co 

vO 

r- 

rH 

fN 

rH 

■m 

2 

VO 

rr 



CN rH 




m 

rsj 

CO 

in 






O 

3 









rH 


rH 

H 






u 



















a. 



















u 


o 

o 

O 

r- 

o o 

o 

m 

O 

o 

iH 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 


OP 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o o 


m 

o 


OP 

m 

m 

o 

o 

O 

o 


«u 

CO 

r— 

rr 

OP 

vO 

o in 


co 

o 

OP 

vO 

VO 

rr 

in 

o 

<N 

in 


>4 


*»> 




«» »* 


«s 

*4 



«% 









in 


vO 

nj 

m h 


m 

m 

r- 

m 


vo 

in 

r- 





>1 

vO 

rr 



rsj h 




m 

CNJ 

CO 

vO 






S 

s 









rH 


iH 

H 






o 

u 

«&. 

/Tn 1 


















35 

CO I 

o 

o 

o 

r- 

O O 

o 

m 

o 

o 

rH 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 


- i 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O O 


m 

o 


OP 

m 

m 

o 

o 

o 

o 


PH 

I 

r- 

rr 

op 

vO 

o in 


CO 

o 

op 

vO 

lO 

rs' 

o 

in 

OP 

o 


hr) 

cH ! 


<s 



•* «*. 













2 

•rH 

in 

i —4 

vO 

na 

m *h 


m 

m 


m 

H 

CO 

in 

vO 





u 

vO 

XT 



<N rH 




m 

n 3 

co 

vo 







<3 jj _gj o 

C C m *0 u 

a a) *h ^ 

io u > w i 

U U (t 4 -> O) 

8 8 £ 8 £ 


& 

g 4 8 

8 Jj,jJ 

4 -t -h 

u « 

<3 8 

S >,2 

4 J 57 © 


8 2 g .2 S ' 3 2 

CJ w ^ r-H <n 
? J fO J D d 
< n> U U C 55 

4 ) 3 -H J £ 

ssassfls 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 


Total Revenue: 101,630 101,630 101,630 101,630 101,630 101,630 2 , 109,042 



lhird Year Projections 


UP 

O 

UP 


O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

r- 

CP 

$ 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

© 

UP 

1-H 

m 

o 

up 

o 


o 

o 

UP 

CP 

uP 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

UP 

UP 

lO 

© 

v£> 

TT 

UP 


o 

o 

lC 

p 


a ^ 

o 

o 

o 

o 

un 

o 


up 


r~ 

es 

VO 

T—t 



nr 

CO 

LO 

UP 

rp 

lO 

PI 

up" 

CO 

PI 

CO 

UP 

p* 

rr 



PI 

r— ( 




p 

PI 

o 

tt 


PI 





o 










♦H 


PI 

i— l 







PI 

UP 

O 

UP 

b 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

P 

© 

vO 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

! o 

UP 


rp 

UP 

o 


o 

O 

UP 

CP 

lP 

uP 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

! uP 

l n 

LO 

© 

vO 

*rr 

UP 


o 

o 

LO 

p 


© 

O 

o 

o 

o 

UP 

o 


in 

r- 

r- 

pT 

LO 

1— ! 


rr 

rp 

CO 

LO 

UP* 

rp 

UP 

o 

lP 

p 

PI 

PI 

UP 

r- 

<r 



PI 

rH 




p 

PI 

! o 

uP 


PI 





o 


upourr-ooooo 
in h o in o oo 

UP lO CP LO ^ UP OO 

up r- i — (N o ^ rr 

r- pi 


lo o o o o o o 

up o o o o o o 

Cv O O O O UP O 

O wH CO in \0 <N M 

UP r-U «— < 


o 

o 

o 

p 

o 

o 

o 

rp 

o 

O 

*H 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 


rp 

o 

rr 

CP 

p 

■<3* 

© 

LO 

o 

LP 


co 

o 

© 

LO 

UP 


LO 

PI 

rr 



rp 

rp 

p 

rp 

VO 




PI 

*H 1 




UP 

pi 










H 


o 

o 

o 

p 

o 

o 

o 

rp 

o 

o 

- I 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 


rp 

O 


os 1 

p 

■*r 

© 

VO 

o 

UP 


CO 

o 

CP vO j 

up” 

rH 

Lo” 

PI 

rp 



m 


p 

rp 1 

VO 

'C* 



PI 

1-H 



rp | 

UP 

P3 I 










H 

1 

o 

o 

o 

p 

o 

o 

o 

rp 

o 

O 

rH 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 


rp 

o 

rr 

© 

p 

TT 

© 

LO 

o UP 


© 

o 

© 

VO 

UP 

»— 1 

VO 

PJ 

rr 

— 1 


rp 

rp 

p 

m 

VO 

TT 



PI 





UP 

PI 










r-H 



o o o o o o o 

nr o O O O O O 

f-* O O O O J"> o 

un -p up rr lo rH lo 


o o o o o o o 

m O O O O O O 
H O O UP UP UP o 

up pi ^ pi or i— i i— i 


O O O O O O O 

ro O O O O O © 

LO © © © © © © 

O O (N (N un H H 

UP i—l i-U 


& 

g. 8 

3 & 

0) H 
-C — < 

V -H « 

SS* 

8 >,£ 

<u 0) (O 


rt3 ui c 
U CJ O w 
— ( O 1> 
c — * xJ u 
3 > *3 -h 
S u. O > , 
5 Gj -h u 
0 WH ^ 


tj U8-2 

(T3 D H JT O 

H C/S U P 4-> 3 

XJ H £ \ c \ 

S OI c o 

u O C J w 

U £ u iJ.HH fC 

^ 5 xj <ts -u 3 d 

< xJ U U C U3 -H 

co wuf a; 3 — i c e 

z S a S i u i5i 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

OF POOR QUALITY 



AdaNET ihird Year Projections (ccnt'd) 


a; 









CN 0 






> 

O 

an 

an 

OOO 

cn 0 

CN 

O 

(N 

0 

O 

0 

O 

0 

•H 

cn cn 

H 

CO 

un 0 

cn 0 

m 

VO 

cn 

cn 0 

0 

O 

0 

O 

0 

xJ 

0 vO 

H 

CN 

0 O 

TT 0 

r- 

<N 

on 

TT 0 

0 

O 

0 

an 

0 

(G 


% 

V % 


■*. 



^ v 


V 




r- <n 

rs 

1 — w 

r- co 

r- 0 

f— ( 

(N 

m 

0 cn 

CO 

rn 

VO 


m 

h 

r- an 

cn 

r*n 

0 m 

^7 m 

CO 

*H 

on 

0 

VO 

O 

on 



6 

CO lO 



m rH 


0 

m 

m 

VO CN 

CN 





3 






CN 


<N 

H 






0 















an 

an 0 

an 


000 

O O 

r- 

cn 

S 

vp 0 
an 0 

O 

O 

O 

0 

0 


l n -h 

m 

O 

an 0 

O O 

an 

cn 

O 

O 

O 

0 

O 

* 

un vo 

05 

vO 

tt an 

O O 

vO 

r- 


^ 0 

O 

O 

O 

0 0 

XJ 









^ •* 






CL 

un r- 

r- 

N 

VO H 

tt m 

0 

vo 

an 

co an 

CN 

CO 

CN 

CO <N 

# 

n- 



CN rH 


r- 

CN 

0 

rH CN 

m 


rH 







i 

rH 


CN 

iH 






O 

an 0 

an 

r- 

000 

0 0 


cn 

S 

vo O 
aS 0 

0 

0 

O 

O 

0 

Cn 

un 1— 4 

m 

0 

un O 

0 0 

un 

05 

O 

0 

O 

O 

O 


an vo 

cn vo 

*7 an 

0 0 

vo 

r- 

rr 

on 0 

0 

an 

O 

O 

O 

cn 

3 

an r- 

r- 

<n 

00 iH 

rr m 

acT 

50 

an 

r- n* 

O 

r^* 

rH 

r- 

o' 

r- *7 



<N ^ 


r- 

CN 

O 

rH CN 

m 


rH 



< 






*H 


CN 

rH 






0 

an 0 

an 


OOO 

0 0 

r- 

cn | 

! s 

vp 0 
an 0 

0 

0 

O 

0 

0 

cn 

an h 

m 

0 

an 0 

O O 

an 

05 

0 

0 0 

O 



an 0 

cn 

vO 

h* an 

0 0 

vo 

r- 


N* O 

0 

0 

O 

0 






*» ^ 




’»• 







3 

an 

r- 

cn 

VO rH 

m 

GO 

vo 

un 

i-H CN 

on p- 

O 

vo 


r- ^ 



CN «H 


r- 

CN 

0 

m cn 

CN 


rH 



0 






rH 


CN 

rH 







0 
















05 

an 

0 

an 

r- 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

r- 

cn 

VO 

vo 

OOO 

OOO 


an 

H 

no 

0 

an 

O 


O 

O 

an 

on 

an 

an 0 0 0 

OOO 

0 ) 

an 

vO 

05 vo 


an 


O O 

vo 

r- 

•^T 

cn 

0 0 un 

OOO 

§ 

an 

r- 

r- 

<N 

vo' 

rH 



no 

co* 

vo 

un 

cn 

0 vo 

on un co 

n 


■^T 



<N 

rH 





CN 

0 

CN 

CN fN 












rH 


(N 

H 



cn 

an 

O 

an 

r- 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 


cn 


s 

OOOOOO 

CO 

an 

rH 

no 

0 

an 

O 


O 

O 

an 

on 

OOO 

OOO 
an un 0 


an 

vO 

05 

03 

rr 

an 


O 

O 

VO 

r- 


^7 

OOO 


an 



CN 

vo* 

rH 



no 

co 0 1 

an 

rH 

0 an vo 

CO ^7 CN 

<s 

r- 




<N 

rH 




r-* 

CN 

0 


H CN 


E 










rH 


CN 

iH 




O 

on 


unounr-ooooo 
H m o un O OO 

on vo on vo ^7 un oo 

^ o h m 

r- rr cn rH 


r- cn 
on cn 
vo r- 

co vo* 
r- cm 


VO 
l n 

in 

o 

CN 


in 

xJ 

C 


S3 

U1 

a 



U) 

4J 

w 

a 

XJ 

U 

0) 

w 


a a) 

a a 


a gj 

a 2 


>0000000 
i7ioooooo 
o o ld o in o 


in r~ to o <n m 

■<=■ *-l CM 



162 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 


'total Revenue: 205,466 205,456 205,456 205,456 205,456 205,456 2,393,992 


NE71' Fourth Year Projections 
(Quarterly Distribution) 


OOOOOOOOO 
OOOOOO OO 
OOOOOO OO 


o o 
o o 

O CM 


0 0 0 0^*0 
O O CD U*) N l/1 
o o cn r— ( 


GO MO 


CD CO 
CO cm 


O 

o 

cm 


mo 
*— < 
un 


o o o o o o o 
o o o o o o o 
o o o o o o o 


o o o o o o o 
lC O O O O O 
i — ■ c~ o co ^ 


o 

o 

O 


o 

o 

CD 


O 

O 






CD 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 


o 

o 

o 

lH 

l n 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

lC 

o 

lO 


o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

sjn 

o 

o 

lC 

o 

o 

o 

lC 

o 

o 

cm 

•-H 

p- 


cm 

o 

r- 

cm 

o' 

n** 

LC 

o 

CM 

LC 

ld 

lC 

cm 

un 

CM 


co 

m 


t— ( 


rr 

CO 

cm 

co 

c-* 

jn 

CM 

CM 

p- 

m 

cm 

1 

•— t 








lO 


mO 

pH 







o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

! 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 


o 

o 

cc 

lH 

*n 

s 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

U“> 

o 

lc 


o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

lT> 

o 

o 

o 

LO 

cT 

o 

cm 

«—< 



cm 

cn 


cm 

cn 


■J* 

o' 

CM 

lC 

■ ^ 

LC 

cm 

lD 

cm 

pH 

o 

m 


H 



CD 

cm 

co 


-*> 

CM 

CM 


cn 

cm 

— i 








LO 


o 


<—< 







o 

o 

o 


o 

^*5 

cK 

o 


o 

o 

o 


cn 


o 

rr 


cm 


o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o o o 

O 

o 

o 

o 


o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 


o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o o 

O 

1 o 

lC 

uC 

o 

o 


o 

o 

o 

o 8 

o 

LC 


o 

O 

o 

lC 

o 

lC O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

un 

o 

o 

-C 

o 

o 

o N 

o 

__c> 


LC 

o’ 

o' 

CM 


p- cm 

o 

p-v 

cm 

cn 


LC 

o 

CM 

•jn 

LC 

LC 

o' 

o 

V 

CM 

■ C 

CM 

r— 4 

CO 

cn 


rr 

CO 

cm 

CD 

p* 

■ c 

CM 

CM 

p- 

co 

; — 



CM 







l n 


MO 



«— f 





o 


pi 




















B 


V3 


o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o o o 

o 

o 

o 

o 











o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o o 

o 

o 

LC 

lC 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

=s= 

o 

O 

o 

-C 

o 

uC o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

un 

— 

*. 




■V 




«% 


un 

o 

o 

LC 

o 

o 

o 

o 

cc 

— 

LC 

O 

O 

CM 

f— J 

P- CM 

c\ 

p* 

CM 

C7> 

■* 

■» 

-. 







J(P 

CM 

LC 

CM 

fH 

co 

cn »— < 


^r 

CO 

CM 

p- 

1 

o 

CM 

lT 

LC 

Up 

o 

o 


CM 

r-M 






LO 


MO 

CD 

p-H 

un 

CM 

CM 

r- 

cn 















1—1 

<— H 





MO 




10 


o 

r-~4 


6 


O 

*m 

5 



a 

u 

« C 

c u: g 

& u 

u cj h a g 

-w to to u a 

> C J-3 ’*H -pH 

5 

4|P 

-C I-H r-4 
UrH fO 

U O > 
(0 CJ 
01 <0 


jJ fl) 

§ CHO ^ 

0) 0) *H 

w > u: i 
u u (t3 Jj W 



u: 

3 


jJ 

U 

oj 

ui 


P P 

f 1 Cju 




3 S 5 


*H CJ 

W 

C — < 

CJ 

3 > <T5 

u 

£ u o 



£ 

8 :55 '3 


VJ 


U 



a; 

u 


g 5 


!fi3 




ORIGINAL PAGE i3 
OF POOR QUALITY 




cm 

cn 

Cn 


CT\ 


•rH 

o 

JJ 

cn 

U 

on 

a; 

<— < 

■m 


o 


Ul 


a, 


-j 


A3 


0) 


>■ 


aj 

cn 

> 

o 

-r- < 

cn 

6k 

H 


o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o o 
o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

© 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

r— 1 

r— < 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

uD 

o 

o 

o 

o 

lO 

CO 

mo 

rr 

kO 

O 

- 

- - 


- 

’*■ 


* 

r** 

LO 

cn 

an 

an 


•c 

m 

f — 


CM 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

Q 

On 

a 







cn 

rr 




o 

o 

an 

an 

an 












m 

Cn 

CM 

T-i 

’—i 











CM 


-o 


























o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o o 



o 

O 

o 

O 


o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

CM 

CM 

o 

c 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 







o 

o 

<* 










o 

o 

© 

o 


o 



O 

CO 

MO 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

CO 

an 

CM 

an 

o 

MO 

CO 

CM 


an 

o 

o 

cn 

o 

o 

■c 

CTv 

mo 



cn 

r—i 


m 

«H 

m 

an 

c- 

C"~ 

o 


I— \ 

m 










CM 


CM 







! 

1 

o 

LO 

an 

o 

o o 

cn 

o ! 

CM 

O 

CM 

CM 

o 


o 

o 

o 

O 

! O' 

cn 


CO 

an 

o 

cn 

O 1 

cn 

MO 

On 

On 

o 


o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

s 


CM 

o 

o 

'C 

o 

r** 

CM 

cn 

■^r 

o 

o 

o 

o 

an 

o 


CM 

CM 


i — 

CO 

r- 

MO 


CM 

m 

O 

O' 

co 

m 

VC 



r-* 

l n 

O' 

m 

o 

cn 

■^r 

m 

CO 


© 

c— 

o 

MO 

MO 

O' 



CO 

lO 



cn 

rH 



o 

m 

m 

MO 

CM 

CM 













CM 


CM 

— < 







mo 

o 

o 


o 

o o 

MO 

O 

' MO 

e'- 

CM 

CM 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

Cn 

o 

TT 

en 


TT 

an 


an 

o 

o 

o 

MO 

MO 

f— i 

CM 

o 

an 

rr 

o 

MO 

<-< 

co 

an 

CM 

an 

o 

an 

o 

o 



















CM 

o 

o 

O 

r~ 

m 


MO 

rr 

an 

cn 


cn 


cn 

CO 

rr 

o 

MO 

CO 

co 

m 

MO 

cn 


cn 

m 

r— 

O 

an 

TT 

MO 




♦—4 

r- 




CM 

T- ♦ 



co 

CM 


on 















t—H 


CM 

rH 








O 

o 

o 

o 

L-n 

mo 


o 

o 

o 

o 

co 

o 


CN 

O' 

O' 

m 

cn 


cm 

rr 

co 


Cn 

o 


CM 


O 

O 

cn 

cn 

cm 

cm 


o 

o 

CO 


mo 


CO 

o 

cn 


mr-cncooMoOMOO 
l£) H -C'^ O ^ O O 

rHi-H^-HCNunm cn o 


p- on "«r cn cn 
o Lfl (N O 


Cn O' 


cn co 
CM mo 
on m 

LO 

CO —i 


CO 

CTv 

CO 

on 

Cn 

cm 


CO o o o o o o 

cn o 

CM MO 

- <-H 

o 

cn 

CM 


o 

cn 

co 

cn 

o^ 

CM 


IQ 

OJ 

C 

1 

<D 

r— ( 

C £2 

kJ 

to 

8 

kj 

O 

*m 

2 



u u fO -U -- 

£ 3 £ 8 £ 


u: 

8 

.u 

a 

w 

Q 


to 

to 

o 

CJ 


fill 


!— 

5 



to 


a> 

> 

g 


3 

8 


CO 

u 

c 

AJ 

r— 1 

3 


165 


PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 


ORIGINAL PAGE ?S 
OF POOR QUALITY 



NCT Fifth Year Projections 
(Quarterly Distribution) 


ooooooooo 
oooooo o o 

oooooo oo 

ifT O © O O in oo 

^ (T\ iO in p- 

d o p* 


o o o o o o o 

O o o o o o o 

o o o o o o o 

o o o o o o o 

n n O O n n n 


OOOOOOOOO 

m o o o o in oo 

> lo in in p' o o 

,*n N (N (N ! — m PJ CP 

c H (N H o C 1— ( 

PJ PJ ■—< 


o o o o o o o 

o o o o o o o 

in ns o © in in in 

p*' o' n r^r^r- 

CD “* C (N ^ 

<s r' i ~- i 


o 

o 

o 

O 

o o 

o 

o 

o 

n 

n 

o 

o 

o 

o 

n 

o 

o 

o 

pj 

PS 

in 

in 

n 

n 

p* 

o 

o 

n 

n 

O 

rs 

pi 

<NJ 

-C 

m 

PS 

CP 

; m 


n 

PJ 

CN 

f— i 

GO 

rH 


fH t 


1 'C 

t ^ 

— 4 

t-H 

n 

o 


o o o o o o o 
o o o o o o o 
n n o o in n n 

p^ p o' n r- r- p* 

co m O rM r~. O m 


ooooooooo 

in o o o o in o o 

p. n in in in p* o o 

m (N (N (N > ^ PJ © 

r: h (N h O ^ «H 

pj pj i— f 


O o o o o o o 
© © O © O Q © 
in in o o in o m 

p p o u^V > r~ 
o ^ O (N n c 


. ooooooooo 
ci nooooin 22 

E p. in in in in oo 

N N rs > N 

4_) H (N tH C5 ^ *"“• 

m <n pj ^ 


o o o o o o o 

o o o o o o o 

in in o o n m in 

f"’** p* o in p* p* 

C P O !N P O n 

rs m 


10 

a> ^ <u 


a a 3 3* u 
8.3 2: S. -5 
£ 

xJ OJ T] S 

ch -0 i jg 
01 <y ro OS 
u > V ^ ^ 
w iT3 xj w O O 

3S3£il 


0. 3 

5 $$ 

JZ f- 4 r-l 

u rj AS 

/a 8 
qj a; 
35 >, u 

«f3 

n a 'w 


> 

u 

c; a 


HZ ^ C 

o o a w 


.5i £ -5 

h i: j£ 

aw '- 


X? X w S- 1 «W 

w 5 ■-* c ^ 

fS w xJ - >-< ^ i*0 

5 U C ^ 3 2 

-juycjg.-g 

^ O 2 ■-< C 6 

o — * "5 - C a; 
w a 2 a u w 


ORIGINAL PAGE JS 

OF POOR QUALITY 



Bibliography 


Papers and Periodicals 

[1] Anderson, J.D., Perkins, J.A., Experience using an Automated Metrics 
Framework in the Review of Ada Source of 1175, Proceedings of the Sixth 
National Conference on Ada Technology, Arlington, VA, March 14-17, 1988, 
pp. 32-41. 

[2] Andrews, Timothy, 

[3] Bailin , S., The CTA Object-Oriented Development Facility , Abstract, Com- 
puter Technology Associates, Inc., Laurel, MD. 

[4] Bailin, S., Moore, J., An Object-Oriented Specification Method for Ada, Ex- 
tended Abstract, Computer Technology Associates, Inc., Laurel, MD. 

[5] Bailin, S., Informal Rigor: A Practical Approach to Software Reuse, Com- 
puter Technology Associates, Inc., Laurel, MD. 

[6] Bailin, S., Moore, J., A Software Reuse Environment, Computer Technology 
Associates, Inc., Laurel, MD. 

[7] Bailin, S., An Automated Quality .4s.sessor For Ada Object-Oriented De- 
signs, Computer Technology Associates, Inc., Laurel. MD. 

[8] Basili, V.R., Rombach, H.D., TAME: Tailoring an Ada Measurement Envi- 
ronment, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 
1987, pp. 318-325. 

[9] Brykczynski, Bill R., Preliminary Version: Ada/SQL: >1 Standard, Portable 
Ada- DBMS Interface, IDA Paper P-1944. IDA Log No. HQ 86-31239, Institute 
for Defense Analyses, April 1987. 


167 


ORIGINAL PAGE fS 
OF POOR QUALITY 


[10] Brykczynski, Bill R., Methods of Binding Ada to SQL: .4 General Discussion, 

Institute for Defense Analysis Paper. 

[11] Burton, B.A., Aragon, R.W., Bailey, S.A., Koehler, K.D., Mayes, L.A., The 
Reusabile Software Library, IEEE Software, July 1987, pp. 25-32. 

[12] Carney, David, Software Methodology and the AIE Program, Library, Ada 
Companion Series, Ada: Managing the Transition, Proceedings of the Ada- 
Europe International Conference, Edinburgh , May 6-8, 1986. 

[13] Chen, P.P, The Entity- Relationship Model-Toward a Unified View of Data, 
Transactions on Data Base Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, March 1976. pp. 166-193. 

[14] Conn, R., The Ada Software Repository and Software Reusability, Proceed- 
ings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 45-53. 

[15] Conn, R. (Editor), Ada Software Repository Newsletter, Management Assis- 
tance Corporation of America, issue 103, January - February 1988. 

[16] Conn, R., The Ada Software Repository (ASR) on Simtel 20, Ada- 
JUG/SigAda, March 1988. 

[17] Conti, R.A., Critical Run-Time Design Tradeoffs in an Ada Implementation, 
Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 
486-495. 

[18] Crawford, R.G., Becker, H.S., A Novice User’s Interface to Information Re- 

trieval Systems, Application Processing and Management, vol. 22, no. 4, 1986, 
pp. 287-298.; - - 

[19] Dausmann, M., Library Structures for Reusable Components, ACM SIGAda 
International Conference, Boston , MA . December 1987 , pp. 226-235. 

[20] Delaney, R.P., Summeriil, L.F., Ada Software Metrics, Proceedings of the Sixth 
National Conference on Ada Technology, Arlington, VA, March 14-17, 1988, pp. 
24-31. 

[21] Dobbins, G.L., Szarek, V.E., Webster, W.H., An Ada/ Prolog Database Man- 
agement System for Ada Source Code, Third Annual Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence & Ada, Washington Dulles Ramada Renaissance Hotel, Herndon, 
VA, October 1987, pp. 23-39. 


168 


esp l 


ORIGINAL PAG" IS 

OF POOR QUALITY 


[22] El-Ghoroury, H., LaBarbera, P.R.. Bollenbacher, J., Software Portability in 
Embedded , Distributed Systems, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, 
Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 420-431. 

[23] Freeman, P., A Perspective on Reusability, Computer Society Press of the 
IEEE, Washington, D.C., December 1986, pp. 2-9. 

[24] Freeman, P., Reusable Software Engineering: Concepts and Research Direc- 
tions, ITT Proceedings of the Workshop on Reusability in Programming, 1983, 

pp. 2-16. 

[25] Goel, A., Wong, E., Evaluation of Existing Benchmark Suites for Ada, Pro- 
ceedings of the Sixth National Conference on Ada Technology, Arlington, VA, 
March 14-17, 1988, pp. 42-48. 

[26] Goguen, J., Reusing and Interconnecting Software Components, IEEE Com- 
puter, February, 1986, pp. 16-28. 

[27] Gorzela, R.S., Perkins, J.A., Experience Using an Automated Metrics Frame- 
work to Improve the Quality of Ada Software, Proceedings of the Joint Ada 
Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 277-284. 

[28] Harrison, C., An Automated Method of Referencing Ada Reusable Code Using 
LIL, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, 
pp. 1-7. 

[29] Hendler, J.A., Wong, Y.C., AIRS: An Al-based Ada Reuse Tool, Third An- 
nual Conference on Artificial Intelligence & Ada, Washington Dulles Ramada 
Renaissance Hotel, Herndon, VA, October 1987, pp. 1-22. 

[30] Horowitz, E., Munson, J.B., An Expansive View of Reusable Software, IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering September 1984, pp. 477-487. 

[31] Hulkkonen, T.O., Software Component Library, Ada Companion Series, Ada: 
Managing the Transition, Proceedings of the Ada- Europe International Confer- 
ence, Edinburgh, May 4-6, 1986. 

[32] Ichbiah, J.D., On the Design of Ada, Information Processing 83, Edited by 
R.E.A. Mason, 1983, pp. 1-10. 


169 


original page is 

of POOR QUALITY 


[33] Jones, T.C., Reusability in Programming: .4 Survey of the State of the .4r£, 

IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, September 1984, pp. 488-494. 

[34] Lanergan, R.G., Grasso, C.A., Software Engineering with Reusable Designs 
and Code, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, September 1984, pp. 
498-501. 

[35] Leach, R.J., Ada Software Metrics and Their Limitations, Proceedings of the 
Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 285-293. 

[36] McKay, C .W., A Position Paper: The Need to Advance Beyond the Rela- 
tional Data Model and SQL, 1988. 

[37] McKay, C.W., A Proposed Framework for the Tools and Rules to Support 
the Life Cycle of the Space Station Program, IEEE, 1987. 

[38] McKay, C.W., Technical Issues: Software Trade-off Considerations for Run 
Time Risk Management in Target Environments, NSIA Conference, 1987. 

[39] Muser, D.R., Stepanov, A. A., A Library of Generic Algorithms in Ada, ACM 
SIGAda International Conference, Boston, MA, December 1987, pp. 216-225. 

[40] Narfelt, K., SCHEF5TROM, D., Extending the Scope of the Program Library, 
Ada Companion Series, Ada In Use, Proceedings of the Ada International Con- 
ference, Paris, May 14-16, 1985. 

[41] Olsen, R., Manufacturing Strategies for the 1990’s, Conference Proceedings, 
Presented at James Madison University, 21-22 March 1988. 

[42] Owen, G.S., Gagliano, R., Honkanen, P., Functional Specifications of Reusable 
MIS Software in Ada , Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, 
DC, March 1987, pp. 19-26. 

[43] Parnas, D.L., Clements, P.C., Weiss, D.M., Enhancing Reusability with Infor- 
mation Hiding, ITT Proceedings of the Workshop on Reusability in Program- 
ming, 1983, pp. 72-76. 

[44] Perlman, G., User Interface Development, SEI Curriculum Module SEI-CM- 
17-1.0, Carnegie Mellon University, Software Engineering Institute, Draft for 
Public Review, April 1988. 


170 


[45] Potosnak, K., (Editor, The Koffler Group), Do icons make user interfaces 
easier to use?, HUMAN FACTORS, May, 1988, pp. 97- 

[46] Poutanen, 0., Notes on Building a Relational Database Management System 
in Ada, Ada Companion Series, Ada in Use, Proceedings of the Ada Inter- 
national Conference, Paris, May 14-16, 1985. 

[47] Preston, D., Nyberg, K. Mathis, R., .4n Investigation into the Compatibility 
of Ada and Formal Verification Technology, Proceedings of the Sixth National 
Conference on Ada Technology, Arlington, VA, March 14-17, 1988, pp. 13-23. 

[48] Prieto-Diaz, R., Freeman, P., Classifying Software for Reusability, IEEE Soft- 
ware, January 1987, pp. 6-16. 

[49] Prieto-Diaz, R., Domain Analysis for Reusability, Proceedings of the COMP- 
SAC 87, Tokyo, Japan, October 1987. 

[50] Prieto-Diaz, R., Jones, G. A., Breathing Neut Life into Old Software, GTE 

Journal, pp. 22-31. 

[51] Prieto-Diaz, R., Faceted Classifications and Reuse Across Domains, Abstract. 

[52] Radi, T.S., TestGen - Testing Tool for Ada Designs and Ada Code, Pro- 
ceedings of the Sixth National Conference on Ada Technology (Sponsored by: 
United States Army, United States Navey, United States Air Force, United 
States Marine Corps, Ada Joint Program Office). Arlington, VA, March 14-17, 

1988, pp. 1-6. 

[53] Rice, J.R., Schwetman, H.D., Interface Issues in a Software Parts Technol- 
ogy, ITT Proceedings of the Workshop on Reusability in Programming, 1983, 
pp. 129-137. 

[54] Rogers, P., A Taxonomy for Ada Software Components, Master s Thesis, 
University of Houston at Clear Lake, December 1987. 

[55] Russell, G., Experiences Implementing a Reusable Data Structure Compo- 
nent Taxonomy, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, 
March 1987, pp. 8-18. 

[56] Selby, R.W., Incorporating Metrics into a Software Environment, Proceed- 
ings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 326-333. 


Ill 



[57] Sivley, K.E., Experience and Lessons Learned in Transporting Ada Software, 
Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC. March 1987, pp. 
436-440. 

[58] Slonaker, P., Prizant, S., Smith, M.S., Giles, J., Development of Multi-Tasking 
Software in Ada- A Case Study, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, 
Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 304-317. 

[59] Smith, J. M., Chan, A., Danberg, S., Fox S., Nori A., .4 Tool Kit for Database 
Programming in Ada, Ada Companion Series, Ada in Use, Proceedings of the 
Ada International Conference, Paris, France, May 1985. 

[60] Tauson-Conte, H.J., Ada Complexity Extension (ACE) .4n Extension of Mc- 
Cabe’s Cyclomatic Complexity Metric for Analysis of Ada Software, Pro- 
ceedings of the Sixth National Conference on Ada Technology. Arlington, VA, 
March 14-17, 1988, pp. 7-12. 

[61] Tracz, W., Ada Reusability Efforts: A Survey of the State of the Practice, 
Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC. March 1987, pp. 
35-44. 

|62] Vbase: Technical Overview, a publication by Ontologic, Inc. for Vbase release 
version 0.8, March 6, 1987. 

[63] Vizard, M., Battle of the Network Protocols, Digital Review, August 24, 1987, 
pp. 73-74. 

[64] Vizard, M., OSI Gains Momentum in Protocol Struggle, Digital Review, Au- 
gust 24, 1987, pg. 75. 

[65] Wagner, P., Varieties of Reusability, ITT Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Reusability in Programming, 1983, pp. 30-44. 

[66] Walker, J.E., Skyles, S.D., Gi lliam, P.U., .4 Practical Experience with Ada 
Portability, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 
1987. pp. 432-435, 

[67] Wolf, A.L., Clarke, L.A., Wileden, J.C., Ada-Based Support for Programming 
in-the-Large, IEEE Software, March 1985. pp. 58-71. 


172 



[68] Woodfield, S.N., Embley, D.W., *4 K nowledge Structure far Reusing Abstract 
Data Types in Ada Software Production, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Con- 
ference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 27-34. 

[69] Wu, L., Basili, V.R., Reed, K., A Structure Coverage Tool for Ada Software 
Systems, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 
1987, pp. 294-303. 

[70] Yoelle, S.M., Kaiser, G.E., Using Conceptual Clustering for Classifying 
Reusable Ada Code, ACM SIGAda International Conference, Boston. MA, De- 
cember 1987, pp. 208-215. 



Books 


[71] Booch, Grady, Software Engineering With Ada, 2nd Edition , The 

Benjamin/Cummings Series in Ada and Software Engineering, Ben- 
jamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA, 1986. 

[72] Booch, Grady, Software Components With Ada, The Benjamin/Cummings 
Series in Ada and Software Engineering, Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, 
CA, 1987. 

[73] Conn, R., The Ada Software Repository and the Defense Data Network: A 
Resource Handbook, New York Zoetrope, New York, NY, 1987. 

[74] , COSMIC, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 1988. 

[75] General Electric Company, Corporate Information Systems, Software Engineer- 
ing Handbook, McGraw-Hill Series in Software Engineering and Technology, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1986. 

[76] Kernighan and Pike The UNIX Programming Environment 

[77] Kiger, J.I., The Depth/Breadth Trade-off in the Design of Menu- Driven User 
Interfaces. 

[78] Matsumoto, Y., A Software Factory: An Overall Approach to Software Pro- 
duction, Computer Society Press of the IEEE, Washington, D C., December 

1986, pp. 155-178. 

[79] Nissen, J., Wallis, P., Portability and Style in Ada, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1984. 

[80] Shneiderman, B., Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective 

Human- Computer Interaction, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, MA, 

1987. 

[81] Integration and Pagination: Long Documents, Proposals, Books, Seybold 
Rep. Publ. Syst., April 1987. 



Standards and Government Documents 


[82] , Standard for Electronic Manuscript Preparation and Markup, Electronic 
Manuscript Series, Association of American Publishers, Washington, D.C., 
February 1986. 

[83] Reference Manual for the Ada Programming Language, ANSI/ MIL- STD- 
1815A-1983, American National Standards Institute, Inc., New York, 1983. 

[84] SQL Standard American National Standards Institute, Inc., New York, 198 

[85] Distributed Computing Design System - .4 Technical Overview, CDRL B003, 
25 July 1987. 

[86] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Methodology Guide (Ada 
Version), CDRL A008, October 1987. 

[87] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Tool User's Guide (Ada 
Version), Draft, CDRL B006, May 1987. 

[88] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Tool User’s Guide (Ada 
Version), CDRL B006, October 1987. 

[89] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Methodology Guide (Ada 
Version) Appendices, CDRL A008, October 1987. 

[90] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Tools User’s Guide (Ada 
Version) Appendices, CDRL B006, October 1987. 

[91] Defense System Software Development, Military Standard, DOD-STD-2167, 
AMSC NO. N3608, AREA MCCR, June 1985. 

[92] Version Description Document for the Missile Software Parts of the Com- 
mon Ada Missile Packages (CAMP), October 1987. 


175 







