AN EXPERT SYSTEM FOR DIAGNOSING ANOMALIES OF SPACECRAFT 


Michael Lauriente, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Code 400 


Greenbelt, Maryland 20771 


N95- 23684 


Rick Durand and A1 Vampola, University Research Foundation 
Greenbelt, Maryland 20771 


Harry C. Koons and David Gorney, The Aerospace Corporation, P.O. Box 92957 

Los Angeles, CA 90009 


Telephone (301)286-5690, Fax (301)286-1742 
E-Mail Address: lauriente@envnet.gsfc.nasa.gov 


KEY WORDS AND PRASES 

Artificial Intelligence, rule-based expert system, 
spacecraft anomalies, space environment interactions 

INTRODUCTION 

Although the analysis of anomalous behavior of sat- 
ellites is difficult because it is a very complex process, it is 
important to be able to make an accurate assessment in a 
timely manner when the anomaly is observed. Spacecraft 
operators may have to take corrective action or to “safe” the 
spacecraft, space-environment forecasters may have to 
assess the environmental situation and issue warnings and 
alerts regarding hazardous conditions, and scientists and 
engineers may want to gain knowledge for future designs to 


Figure 1. Expert System Architecture. 


mitigate the problems. Anomalies can be hardware prob- 
lems, software errors, environmentally induced, or even 
the cause of workmanship. Spacecraft anomalies attrib- 
utable to electrostatic discharges have been known to 
cause command errors. A goal is to develop an auto- 
mated system based on this concept to reduce the number 
of personnel required to operate large programs or mis- 
sions such as Hubble Space Telescope (HST) and Mis- 
sion to Planet Earth (MTPE). Although expert systems 
to detect anomalous behavior of satellites during opera- 
tions are established, diagnosis of the anomaly is a 
complex procedure and is a new development. 

DESCRIPTION 

The tool that is being proposed is a rule-based on- 
line expert system for diagnosing in-flight 
spacecraft anomalies that has the future of 
simplifying the complex task of analyzing 
spacecraft anomalies. It uses heuristics in 
addition to algorithms which allow approxi- 
mate reasoning and inference and has the abil- 
ity to attack problems not rigidly defined. The 
expert system provides scientists with needed 
risk analysis and confidence not found in the 
usual programs. The system currently runs on 
an IBM RISC 6000 at Goddard Space Flight 
Center (GSFC). The inference engine used is NASA’s C 
Language Integrated Production System (CLIPS). 1,2 A 
window implementation makes it a more effective tool. 

The architecture of the system is shown in Figure 
1. The real time link shown is an option available to 


Realtime Data 


Spacecraft 

Attributes 

Database 


Spacecraft 

Anomaly 

Database 


Space 

Environment 

Database 


Knowledge 

Base 


Interface 1 

Driver/Screen Manager 1 




SAMS 1 

Spacecraft Anomalies System 1 


Data Access Procedures 


CLIPS 

Forward Chaining 
Interface Engine 


I 

I Output 
Probability Analysis 


63 

PREL'. ; , NOT FILM*:'" 


n 




Seasonal Distribution of GOES Anomalies 



Jan Fab Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sap Oct Nov Dac 
Month 


Figure 2. Seasonal distribution of GOES anomalies 

collect quasi-real time satellite broadcasts by NOAA's 
Space Environments Services Center (SESC) in Boul- 
der, Colorado. Also available is an option to link up with 
the interactive space modeling facilities at EnviroNET. 3 
The interface driver shown provides a graphing capabil- 
ity. An example is the seasonal distribution of all the 
GOES spacecraft anomalies as shown in Figure 2, plot- 
ted from data in the Spacecraft Anomaly Database using 
IDL™ graphics. 4 This file was provided by NOAA’s 
National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC). Phantom 
command anomalies show a bimodal distribution by 
season. The other anomalies do not. As the phantom 
commands have been correlated to substorms, it follows 
that phantom commands also exhibit a seasonal trend. 

Figure 3 is a plot of the local time-observed anoma- 
lies for the GOES spacecraft. The clustering of phantom 


Local Time Distribution of GOES Anomalies 



01 03 05 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 

Local Time 


Figure 3. Local-time distribution of GOES anomalies 

commands shows the extent of the particle injection and 
the subsequent discharging due to high surface potentials. 

The block shown as SAMS in Figure 1 was devel- 
oped by NGDC as a utility to provide a full range of 
functions for managing, displaying and analyzing data, 
including functions to examine single anomalies or sets 
of anomalies for environmental relations. Histograms of 
local time and seasonal occurrence frequency provided 
by this utility can reveal distinct patterns for spacecraft 
which are susceptible to static charge buildup and elec- 
trostatic discharge. 

Over 300 events are in the database going back to 
1971. The contributions to this database were made by 
cooperation on a world- wide scale and 80 per cent of the 
spacecraft are at geosynchronous orbit. The four data- 
bases shown represent different techniques for storing 


RULE 201 

SUBJECT : : BULK CHARGING-RULES 
DESCRIPTION : : (recurs when fluence high) 

If 1 ) the recurrence of the anomaly, and 

2) the recurrence is of HIGH_PENETRATING-FLUX, and 

3) 1 ) the seven-day accumulated fluence of penetrating electrons is HIGH, or 

2) the seven-day accumulated fluence of penetrating electrons is VERY_HIGH, 

Then there is suggestive evidence (60%) that the cause of the anomaly is BULK_CHARGING 

IF (RECURRENCE AND PERIODICITY = OF_HIGH- PENETRATING.FLUXAND 

(ACCUM.FLUEN = HIGH OR ACCUM_FLUEN = VERY_HIGH) ) 

THEN : : (CAUSE = BULK_CHARGING CF 60) 

BliLEJLlQ 

SUBJECT : : TOT AL_DOS E-RULES 

DESCRIPTION : : (Local time recurrence rules out total radiation dose.) 

If 1) the recurrence of the anomaly, and 

2) the recurrence of an anomaly in a specific local-time sector, 

Then it is definite (100%) that the cause of the anomaly is not TOTAL_DOSE. 

IF : (RECURRENCE AND LT.RECUR 

THEN : : (CAUSE ! = TOTAL.DOSE) 


Figure 4. Rule Format 


64 




Spacecraft Environmental Anomalies 


Select all of the types of problems that arc associated 

with this anomaly: 


Yes 


o 

PHANTOM COMMAND 

o 

LOOT UPSET 

o 

ELECTRICAL 

o 

MECHANTAT^^^^ 

<> 


o 

SOFTWARE 

<> 

MEMORY 

o 

THERMAL 

o 

PART FAILURE 

<> 

TELEMETRY ERROR 

o 

SYSTEM FAILURE 

o 

MESON FAUJRE 

<> 

OTHER 


Figure 5. Expert system query screen 


and accessing data. The architecture of the system was 
designed to emulate the way the user normally looks at 
data to diagnose anomalies. The expert system not only 
consolidates expertise in a uniform, objective, and logi- 
cal way, but it also offers “smart” ways of accessing 
various databases which are transparent to the user. 
Then by applying various rules in its knowledge base, 
the system is queried, as appropriate, to arrive at a 
conclusion. The current development of the system is 
able to attribute the causes of satellite anomalies to one 
of several possible categories, including surface charg- 
ing, bulk charging, single event upsets (SEUs), and total 
radiation dose. The architecture is such that other causes 
could be added if a satisfactory rule base were devel- 
oped. The rule base includes the expert system rules that 
will be “fired” under control of the inference engine. The 
rules are entered in a defined “if-then” format as shown 
in Figure 4. The user interface links to databases which 
include past environmental data, satellite data and known 
anomalies. 

The knowledge base consists of over 200 rules and 


provides links to historical and environmental data- 
bases. Unlike its algorithmic predecessors, it can be 
flexible in the way it attacks complex problems. The 
system output was verified by referring to historical case 
studies and historical databases. 

The anomaly database is an ASCII file provided by 
the NGDC which contains information on approxi- 
mately 300 historical anomalies. Figure 5 is a listing of 
the types of problems considered for anomalous behav- 
ior. The attributes database is an ASCII file for launch 
and orbital information on satellites as shown in Figure 
6 is an abbreviated format. The actual listing has 35 
satellites. 

The environment database is an ASCII text file of 
the historical record of the geophysical parameter known 
as Kp, the planetary magnetic index, used to estimate the 
severity of magnetic storms within the Earth’ s magneto- 
sphere. The solar flare database is an ASCII data file on 
the date and time-of-occurrence of X-class solar x-rays 
These files are accessed by a C-language interface be- 
tween the expert system and the ASCII file. 

The Attributes Database is an ASCII file for launch 
and orbital information on satellites. It is possible to 
anticipate anomalies based on particular orbits. These 
probable causes have been summarized for classes of 
orbits in the tutorial paper on spacecraft anomalies. 5 
These probable causes are also covered by rules and facts 
in the Knowledge Base. 

FUTURE WORK 

The graphical outputs of the Anomaly Database 
were used as illustrations merely to make the point that 
these fact resources are readily accessed. They lend to 
the tool an advantage for analyzing and interpreting 
large data sets. The development of the engine or driver 
is considered adequate for the task. The fact base and 


NAME 

INCLINATION 

APOGEE 

PERIGEE 

LONGITUDE 

LAUNCH DATE 

SAMPEX 

82° 

520 km 

670 km 

-1° 

07/03/92 

UARS 

57.0 

579 

573 

-1 

09/15/91 

TOMS 

82.6 

1203 

1185 

-1 

08/15/91 

TDRS 5 

0.0 

35805 

35774 

-1 

08/02/91 

TDRS 1 

1.4 

35798 

35785 

-1 

04/05/83 


Figure 6: Launch and orbital information for satellites contained in the database 


65 





knowledge base, on the other hand, need to be expanded. 
The correlation of cause and effects of solar terrestrial 
effects is a young science. Enough evidence has been 
collected by NOAA’s NGDC that these environmental 
effects need to be considered as serious. 6 Workshops and 
special publications that update our knowledge on these 
environmental interactions should be used as resources 
for the knowledge base. New frames are also needed. 
Orbital debris has been recognized as a threat and algo- 
rithms exist that are easily accommodated by the expert 
system. Scintillation related to noisy telemetry links and 
commanding errors are also candidates to be considered 
ionospheric. 7 The facility has been improved by the 
speed of the IBM RISC 6000, and with the use of X 
Windows, the system will also be enhanced. The Space- 
craft Attributes Database does not presently contain 
information on electrical parts which is certainly an area 
that needs pursuing. 

A new initiative under study is a spin-off expert 
system for diagnosing anomalies during the early phase 
of the spacecraft life. The present operation depends on 
a contingency manual for guidance when anomalies 
occur. This expert system is an ideal candidate to host a 
“lessons learned” archive to improve on the facilities 
now available to ground operators. 

Wilkinson has found a solar cycle dependence for 
SEUs on the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS- 
l),which are caused by cosmic rays. 6 Anomalously high 
rates of SEUs were correlated with solar flares. We are 
now collecting SEU data from the Total Ozone Mapping 
Spectrometer (TOMS) and the Solar, Anomalous, and 
Magnetospheric Particle Explorer (S AMPEX) satellites 
in acooperative effort with NOAA. According to NOAA's 
Joe Allen, every satellite is a potential monitor of the 
space environment. 8 By continuing to study the SEUs of 
spacecraft in different orbits, we hope to get a better 
understanding of the anomalous behavior of spacecraft 
for incorporation into the rules of the expert system. 

The incorporation of real-time or near real-time 
data would permit a much more efficient resolution of 
the causes of satellite anomalies . For this to be achieved, 
major interagency cooperation will be needed. A long 
range goal is to reduce the number of personnel needed 
to monitor and control the large NASA missions. The 
present development can be incorporated as a baseline 
for subsystem for ground operators. The implementa- 
tion of this concept will hold great promise for reducing 
cost of operations throughout NASA. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We have been fortunate enough to receive out- 
standing support through a cooperative agreement with 
the University Research Foundation by Chris 
O'Callaghan, John Ruby, Tom Wehrung, Mark Rolincik, 
and Peter Messore, who are students. We are indebted to 
the staff of NASA Johnson Space Center's AI Labora- 
tory for their cooperation in the use of CLIPS. The 
technical discussions with Dan Wilkinson and Dr. Joe H. 
Allen at NOAA were very helpful. 

REFERENCES 

[1] Giarratano, J. C. (1989, May). “Artificial Intelli- 
gence Section,” CLIPS User’s Guide, Version 4.3 of CLIPS, 
Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. 

[2] Rolinick, Marie; Lauriente, Michael; Koons, Harry, 
C.; Gomey, David; “An On-Line Expert System For Diag- 
nosing Environmentally Induced Spacecraft Anomalies Using 
Clips,” NASA Conference Publication 3187, SOAR ‘92 
Vol.l. 

[3] Lauriente, Michael, “An On-Line Spacecraft Envi- 
ronment Interactions Information System, J. Spacecraft and 
Rockets, 31, No. 2, Mar- Apr 1994. 

[4] Wilkinson, Daniel C., “National Oceanic and At- 
mospheric Administration’s Spacecraft Anomaly Database 
and Examples of Solar Activity Affecting Spacecraft,” J. 
Spacecraft and Rockets, 31. No. 2, Mar- Apr 1994. 

[5] Vampola, A.L. "Environmentally Included Space- 
craft Anomaly Analysis," Spacecraft and Rockets, 3 1 , No. 2, 
Mar-Apr 1994 

[6] Wilkinson, Daniel C. , TDRS- 1 Single Event Upsets 
And The Effect Of The Space Environment,” IEEE Transac- 
tions on Nuclear Science, Vol. 38, No. 6, Dec., 1991. 

[7] Koons, H. C., and Gomey, D. J., “Spacecraft 
Environmental Anomalies Expert System,” J. Spacecraft 
and Rockets, 31. No.2, Mar-Apr 1994. 

[8] Allen, Joe, Private Communication, May 1989 


66 



