rv^sA rM- 


NASA Technical Memorandum 82799 NASA-TM-82799 19820014512 


Ultrasonic Scanning System for Imaging 
Flaw Growth in Composites 


Louis J. Kiraly and Erwin H. Meyn 
Lems Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 




AUG I 0 l9o6 


LANOLtV Hi h; :V;m CtNihR 
^ H/WnON. VlrtGi-NlA 


Prepared for the 

Twenty-eighth International Instrumentation Symposium 
sponsored by the Instrument Society of America 
Las Vegas, Nevada, May 3-6, 1982 


fVI/\SA 



E-1138 


ULTRASONIC SCANNING SYSTEM FOR IMAGING 
FLAW GROWTH IN COMPOSITES 


Louis J. Kiraly and Erwin H. Meyn 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 


ABSTRACT 

A unique system for measuring and visually re- 
presenting damage in composite specimens while 
they are being loaded has recently been demon- 
strated at the NASA Lewis Research Center. It 
uses a hobbiest grade microcomputer system to 
control data taking and image processing. The 
system scans operator-selected regions of the 
specimen while it is under load in a tensile 
test machine and measures internal damage by 
the attenuation of a 2.5 MHz ultrasonic beam 
passed through the specimen. The microcomputer 
dynamically controls the position of ultrasonic 
transducers mounted on a two-axis motor-driven 
carriage. As many as 65,536 samples can be taken 
and filed on a floppy disk system in less than 
four minutes. As the specimen is scanned, a 16 
level gray scale image is developed and displayed 
on a CRT. This image may be recalled later and 
can be enhanced in various ways or 'zoomed-in' on 
specific features. Many images may be stored in 
sequence as the load on the specimen is in- 
creased, and a movie showing flaw growth as a 
function of tensile loading can be generated. 

INTRODUCTION 

Multilayer fiber composite materials develop com- 
plex damage zones prior to fiber fracture. This 
damage principally consists of matrix cracking 
and interply delaminations. The determination of 
damage patterns is important in developing an 
understanding of the fracture process and to the 
subsequent development of a capability for pre- 
diction of the failure process. Initial predic- 
tions have been made but have not been fully 
verified experimentally. 

A system was designed which could monitor the 
initiation and progression of local damage pat- 
terns in composite specimens under tensile 
loads. A fixture for holding composite specimens 
while they are immersed in a tank of propylene 
glycol and loaded by a 100,000 pound te'nsile test 
machine was developed and is shown in Figures 1 
and 2. A scanning system to measure and display 
damage patterns as they develop during incre- 
mental loading was constructed using an 8080 
based hobbiest grade microcomputer and mis- 
cellaneous equipment. Damage, as determined by 
the attenuation of ultrasound passed through the 


specimen, can be displayed in real time in 
sixteen levels of gray on a CRT and stored as 
either single images or as a series of images. 

The microcomputer system shown in Figure 3 was 
interfaced to a two-axis motor-driven carriage 
and an ultrasonic transducer signal conditioning 
system. The microcomputer controls and monitors 
carriage position. Selected areas of the corrv- 
posite specimen are scanned with focused-beam 
ultrasonic transducers mounted on the carriage. 
During data taking, the microcomputer continuous- 
ly samples transducer output and processes the 
data for display. The sampled data can also be 
stored to a floppy disk and played back later 
with image enhancement. The goal is to use this 
system to develop 'motion' pictures of the flaw 
growth within the specimen as a function of the 
tensile loading. 

The purpose of this paper is to describe the 
hardware and software systems which have been 
developed to make these measurements. The flaw 
growth research program for which the system will 
be used will be described by the system users at 
some later date. However, some preliminary re- 
sults are briefly described to highlight various 
aspects of the design approach and to demonstrate 
some features of the system. 

SYSTEM CONCEPT 

Design objectives included a versatile low-cost 
system which could be easily used by non- 
programmers and could be readily interfaced to 
existing equipment. Other design objectives 
were: selective scanning of different regions of 
varying size and location on the specimen, CRT 
imaging of of the scan data and control of its 
presentation, and post-test image processing and 
playback. 

To meet these objectives a microcomputer system 
was chosen to control very general hardware 
interfaces, and software was used to perform most 
of the control and data processing. Most of the 
software is in 8080 assembly code and is gen- 
erally invisible to the operator. The operator's 
interface to the system is through programs coded 
in the BASIC language. The operator simply runs 
the BASIC programs and answers a variety of 
questions posed by the system. Responses to 


/V ~ ^ ^ ^ 


these questions set up operating modes for data 
taking and image presentation. These modes are 
communicated to the assembly coded routines by 
writing parameters to specific memory locations 
as part of the BASIC programming. When all of 
the control parameters have been set up in this 
way, the BASIC program calls the appropriate 
assembly coded routines which process and display 
the scan data. At the completion of a scanning 
operation, control returns to the calling BASIC 
program and the operator is asked how he would 
like to proceed. 

Individual images generated by the scanning 
procedure consist of as many as 65,536 pixels in 
a 256 X 256 format. Data for these images are 
stored on a floppy disk as a set of normalized 
eight bit words for each pixel. All data from 
the two-axis motorized carriage and the ultra- 
sonic transducer are taken with a twelve bit 
analog to digital converter and then normalized 
in various mode dependent ways to eight bit 
words. A short header consisting of test setup 
parameters which descrbe the test conditions is 
stored along with a continous stream of trans- 
ducer output data onto the floppy disk. Data 
taken from the potentiometers that measure car- 
riage position are used only for control and are 
not stored. Five fully developed 65,536 pixel 
images can be stored on a disk. 

The motorized carriage is positioned by lead- 
screw drive systems. A stepper motor horizon- 
tally positions the carriage, while a reversible 
direct current (DC) motor positions the carriage 
vertically. The motorized carriage is shown most 
clearly in Figure 5. 

Data are taken during the vertical scans. After 
each vertical scan, the horizontal drive is 
stepped to the next scanning position. The data 
are generally taken bi-directionally with each 
stroke and return stroke of the DC motor driven 
carriage. The horizontal stepper indexes the 
carriage before the DC motor can reverse and scan 
the next vertical region. The speed of the over- 
all data taking and imaging process is limited by 
the speed of the DC scanning drive. The vertical 
scanning is generally run as fast as possible 
considering the region to be scanned, the iner- 
tial loadings on the drive, the possibility of 
splashing the propylene glycol, and the limits on 
reversing currents generated by the DC motor 
controller. 

Linear potentiometers on the horizontal and 
vertical drive carriages provide analog signals 
proportional to the carriage positions. These 
signals are multiplexed and digitized by an 
analog to digital converter. A horizontal drive 
measurement is made only at the start of a data 
taking sequence to center the horizontal drive in 
the region of interest. Then, operator-entered 
parameters are used to calculate how many steps 
the drive should make between vertical scans. 

The number of steps depends upon the size of the 
region to be examined, selected horizontal to 
vertical image scaling factors, and the number 
of vertical scans desired. After the number of 
steps is determined, the horizontal drive is 
positioned to its leftmost extent and the data 


taking sequence is started. The horizontal drive 
then indexes the carriage from left to right 
until all of the data are taken. 

As data are taken, the carriage vertical position 
is repeatedly measured with the analog to digital 
converter in an assembly code program loop. Once 
the carriage has reached a pre-defined sampling 
position, transducer data are taken, normalized, 
stored and then displayed on the CRT in accord- 
ance with chosen image presentation options. The 
next sampling position is then defined and, once 
again, the vertical carriage position is measured 
at a high rate in an assembly coded program loop 
until the new sampling position is reached. In 
this manner, 256 samples of the transducer output 
are taken and displayed for each vertical scan. 
Any non-linearities in the vertical drive 
motions, particularly due to high speeds and high 
accelerations are automatically compensated for 
in this manner. 

Data taken during alternate up and down stokes 
are stored in memory as if the data were only 
taken during downward strokes. This is done for 
data storage consistency, since in two repeated 
tests, data for any particular vertical scan 
might be taken during either an upward or a down- 
ward stroke. Post-processing of the stored data 
is also much easier when the data are stored this 
way. 

After the last sample in a vertical stroke, the 
DC drive reverses direction. Next, the horizon- 
tal drive is stepped to the next position. The 
position for the first sample on the next verti- 
cal stroke is defined and the data taking and 
display processing continue. This basic sequence 
is repeated until all of the required vertical 
scans are completed. Then, the motor control 
logic is disengaged, and both the horizontal and 
the vertical drive motors are returned to manual 
control . 

Except for minor features, the playback of the 
recorded images uses basically the same imaging 
software as the data taking. 

HARDWARE FEATURES 

Figures 4 and 5 are pictures of the developmental 
hardware before it was mounted on the tensile 
test machine. The principal components are the 
microprocessor system, the ultrasonic signal 
conditioning system, the horizontal and vertical 
traversing carriage mounted within a tank of 
propylene glycol, and the specimen held in place 
by the lower grip assembly. The hardware and 
software systems were developed in this rig 
before installation on the 100,000 pound tensile 
test machine shown in Figure 1. Damage within 
the specimen is assessed by measuring the 
attenuation of ultrasound beamed through the 
specimen. The specimen is immersed in propylene 
glycol to provide good accoustic coupling with 
the ultrasonic transducers and to minimize corro- 
sion of the metallic parts of the carriage and 
grip assemblies. A commercial piezoelectric 
transducer provides a focused 2.5 MHz ultrasonic 
beam. Best results were obtained with an un- 
focused receiving transducer to measure the 


2 


attenuation of the beam passing once through the 
specimen. Other operating modes include using 
the source transducer as the receiver as well. 

In this mode ultrasound passes through the speci- 
men, reflects off of an inactive reflecting sur- 
face and passes back through the specimen to the 
recei ver/transmitter. This mode has more sen- 
sitivity than needed for the composite specimens 
initially tested, but may be desirable with 
future specimens or other test configurations. 

An ultrasonic signal conditioner and power supply 
provides excitation and conditions the output of 
the recieving transducer. The transmitter is 
pulsed on and off at an approximate rate of 
16 KHz. The signal conditioner is synchronized 
with the transmitter pulse rate and a time gating 
circuit allows the operator to use only desired 
portions of the received signal. The gating 
eliminates signal returns due to multiple path 
reflections. The conditioner provides a continu- 
ous DC output proportional to the peak signal 
received in the time gate. This signal is sent 
to the microprocessor where it is digitized and 
displayed on the CRT. 

The control microcomputer is based on the 8080A 
microprocesser with a 64 K byte random access 
memory and is designed with a standard SlOO bus. 

A dual eight inch hard-sectored floppy disk drive 
is used. The default drive accesses operating 
software and the second drive stores or accesses 
transducer output. Each disk has a 384,000 byte 
storage capacity. The parallel output port of 
the control processer controls the motors of the 
horizontal and the vertical carriage positioning 
systems. The serial data port of the control 
processer interfaces to a line printer. A black 
and white video monitor displays both alpha- 
numerics and graphics. 

An analog-to-digital converter board was added on 
the SlOO bus. The board has eight multiplexed 
analog input channels and a twelve bit resolu- 
tion. The board was configured for a zero to ten 
volt operation with an unsigned binary magnitude 
digital output and for operation in a non- 
interrupt fashion. Status flags are monitored by 
the software to determine when a successful con- 
version has occured. The twelve bit output word 
from the converter is reported to the system in 
two bytes. The most significant four bits of the 
most significant byte contain meaningless infor- 
mation and are always masked to zero by the 
operating software. The three channels used in 
this application are the outputs of the horizon- 
tal and the vertical drive potentiometers and the 
ultrasonic transducer. 

Two video display boards were also added on the 
SlOO bus. Some modifications were made to these 
boards and to the host system to allow for a full 
256 by 256 pixel sixteen level gray scale output 
on the CRT. The video output of the micro- 
computer system was disconnected and mixed with 
the imaging video output so that the alphanumeric 
text generated by the processer and the imaged 
data could be displayed simultaneously. The two 
composite video signals were synchronized with a 
video phase locked loop. Other modifications 
were made on these and on system boards to adjust 


for video signal polarities and to improve pic- 
ture stability by intentionally adding some 
signal delays to portions of the combined video 
signals. 

Two of the eight bits at the parallel output port 
control the horizontal carriage stepper. The 
carriage advances one step left or right depend- 
ing upon which of the two bits are pulsed low. 

One or the other of the two control bits is 
latched low and a software timing loop is 
entered. After the required pulse width has been 
established, both of the horizontal drive control 
bits are reset high. The required dwell time 
between control pulses is then established by 
another software timing wait loop. Upon comple- 
tion of this loop, more control steps can be 
taken by the system if required. Manual control 
of the horizontal drive is possible whenever the 
computer is not holding one of the control lines 
low. 

Two other bits from the parallel output port con- 
trol the vertical DC motor drive system. The DC 
motor speed is manually controlled by setting the 
armature voltage. Drive direction is determined 
by the armature supply polarity which is switched 
by relays. Transistor-transistor level logic is 
used in conjunction with the two control bits and 
two mechanical limit switches to control the 
armature relays. With both of the control bits 
held high or with the microprocessor in an un- 
powered state, the limit switches define the 
vertical scanning range and switch the armature 
relays accordingly. When one of the bits are 
held low, the drive moves either upward or down- 
ward depending upon which bit is being con- 
trolled. The mechanical limit switches override 
the control bits if a conflict occurs. 

The mechanical limits of the vertical carriage 
can readily be adjusted to suit a given specimen 
mounting configuration. The limits are measured 
by the software before the microcomputer takes 
control of the vertical drive. This is done 
during an auto-ranging process for transducer 
output normalization, as well as to assure that 
the operator desired vertical extents are within 
a feasible range. 

SOFTWARE FEATURES 

The hardware interfaces were designed to be 
as general as possible, and software provides the 
majority of the control and signal processing 
functions. The software was designed for easy 
use by a non-programming operator. The operator 
engages the software through BASIC language rou- 
tines which set up and check operating parameters 
and then call assembly language routines to do 
the control and data processing. The operator 
needs only to type either 'BASIC SCAN' or BASIC 
VIEW' to start scanning a specimen or to play 
back stored data. After that, various conditions 
are reported to the operator who responds by 
answering questions which the program asks. The 
answers set up the required data taking and image 
processing functions. 

Defaults, provided in the BASIC language pro- 
grams, can readily be edited to provide a 


3 


starting set up for a given test sequence. The 
operator can change any of the default parameters 
during his question/answer session in a 'global' 
mode or in a 'selective' mode. In the 'global' 
mode, the operator is asked to define all of the 
parameters in a question/answer sequence. In the 
'selective' mode, the operator changes individual 
parameters one at a time in a question/ answer 
sequence. A parameter changed during an 
operating session retains its changed value as 
the new default. Each parameter is checked for 
consistency with physical constraints on the pro- 
cess. For example, the desired horizontal motor 
drive extents are calculated from the operator 
inputs. These extents are then checked to assure 
that the operator has not inadvertantly asked the 
system to drive the horizontal carriage into the 
tank walls. Other constraints, such as the 
feasible extents of the vertical carriage drive 
are measured by operating the scanning drive 
between mechanical limit switches before the 
software can take control of the drive. If any 
default parameter is inconsistant with the physi- 
cal system, the operator is asked to re-define 
that parameter. 

Once the horizontal center of the feature to 
be scanned has been defined and checked, an 
assembly-coded routine is called to step the 
horizontal drive to that position and to cycle 
the DC motor between its mechanical limits. The 
limiting values from the vertical potentiometers 
define the feasible motor drive extents. The 
maximum DC output from the ultrasonic signal 
conditioner is also recorded. Control then 
returns to the BASIC routine which calculates a 
normalizing factor for the transducer output so 
that the full range of the available signal is 
used for imaging. 

Next, the number of vertical scans to make is 
entered as a number from 2 to 256 and a contrast 
enhancement index is defined. 

The contrast enhancement index is used to limit 
the number of gray scale levels that the system 
uses for imaging. This strongly demarks areas 
of transition when representing damaged areas. 

A sixteen level gray scale image can be presented 
in eight, four or two levels (black and white) 
using this index. A white scale shift index is 
also used which doubles the image brightness a 
number of times so that the 'brightest' range of 
data produces a fully white display. These two 
parameters provide the image enhancement options 
for data taken in real time or played back from 
the floppy disk. 

Next, a horizontal scaling factor is defined. 
Normally this parameter is set to one. If it is 
changed, the horizontal or vertical dimension of 
the scan is compressed to fill the screen. This 
allows differing damage areas to be 'squashed' 
to fit the screen dimensions. This factor, the 
starting position, and the number of scans re- 
quired determines the ultimate limits that the 
horizontal drive carriage will be required to 
traverse. If the calculated limits are beyond 
a feasible range, the operator is requested to 
change one or more of these parameters. 


A zoom index is also defined for magnifying some 
region of the image to be displayed. Individual 
pixels are scaled to many times their normal size 
in accordance with the zoom index. Zoom coordi- 
nates define the center region to be zoomed in on 
in terms of the screen coordinates for an other- 
wise un-zoomed image. Even though a zoomed image 
is displayed during data. taking, a full un-zoomed 
image is stored on the disk. 

When very small regions are scanned, a problem 
with signal latency may occur due to propagation 
time in the propylene glycol and averaging time 
taken by the conditioner. On alternate up and 
down strokes of the carriage an occasional stair- 
stepping of the image with scan direction has 
been observed. This occurs during faster tra- 
versal rates when scanning small regions. The 
effect is particularly noticed at sharp edges 
such as the damage-initiation slots machined in 
the composite specimens. In order to minimize 
this effect a 'slow scanning' mode can be 
selected so that data are taken only during the 
downward strokes. In this way, all of the signal 
latency at the sharp edges is in phase for adja- 
cent vertical scans and the stair-stepping in the 
resulting image is greatly reduced. 

When all of the parameters are defined, they are 
copied into the assembly code data tables which 
remain in core memory with the BASIC calling rou- 
tine. The playback of stored data works the same 
way but fewer operator parameters are copied into 
memory. When all parameters have been trans- 
fered, the BASIC routine calls the assembly coded 
routines which take and process data. 

The assembly routine first calculates a table of 
vertical positions at which transducer data 
should be taken. The table has 256 sixteen bit 
entries; each entry is four times the required 
sampling position coordinate. Next, the program 
determines which way the drive is going and 
checks to see whether the carriage is beyond the 
extent of the sampling position tables. When the 
carriage is unambiguously beyond either of the 
sampling table limits, the computer takes control 
of the (5C drive, reverses its direction, and 
begins taking image data. 

During data taking, the vertical carriage posi- 
tion is continuously measured and each sample is 
stored sequentially in a four word circular 
buffer. After each sample, the four words in the 
buffer are added and compared to the sampling 
position word pointed to in the sampling position 
table (The summed values tend to average out any 
noise in the sampled carriage position). If the 
drive is going up and the sum is greater than or 
equal to the sampling position value, the trans- 
ducer output is sampled. Conversely, if the 
drive is going downward and the sum is less than 
the sampling position value, the transducer out- 
put is sampled. The transducer data is then left 
shifted in accordance with the normalization 
index, and stored in a temporary buffer. The 
transducer data is manipulated in accordance with 
the contrast index and whitescale shift provi- 
sions, and the resulting four display bits 
(corresponding with the sixteen possible gray 
levels) are written to the appropriate screen 


4 


buffer address. The program then checks the 
sampling position table pointer index to see if 
the last data was the last required for the 
scan. If not, the pointer index is updated, 
a new sampling position is defined and the pro- 
gram again measures the vertical position con- 
tinously until the next sampling position is 
crossed. 

After the last sample of a vertical scan, the 
horizontal address for the on-screen 'display 
pixels is updated and the set of sampled data 
from the vertical scan are written to a disk 
write buffer. Data is written to disk if the 
disk buffer completely fills during this opera- 
tion. The horizontal drive is stepped a pre- 
determined number of steps and the DC motor drive 
direction is reversed. The scan counter is 
updated and checked. If there are more scans 
to do, the data taking proceeds with the return 
stroke of the vertical drive using a routine 
which indexes the opposite way through the 
sampling position value table. If the slow- 
scanning option was selected, a different routine 
repositions the drive beyond the other end of the 
sampling position table and reverses the vertical 
drive. The normal data taking routines for a 
downward stroke are then called which enables the 
data taking procedure to continue. 

When all of the vertical scans are completed the 
remaining data in the disk write buffer is 
written to the disk and the disk file is closed, 
if the disk write option was selected. Next, the 
horizontal and vertical drive control bits are 
disabled to allow manual control. Program con- 
trol then returns to the calling BASIC routine 
and the operator is asked if he wants to quit, 
change the defaults, or make another scan with 
current defaults. During incremental load test- 
ing on the tensile test machine the tensile load 
is increased between scans. 

APPLICATION EXAMPLES 

The system provides a qualitative picture on 
a CRT of the graduated internal damage of speci- 
mens which is impossible to see in other ways. 

The pictures give interesting results which tend 
to agree with our notions of the internal struc- 
ture of the specimens and seem to show expected 
damage patterns for certain kinds of loadings. 
During one early series of system development 
tests, pen point indentations were seen on the 
specimen surface due to its prior use as a hard 
surface for writing. 

While very high sensitivity has been obtained in 
some cases, no quantitative correlations have 
been made between the signal attenuation and the 
actual damage of the specimens. That is part of 
the planned research which will be done using 
this system in conjunction with analytical code 
development and detailed specimen examinations. 

Figure 6 shows local damage in a broken graphite 
epoxy specimen which was scanned as part of the 
system development. The physical region shown in 
the photograph is about 1 1/2 by 3 inches. The 
broken surface of the specimen is not visible in 


the figure but is shown in phantom. Notice the 
regions of apparent progressive damage shown by 
the graduated tones in the photograph. Also, 
note how extensive the damage is below the break 
line and the assymmetries of the damage pattern. 
The bright region to the right appears to have 
experienced little damage while the region in the 
center appears to have experienced extensive 
damage. 

Figure 7 is a scan of a 3/8 by 3/4 inch region 
around a sharp edged notch in an otherwise un- 
damaged fiberglass epoxy panel. The dark region 
around the notched hole is due to local damage 
around the hole and possibly some signal scatter- 
ing of the focused sound beam at the sharp edges 
around the hole. Notice the two slanted lines 
running vertically through the image with the 
darker region in between. These lines are 
aligned with one of the interior plies and may 
show overlap or missing filaments in that ply. 

The darker region between the lines may be due to 
some internal bonding problems. These images 
cannot be interpretted exactly. However, their 
presentation seems to be in agreement with the 
internal geometry and structure of the specimen. 

This is also true for Figure 8 which represents 
a 3 by 5 inch region of an undamaged graphite 
epoxy specimen and appears to show some matrix 
effects. The lines in the pattern match the 
known fiber orientations of the plies. 

Figures 9, 10 and 11 are the same view of the 
same broken specimen displayed in a sixteen 
levels of gray, eight levels, and four levels 
respectively. The damage initiation slot is near 
the top center of these figures. A pair of dark 
areas which corresponds with local delamination 
before the specimen broke can be seen around the 
slot. These areas look like a pair of bracketing 
'parentheses' and qualitatively agree with ini- 
tial analytical predictions. The 'parenthesis' 
on the right is partially obscured by a broader 
area of damage which apparently occurred when the 
specimen broke. Note the progressi vely sharper 
demarcation of the damage as the number of gray 
levels was reduced in Figures 9 through 11. 

The authors feel that, for this particular speci- 
men. the eight level gray scale image gives the 
clearest overall picture of specimen damage 
without removing significant midrange detail. 

Figures 12 through 16 are- from a checkout test 
sequence with a specimen being incrementally 
loaded by the tensile test machine. Damaged 
areas can be seen to grow as the tensile loading 
is increased beyond liOOO pounds. Figures 17 and 
18 are a 'before' and 'after' image of the over- 
all specimen. The imaged sequence clearly shows 
the way in which damage grows about the damage 
initiation slot. 

Unfortunatly, for this test setup, a clearly 
demarked graduated damage indicated by midrange 
gray tones, was not observed. In order that this 
initial test sequence be taken under constant 
conditions, the transducer settings were not 
changed as the testing proceeded. The initial 
set up of the transducers for a given test series 


5 


will have to be determined empirically for the 
types of test specimens to be run. This will be 
one of the considerations for the future work 
done with this instrument. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

A hobbiest grade microcomputer system was inter- 
faced to an ultrasonic transducer signal condi- 
tioning system and a motor driven X-Y scanning 
carriage. All interfaces were made very general, 
with assembly level coding accomplishing most of 
the control and data taking operations. The 
operator uses BASIC language routines in a 
question-answer fashion to set up operating 
parameters and to initiate measurements. Image 
enhancement software options are available for 
both real time display and for playback of stored 
data from the disk. 


It is possible to monitor and to image the inter- 
nal damage in a composite specimen with this 
instrument while the specimen is being loaded in 
a tensile test machine. Further, it is possible 
to record a series of images which illustrate 
progressive damage with increasing load on the 
specimen. The correlate well with anticipated 
damage patterns, with graduated images showing 
different levels of internal damage within the 
specimen, as well as otherwise unseen details of 
the internal structure of the specimen. 

Future use of this instrument will be directed 
toward correlating experimental results with 
analytical predictions of the internal damage of 
tensile loaded composite specimens. 


6 




) 



Figure 3. - Microcomputer system. 



Figure 4. - Developmental hardware. 






Figure 6. - Imaged damage in a 1 1/2 x 3 inch area of a broken composite 
specimen. 



Figure 7. - Image of a 3/8 x 3/4 inch region about a hole in a composite 
panel. 



Figure 8. - Image of a 3x5 inch area of an undamaged graphite epoxy 
specimen. 



Figure 9. - Sixteen level gray scale image of a broken composite specimen. 



Figure 10. - Eight level gray scale image of a broken composite specimen. 





Figure 12. - Tensile loaded specimen: 0 pounds. 



Figure 13. - Tensile loaded specimen: 11 800 pounds. 





Figure 14. - Tensile ioaded specimen: 12 100 pounds. 



Figure 15. - Tensile loaded specimen: 12 200 pounds, 





Figure 16. - Tensile loaded specimen: 12 350 pounds. 



Figure 17. - Tensile loaded specimen: before loading. 


f 






Figure 18. - Tensile loaded specimen: after 12 500 pounds. 




1. Report No. 2. Government Accession No. 

NASA TM- 82799 

3. Recipient's Catalog No. 

4. Title and Subtitle 

ULTRASONIC SCANNING SYSTEM FOR IMAGING FLAW 
GROWTH IN COMPOSITES 

5. Report Date 

6. Performing Organization Code 

505-33-62 

7. Author(s) 

Louis J. Kiraly and Erwin H. Meyn 

8. Performing Organization Report No. 

E-1138 

10. Work Unit No. 

9. Performing Organization Name and Address 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 

11. Contract or Grant No. 

13. Type of Report and Period Covered 

Technical Memorandum 

12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, D.C. 20546 

14. Sponsoring Agency Code 


15. Supplementary Notes 


Prepared for the Twenty- eighth International Instrumentation Symposium sponsored by the 
Instrument Society of America, Las Vegas, Nevada, May 3-6, 1982. 

16. Abstract 

A unique system for measuring and visually representing damage in composite specimens while 
they are being loaded has recently been demonstrated at the NASA Lewis Research Center. 

It uses a hobbiest grade microcomputer system to control data taking and image processing. 
The system scans operator- selected regions of the specimen while it is under load in a tensile 
test machine and measures internal damage by the attenuation of a 2. 5 MHz ultrasonic beam 
passed through the specimen. The microcomputer dynamically controls the position of ultra- 
sonic transducers mounted on a two-axis motor-driven carriage. As many as 65, 536 samples 
can be taken and filed on a floppy disk system in less than four minutes. As the specimen is 
scanned a 16 level gray scale image is developed and displayed on a CRT. This image may be 
recalled later and can be enhanced in various ways or ’zoomed-in’ on specific features. Many 
images may be stored in sequence as the load on the specimen is increased, and a movie show- 
ing flaw growth as a function of tensile loading can be generated. 


17. Key Words (Suggested by Author(s) ) 

Microprocessor 
Composites 
Ultrasonic scanning 

18. Distribution Statement 

Unclassified - unlimited 
STAR Category 31 

19. Security Classif. (of this report) 
Unclassified 

20. Security Classif. (of this page) 
Unclassified 

21. No. of Pages 

22. Price* 


For sale by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161 


National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 

Washington, D.C. 

20546 


Official Business 

Penalty for Private Use, $300 


SPECIAL FOURTH CLASS MAIL 
BOOK 


Postage and Fees Paid 
National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 
NASA-451 



NASA 


POSTMASTFR 


If IJndeliverahle (Section I SK 
Postal Manual) Do Not Hetiirii 


