N93-1 1927 


AN EXPERT SYSTEM FOR DIAGNOSING 
ENVIRONMENTALLY INDUCED SPACECRAFT ANOMALIES 

by 

Mark Rolincik, University Research Foundation, Greenbelt, MD 20770 
Michael Lauriente, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Code 410, Greenbelt, MD 2077 1 __ 

Harry C. Koons & David Gomey, The Aerospace Corporation, M-2/260, P.O. Box 92957, Los Angeles, CA 90009 


ABSTRACT 

We are designing a new rule-based, machine indepen- 
dent analytical tool for diagnosing spacecraft anomalies 
using an expert system. Expert systems provide an effec- 
tive method for saving knowledge, allow computers to sift 
through large amounts of data pinpointing significant 
parts, and most importantly, use heuristics in addition to 
algorithms, which allow approximate reasoning and infer- 
ence and the ability to attack problems not rigidly defined. 

The knowledge base consists of over two-hundred 
(200) rules and provides links to historical and environ- 
mental databases. The environmental causes considered 
are bulk charging, single evert upsets (SEU), surface 
charging, and total radiation dose. 

The system’s driver translates forward chaining rales 
into a backward chaining sequence, prompting the user for 
infoimation pertinent to the causes considered. The use of 
heuristics frees the user from searching through large 
amounts of irrelevant information and allows the user to 
input partial information (varying degrees of confidence in 
an answer) or ‘unknown’ to any question. 

The modularity of the expert system allows for easy 
updates and modifications. It not only provides scientists 
with needed risk analysis and confidence not found in 
algorithmic programs, but is also an effective learning tool, 
and the window implementation makes it very easy to use. 
The system currently runs on a MicroVAX II at Goddard 
Space Flight Center (GSFC). The inference engine used is 
NASA’s C Language Integrated Production System 
(CLIPS). 


BACKGROUND 

This joint project to develop an expert system for 
diagnosing environmentally induced spacecraft anomalies 
owes its origin to the observation by the Air Force that 
spacecraft anomalies were often environmentally in- 
duced. It was a common occurrence then to receive calls 
on problems with satellite anomalies. The expert system 
was initiated as a research project that could be used by 
program offices and contractors to eliminate the flood of 
calls which were becoming a nuisance. The objective was 
to develop a classic diagnostic tool for trying to determine, 
once an anomaly has occurred, whether it was caused by 
the environment. Hopefully this information will be useful 
to the design of spacecraft, so that in the future, systems will 
be built having increased immunity to the hostile space 
environment 

Historically, the Air Force has supported NASA’s 
EnviroNET (1), so its on-line feature was considered a 
“natural” as a communication tool for educating its users 
about this innovative venture. In addition, an opportunity 
existed for users to feed back information that might 
improve on the system. The key to advancement in this 
endeavor is communication between users. The user here 
is either a forecaster, a scientist, an engineer, an operator, or 
perhaps a contractor who needs to know something about 
tire effects of the environment on a satellite or a satellite 
subsystem, recognizing that they will have access to a 
variety of databases and knowledge. A special session on 
environmentally induced spacecraft anomalies chaired 
jointly by the Air Force and NASA at the 1990 AIAA 
meeting in Reno (2) brought to focus tire issues of concern . 


36 



INITIAL WORK: METHODOLOGY 

This research tool was originally developed by the 
Aerospace Corporation for a PC using a Texas Instrument 
commercial expert shell (3). It was then handed off to 
EnviroNET to develop a program to port the system to the 
EnviroNET central computer, which is accessible through 
most of the popular networks. The inference engine used 
is NASA’s C Language Integrated Production System: 
CLIPS (4). CLIPS is not only compatible with both C and 
Fortran languages, but it has features which include the 
ability to compile the rules and save them in a binary image 
file, thus allowing faster execution than a typical rule 
interpretive system. This feature qualifies CLIPS to be 
used as an expert shell, i.e., an environment where the rules 
can reside and be accessed. 

Initially, recognized experts in the field were queried 
on how to diagnose anomalies; these “rules of thumb” 
were formatted into logical rules. The expert system rules 
involve four main types of environmental anomalies: bulk 
charging, surface charging, single event upsets (SEU), and 
total radiation dose. It should be recognized that the expert 
system as a tool can be expanded to include other causes of 
anomalies, even non-environmentally induced anomalies. 

The architecture of the system was designed to emu- 
late the way the user normally looks at data to diagnose 
anomalies. The expert system not only consolidates exper- 
tise in a uniform, objective, and logical way, but it also 
offers “smart” ways of accessing various databases which 
are transparent to the user. By applying various rules in its 
knowledge base, the system accesses databases, queries 
the user as appropriate, and arrives at a conclusion. The 
system output was verified by referring to historical case 
studies and historical data. 

EXPERT RULES 

The EnviroNET expert system knowledge base cur- 
rently contains over two hundred (200) rules. The system 
goes through a varying “decision tree” based on these rales 
and user input in order to arrive at the likely cause of an 
anomaly. The rale base includes the expert system rales in 
a defined “if-then” format that will be “fired” under the 
control of the inference engine. The user interface links to 
databases which include past environmental data, satellite 
data, and previous , known anomalies. Information regard- 
ing satellite design, specifications and orbital history needs 
to be assimilated with previous anomalies data and envi- 
ronmental conditions, while addressing the specific cir- 
cumstances of individual users. 


Seldom are the environmental problems encountered 
by scientists rigidly defined, and thus they lack clear 
mathematical solutions. Under such circumstances, algo- 
rithmic programs are too limited by their sequential logic, 
becoming too cumbersome when trying to consider a wide 
range of variables of varying degrees of certainty. 


Real Time Data 



Figure 1. Expert System Configuration 

EnviroNET’s Expert System is being developed as an 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) technique to cope with this 
voluminous data and fluidity associated with spacecraft/ 
environment causality models. 

Unlike its algorithmic predecessors, an expert system 
can be flexible in the way that it attacks complex problems. 
By virtue of its three basic parts (a knowledge base, a fact 
base, and a driver), an expert system more closely simu- 
lates the methods of human experts who use a combination 
ofknown, empirically derived formulae, hunches based on 
degrees of certainty and experience, and even judicious 
“fudging” when specific data is lacking. Figure 1 shows the 
expert system configuration. 

The knowledge base, with its set of rules, is what 
makes a rule-based expert system unique. Best thought of 
as an independent collection of “if.. .then” statements, the 
mles are created by experts in their respective fields and 
reflect the current level of human experience, along with its 
uncertainties. Under the weight of these rules, and by the 
use of multi-field variables, an expert system can be said to 
“ponder the possibilities” presented by a compendium of 
data and knowledge too extensive to be readily assimilated 
by any single person. Rather than being limited to conclu- 
sions that must satisfy a set of tightly ordered mathematical 
statements, the system is free to offer suggestions, consid- 
erations, and likelihoods. 




37 









KULE201 


INCLINATION 


SUBJECT :: BULK_CHARGING-RULES 
DESCRIPTION :: Trecur* whan flutnce high) 

If 1) the recurrence of the anoealy, and 

2} the recurrence is OFJTT GH_PENETRATING_FIDX , and 
3) I) the seven-day accumulated fluence of penetrating electrons is 
HIGH, or 

2) the seven-day accumulated fluence of penetrating electrons is 
VERY_HIGH, 

Then there is suggestive evidence (601) that the cause of the anomaly is 
BULK_ CHARGING. 

IF : : (RECURRENCE AND PERIODICITY - OF HI GH_PENETRATTHC_F LUX AND 
(ACCUM FLDEN « HIGH OR ACCUM_FUJEN - VERY_HIGH ) ) 

THEN : : (CAUSE ■ BULK_CHARGING CF 60) 


RULE110 

SUBJECT ; ; TOTALISE -RULES 

DESCRIPTION :: (Local tine recurrence rules out total radiation dose. 
If 1) the recurrence of the anomaly, and 

2) the recurrence of an anomaly in a specific local-time sector., 

Then it is definite (1001) that the causa of the anomaly is not TOTAL_DOSE . 

IF : : (RECURRENCE AND LT_RECUR) 

THEN :: (CAUSE I- TOTAL_DOSE) 


Figure 2. Rule Format 


TRANSLATION :: (tha inclination of tha plane of the orbit vith respect 
to the earth’s equatorial plane ) 

PROHPT (Select the inclination of the satellite with respect to the 
earth's equatorial plane. ) 

EXPECT" ™EES^ LON INCLINATION HIGH INCLINATION POLAR OTHER) 
^Sd^BY (RULE041 RULE 131 RlILEl 34 RULE135 RULE136 RULE1J2 MLU» 
RULE139 RULE140 RULE14I RULE142 RULE137 ) 

ANTECBDENT-BY :: (RULE026 RULE 030) 

USED-BY :: (RDLE017 RULE016 RULE091 RULE0B9) 

HELP i: ("Low inclination orbits are below 30 deg. 

inclination orbits are above 60 deg. Polar orbits 

are above «0 deg. Interplanetary orbits are undefined. ) 


(the recurrence Qf an anomaly in a specific local-time 
sector. ) . . . . . , , 

PRONPT :: {-Indicate the degree of certainty that you have that this 

type of anomaly has a strong tendency to recur in one local 
time sector, for example the nightside or the dayside of the 
earth?" ) 

UEED-BY : : *(RUU019 RULS020 RULE110 RULE054 RULE188 RULE1B9 RULE190 
RULE191 RULE192 RULE193 RULE 194 RULE043 ) 

HELP :: (The anomaly should have occurred a few timee (i.«. or more) 
before you have confidence that the recurrence is related to a 
specific local-time sector. Generally we are asking if the 
anomaly has a very strong tendency to occur within a 12 hour range 
in local time. ) 

CERTAINTY -FACTOR -RANGE : : POSITIVE 


TRANSITION 


Figure 3 . Variable Format 


The rule format used in the expert system is shown in 
Figure 2. Each rule has a subject associated with it (in this 
case one of the four causes considered), a description of the 
rule, and then the actual rule itself. The rules alsohave what 
is termed a ‘confidence factor’ associated with the right 
hand side of each rule. Algorithms, which normal pro- 
grams are limited to using, have a 100% certainty to them 
and are a subset of the general heuristic rules which the 
expert system uses. 

This aspect of the rule-based expert system is very 
important in diagnosing anomalous behavior since much 
of the knowledge, rules and experience required to diag- 
nose these anomalies have confidence factors associated 
with them. The use of such confidence factors in the expert 
system introduces the concept of ‘risk assessment’ to the 
diagnostic procedure and the inclusion of knowledge 
which otherwise would be lost, since it is, at the very least, 
extremely difficult to represent such knowledge using 
mathematical formulae. 

Another advantage of using a rule-based system is that 
it allows direct access to and easy comprehension of the 
knowledge and expertise used to diagnose the anomalies as 
opposed to the very complicated, and sometimes esoteric 
coding of most normal programs. Not only does this 
provide a way of storing the knowledge, it also allows the 
system to be easily and quickly updated. These updates are 
accomplished by simply adding, deleting or modifying 
rules to which the system then automatically adjusts. 

VARIABLES 

The EnviroNET expert system’s use of variables is 


another area which makes this system unique, allowing it 
to handle non-algorithmic, equivocal problems. A variable 
in this system can take on one of three settings. It can be 
'unset' meaning that it has not been input by the user and 
that no rule has been able to determine a value for it; it can 
be 'unknown,' which means the user was prompted for the 
variable but did not know it; or it can have one or more 
'values.' The unique aspects of the system are that not only 
can the expert system continue to execute when variables 
are unknown, but when variables do have values, each 
value has a confidence factor associated with it. Figure 3 
shows examples of variable formats. 

In the variable format, the translation and prompt 
string are self-explanatory. Each variable also has a type 
associated with it, either‘single-valued,’ ‘multi-valued, or 
‘yes/no.’ The ‘expect’ field is a list of the possible values 
for that variable which the user can select when and if he/ 
she is prompted for that variable. The ‘updated_by ’ field is 
a list of rules which are able to determine values for that 
variable, while the ‘used_by’ field contains rules which 
require this variable in order to fire. (It is possible that in 
order for a rule to fire, a variable must be 'unknown. ) The 
‘help’ field is the information displayed when the user 
presses the help key, requesting more information on the 
variable being prompted for. The ‘certainty-factor-range’ 
(CFR) is pai ticular to this system and can have a value of 
'unknown,' 'positive,' or 'full.' The CFR being 'unknown' 
means that this is a possible input for that variable. If the 
CFR is 'positive,' the user can input degrees of confidence 
fromOto lOOforeachof the entered values forthat variable. 
Finally, if the CFR is 'full,' the user can input degrees of 
confidence from -100 to 100, which means a range from 


38 



SPACECRAFT EraMMHITAi ANOMALIES 

Select the naie of the satellite that has experienced the anonaly. 

OSCAR 32 

TELSTAR 3D 

OSCAR 31 

GSTAR 1 

DMSP 

LEASAT 3 

GOES 7 

SCATHA 

FLTSATC0H7 

polar .bear 

-> NOAA 10 
GSTAR 2 
SATCOM XI 
SATCOjf K2 
NAVSTAR.il 
ASC 1 
OSCAR 30 
0SCAR~2« 

UNKNOWN 


Use arrov key to position cursor, press ENTER to continue. 


Figure 4. Satellite Selection 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANOMALIES 


Set your confidence level for all of the times that have been identified 
for the recurrence of this specific anomaly. 


Yes 



SATELLITE SPIN PERIOD 
DIURNAL “ 

SOUR ROTATION 
SOUUf CYCLE 
SPRINC/FALL 
MAGNETICALLY DISTURBED 
OF HIGH PENETRATING FLUX 


Using arrov keys to position cursor, indicate certainty factors on all 
lines that apply. After »a)dng selections, press ENTER to continue. 

Figure 5. Multi-valued input with confidence 

being 100% certain the variable is not a specific value to 
being 100% certain that the variable is a specific value. 

The confidence factors relay the confidence the user 
has in a certain value of the variable. This is very important 
since there is most likely information of which the user is 
not 100% sure. Such information is lost in normal pro- 
grams. The combination of the confidence factors of 
variables and those of the rules propagates the confidence 
factors to other variables which are determined by these 
rules and ultimately to the cause of the anomaly. 

Figure 4 shows an input screen for a single-valued 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONXEKTAL ANOMALIES 


Select >11 of the databases that ara available for tbla systei. 


Its 

I ANOMALY 

run 
i jj 


** End - pres* ENTER to continue. 


Figure 6 . Database selection screen 


HELP WINDOW 

The ANOMALY database it the NOAA Satellite ( 
Anoaaly database froa the National Geophysical 
Data Center. The PURE database contains X 
class x-ray flares. The KP database contains 
values of the planetary Magnetic index, Kp, 
since 1932. 


variable which assumes 100% confidence and a CFR of 
'unknown.' Formats like this figure arc examples of the 
user friendly interface that was designed and are intended 
to portray a snapshot image of what the user sees. 

Figure 5 is an example of the input screen for a multi- 
valued variable with a 4 positive ’ CFR. Notice how the 
variable in Figure 5 can have more than one value, and each 
value has its own confidence factor associated with it. 


FACT BASE 

The fact base, a collection of informative sources 
related to the topic of interest, is the second integral part of 
an expert system. It can consist of as many separate data 
bases as may be deemed pertinent to solving the problem 
at hand. In the case of spacecraft anomalies, a fact base 
might contain information on the hardware currently in 
use, other active and past satellite systems, and historical 
data for orbital environments. 

The database screen is shown in Figure 6, which 
shows the databases available for this system along with an 
example of the expert system help facility which is avail- 
able for any variable. An important advantage obtained in 
using the expert system is that once it has been established 
which databases are available, the rules determine which 
information is pertinent, access the database for the rel- 
evant information and apply this information (all of which 
is transparent to the user). Also, the database accessing is 
modular and easily expandable, thus if more databases 
need to be added, only the selection screen needs to be 
changed and the new rules added to the knowledge base. 
These capabilities free the user from sifting through laige 
amounts of data and ensure that only pertinent information 
and all pertinent information is used in the diagnosis. 


39 





INTERFACE 

The interface is one of the aspects which makes all 
expert systems different from one another. Since the expert 
shell, databases and knowledge base are independent and 
modular, the main purpose of the interface is to create a 
coordinating system which is not only user friendly, but 
also provides the necessary features to assist the user in 
understanding the system and the results. 

The system’s current interface driver translates for- 
ward chaining rules into a backward chaining sequence, 
prompting the user for information pertinent to the causes 
he/she wishes to consider. The main purpose of the driver 
is to maintain information regarding the variables which 
are being determined, the rules which can determine these 
variables, the status of the variables, and which mles can be 
fired. 

Some variables are designated as initial or goal vari- 
ables. The system first prompts the user for the initial 
variables. The driver then stacks the goal variables on the 
run time stack and searches the knowledge base for mles 
which determine (or ‘update’) these variables, and then 
puts them on the stack as well. The system focuses on those 
possibilities of high confidence and then assists the user by 
directing him/her to areas of consideration that directly 
affect the particular problem. The goal (variable) in our 
system is the CAUSE of the anomaly, a multi-valued field 
variable with a 'full' CFR, since it can take on any number 
of the four possible causes where each cause has its own 
confidence factor associated with it ranging from -100 to 
100. 

If a variable on the left hand side of a stacked rule is 
unset, this variable becomes the current goal variable and 
is put on the stack, and the process continues. If a variable 
is on the stack and has not been determined by any rules nor 
by the available database (and it has a prompt string), the 
user is prompted for it This can be thought of as a 
transformation of the forward chaining mles in the knowl- 
edge base into a backward chaining variable sequence. 
Once a variable has a value , it is removed from the stack and 
the mles which use this variable are fired, discarded, or 
require the driver to put the next variable on that mle’s left 
hand side onto the stack. The chaining process continues 
until the stack is empty. 

Any mle on the stack that can be fired does so 
transparently to the user, where the confidence factors of 
the individual variables on its left hand side (LH5) are used 
for determining the confidence or validity of the entire 
LHS. When a mle fires, it executes the right hand side 
(RHS), and the confidence factor associated with its LHS 


is used in conjunction with the confidence factor of the rule 
to propagate the confidence to the RHS. This RHS execu- 
tion can entail the setting of variables, the use of mathemati- 
cal calculations, or the accessing of databases. 

LEARNING TOOL 

One of the most beneficial aspects of the system is its 
use as a learning tool for diagnosing spacecraft anomalies. 
A user is initially given a choice between either ‘novice’ or 
* expert’ mode for the current session. If the user selects the 
novice mode the system automatically gives detailed ex- 
planations and descriptions of terms and reasoning as the 
session progresses, in a sense teaching the user about the 
topic or topics. The expert mode, on the other hand, simply 
executes the session without giving these extra explana- 
tions, unless the user specifically requests them. 

SPACECRAFT ENYIROHXEHTAL AROKAUIS 

5al«ct all of tue causes tuat you visa to consider lor mis anoMiy* 

Yes 

ALL 

X BULK CHARGING 
SURFACE CHARGING 
SEU 

X TOTAL DOSE 

PARTICLES/PIASMA 


Using arrow keys to position cursor, select all applicable responses. 
After liking selections, press ENTER to continue. 

Figure 7. Causes selection screen 

The user is also given the option of selecting which 
causes are to be considered. (See Figure 7.) This selection 
determines a knowledge base sub-group, so that only rules 
in this specific environmental area are considered. In this 
way the user can learn what variables, information and data 
affect and are important to that cause. In addition to this, in 
the features described next, the user is actually able to 
access the relevant rules him/herself and other variables 
and facts which were determined by using these rules. 

UNIQUE FEATURES 

The ability to add intricate features and options is 
primarily due to the modularity of the system which the 
expert shell and expert system knowledge base concept 


40 



itself provide. These features are the most impressive when 
demonstrating the capabilities of the EnviroNET expert 
system and its advantages over the usual, strictly math- 
ematical programming techniques. 


Planetary Magnetic Index, Kp 


80 



V J 

Figure 8. Kp Graph 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANOMALIES 


Setting 

TOTAL DOSE TECHNOLOGY * 

AHORPHOUSJTTL cf 100 

Testing 

RULE119 


RULE119 

FAILS 


Testing 

RULE128 


R0LE12B 

FAILS 


Testing 

RULE129 


RULE129 

FAILS 


Testing 

RULE131 


Applying 

RULE131 


Setting 

TOTAL DOSE THRESHOLD = 

1000000 Cf 100 

Testing 

RULE120 


Applying 

RULE120 


Setting 

CAUSE *= T0TALJX3SE cf 

-86 

old cf ■ 

-30 


1 Mark antec rules for CAUSE RULE027 s 

1 Try marked antec .rules 


| Testing 

RULE027 



. .... 


** More - press ENTER to continue. 



Figure 9 . Trace example 


The user interface provides for accessing graphics. 
For example, if the user inputs that one of the databases 
available is Kp, the system will ask if he/she wishes to see 
the Kp historical graph for the time around which the 
anomaly occurred. If the input is ‘yes' then a graph similar 
to the one shown in Figure 8 will be displayed. (If, however, 
the date is ‘ unset ' then the system will first ask for it, and 
if the date is ‘unknown' the system will ignore this line of 
questioning altogether.) This gives the user a much needed 
overall view of environmental information and conditions 
around the date in question. 


Anotherfeature whichmakes the expert system unique 
is its trace capability. The user can turn on the trace and send 
it to the screen or a file. The trace shows the rules as they 
are tested, variables as they are pushed onto the runtime 
stack and determined, and searches of the databases (see 
Figure 9). 

This allows the user to understand what is happening 
at any step and see the knowledge that is being used, thus 
giving the user confidence in the system. This type of 
capability is obviously not available in purely algorithmic 
programs. Due to the amount of information the user could 
be prompted for and depending on the particular session, 
the user may want to review his/her inputs. This capability 
is available in the ‘REVIEW’ facility. This option also 
provides the user with a simple way of comparing different 
inputs of different sessions. 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANOMALIES 



Figure 10 . Backward reasoning 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANOMALIES 


Enter a value between 0 and 400 for the naxiiui value of the planetary 


WHY WINDOW 

the level of Magnetic activity in the Magnetosphere is needed to 
determine the cause of the anoialy 

RUIE021 

If the level of magnetic activity in the Magnetosphere is QUIET, 

Then there is suggestive evidence (50t) that the cause of the anoialy 
is not BQLK^CHARGING. 




« More - press ENTER to continue. 


Figure 11. Backward reasoning (con r t.) 


41 






SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANOMALIES 

S«l«ct tit Un that best describes the radiation shielding of the circuit 
f HOV WINDOW 


the rnaber of the KP interval for the da :i (1 100 RUU097) 
the local time interval in which the mo j i (0-3 100 WJIE097) 

- inclination of the satellite as read fro ;; (98.7 100 SATELLITB_ 

- the apogee of the satellite...*.. :i (826 100 SATELLTTEJ) 

* the perigee of the satellite............ :* (808 100 SATELLITE_D 

the date the satellite was launched..,.. n (91786 100 SATELLITE 

X the orbit of the satellite.,., :: (EH5P 100 SHLE1B1) 

The altitude of the satellite :: {MULTITUDE 100 RD 

- the inclination of the plane of the orbi :: (HIGH_INCLIKATlOH 10 

the level of Magnetic activity in the m :: (NORMAL 100 RCLE0Q4) 

X the cause of the anouly :: (BULK CHARGING -43.. 

the Julian date :: (2447237 lpO B0LE115 


Select variable (s) using arrow keys - press ENTER to continue. 


Figure 12. HOW facility 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANOMALIES 


Select the ten that best describes the radiation shielding of the circuit 

HOW WINDOW 

the orbit of the satellite Is detenined by: 

RULE181 

If 1) the perigee of the satellite is less than 900 but greater than 
or equal to 735, and 

2) the apogee of the satellite is less than 920 but greater than 
or equal to 750, and 

3) the inclination of the satellite as read froi a Dbase III file 
is less than 110 but greater than or equal to 90, 

Then it is definite (1008) that the orbit of the satellite is CHSP. 


** More - press ENTER to continue. 


Figure 13. HOW facility (con't.) 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANOMALIES 


Select the ten that best describes the radiation shielding of the circuit 

HOW WINDOW 

the cause of the anooaly is detenined by: 

RDLE037 

If another satellite that had an anonaly at about the ease tiie, 

Then there is weakly suggestive evidence (108) that the cause of the 
anouly is BGLXJHARGING. 


** More - press ENTER to continue. 


Figure 14. HOW facility (con't.) 


A feature which demonstrates a definite advantage of 
the rule-based expert system is the ‘WHY’ option. Any 
time the system prompts the user for a variable, the user can 
ask the expert system why the system needs this variable. 
The system then uses its run time stack (a backward 
chaining stack) to follow and show the reasoning backward 
to the goal, that is, the cause of the anomaly. Figures 1 0 and 
11 show an example of this. Ibis is not only vital to 
understanding and having confidence in the system, but it 
is also an important part of the expert system’s use as a 
learning tool. 

A final feature which sets the expert system apart is the 
‘ HOW’ command. As with all programs, the expert system 
is constantly determining variablesby means otherthan the 
user inputting them, whether by the heuristics and algo- 
rithms in the rules or by extracting values from the data- 
bases. This command allows the users to, at any time, see 
what variables have been determined by means other than 
user input, their values, and which rules (or databases) were 
used to determine them. Figures 12 throughl4 show an 
example of this feature. 

The user first selects which variables he/she wants to 
look at and then the system proceeds to show which rules 
determined them. Notice how it is possible for variables to 
be determined (or updated) bymorethanonerule.Theuser, 
of course, can choose any number of variables, though for 
this example only one variable, the cause of the anomaly, 
was selected. This feature not only gives the user complete 
control over die system, but allows him/her to see all the 
facts and knowledge that can be inferred from the inputs 
they have given, the available databases, and the expertise 
in the rules. Asa final option, the user is also allowed, at any 
point, to exit from the program or begin a new session 
without ever leaving the program’s window screen. 

RESULTS 

The diagnostic results are in the form of confidence 
factors derived from both the confidence assigned to rules 
by the experts and also the confidence of variables input by 
the user. Both the confidence in the rules/heuristics and the 
input of certainty factors by the user are needed to diagnose 
anomalies, as they contain vital knowledge which can only 
be represented as such. The results window is shown in 
Figure 15 (see next page). 

The results window in our system includes, in 
addition to the cause(s) of the anomaly, the orbit of the 
satellite, whether input by the user or determined by rules, 
and a list of the causes considered in the diagnostics. The 
window can easily be modified to display any other 


42 





FUTURE WORK 


SPACECRAFT OTIROHHEHTAL AMOKALHS 

The orbit of tU satellite is as follows: WSP 

The possible causes of the aimly that you vish to consider is as follow: 
HTUJXARGIHG TOTAL^DOSE 

The cause of the anoaaly is as follow: 

SJIX CHARGING (6U) 
lot TOTAL DOSE (801) 


>« End ■ press ENTER to continue, | 

Figure 75. Results screen 

information which is considered important In the ex- 
ample, the cause of the anomaly was determined to be bulk 
charging with a confidence of 64%, and determined not to 
be total radiation dose with a confidence of 80%. The 
knowledge base does, of course, contain rules and formu- 
lae which can determine the cause of the anomaly with 
1 00% confidence, or completely rule out a particular cause. 
For these situations the system will simply say that the 
cause, for example, is bulk charging or is not total dose. 

The main concern with the system is the actual confi- 
dence and validity of the rules themselves. Since experts in 
any field are likely to disagree over certain areas, there may 
be rules to which other experts would apply slightly higher 
or lower degrees of confidence. This is certainly a consid- 
eration when using such a system, though it must be 
remembered that it is due to such a confidence/certainty 
question in the field that this type of expert system is 
needed. In general, as more quantitative environmental 
data become available in the immediate area of a space- 
craft, we can apply the higher confidences to all of the 
system’s rules. In addition, the features provided by the 
interface allow the user to see exactly what rules are being 
used so there is complete awareness and understanding of 
the formulae and knowledge being used. 

An advantage of this particular system is that its 
interface is completely generic. Not only can the sys- 
tem run on many machines, the interface can be used in 
any field since the rules and knowledge base are com- 
pletely independent of it. By substituting rules from 
another field, the system becomes an expert system for 
that field able to diagnose or solve problems towards 
which its tailored rules converge. In this sense the 
software is completely reusable. 


We are improving our EnviroNET network with the 
addition of an IBM RS/6000. Because the inference engine 
is machine independent and the remaining code is written 
almost entirely in C, the porting of the system to this UNIX 
machine will be quite simple. Once there, not only will the 
speed of the Expert System be increased, but with die use 
of X Windows, the system will also be enhanced. 

For example, withX Windows theuser could have one 
query window which prompts him/her for information, 
another separate window that displays which rules are 
being tested and fired, which variables are being searched 
for, and another window for graphics . With these multiple 
windows the usercan see the entire system working at once 
and be freed from having to change windows to see system 
information. 

CONCLUSION: 

The EnviroNETexpert system combines the algorith- 
mic capabilities of mathematical programs and diagnostic 
models with expert heuristic knowledge, and uses confi- 
dence factors in variables and rules to calculate results with 
degrees of human confidence associated with them. Since 
the causes of environmentally induced spacecraft anoma- 
lies depend not only on algorithms, but also on environ- 
mental conditions, rules and information can rarely be 
known with 100% certainty. Based on present experi- 
ences, the role for the expert system is for either quasi-real 
time, or post analysis. There is a need to greatly improve 
our ability to predict the environment before meaningful 
work can be done in forecasting satellite anomalies. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We are indebted to the staff of NAS A’s Johnson Space 
Center’s AI Laboratory for their cooperation in the use of 
CLIPS. Funding was provided by NASA Headquarters 
and the Geophysical Laboratory (GL) Space Systems 
Environmental Interaction Technology Office and the 
Space StationDivisionoftheU.S. Air Force undercontract 
F04701-88-C-0089 


43 



REFERENCES 


1. EnviioNET ; An On-line Environmental Interactive 
Resource, Proc. Fourth Annual Space Operations and 
Research (SOAR) Symposium, June 26-28, 1990 

2. 28th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, Nevada, J anu- 
ary 8-11, 1990 

A. Vampola, “Tutorial on Spacecraft Environmental 
Interactions Anomalies,” CP ALAA 
90-0172. 

D. Wilkinson, “NOAA’s Spacecraft Anomaly Data 
Base,” CP ALAA 90-0173. 

Robinson, “Anomalies Due to Single-Event Upsets,” 
CP AIAA 90-0174. 

D Gomey and H. Koons, “Spacecraft Anomaly Expert 
System,” CP AIAA 90-01 75. 

J. Gaffey and D. Bilitza, ‘Trapped Radiation Model 
Facility,” CP AIAA 90-0176. 

H. Garrett and A. Whittlesey, “Environmentally In- 
duced Spacecraft Anomalies onTDRSS,” 

CP AIAA 90-0178. 

3. Koons, H.C., and Gomey, D.J., “Spacecraft Environ- 
mental Anomalies Expert System: A Status Report, 
Aerospace Report # ATR-88 (9562)- 1, The Aerospace 
Corporation, El Segundo, CA., 1 Dec. 1988. 

4. Giarratano, J. C. (1989, May). “Artificial Intelli- 
gence Section,” CUPS User’s Guide, Version 43 of 
CUPS. Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. 


44 



