
Introduction 

The General Mission Analysis Tool (GMAT) is a space trajectory optimization and mission analysis system developed by 
NASA and private industry in the spirit of the NASA Mission. GMAT contains new technology and is a testbed for future 
technology development. 

The goal of the GMAT project is to develop new space trajectory optimization and mission design technology by working 
inclusively with ordinary people, universities, businesses, and other government organizations, and to share that technology 
in an open and unhindered way. GMAT is a free and open source software system licensed under the NASA Open Source 
Agreement : free for anyone to use in development of new mission concepts or to improve current missions, freely available 
in source code form for enhancement or further technology development. 


System Description 


GMAT is an open source, platform independent trajectory optimization and 
design system system. We use an open source process to permit anyone to 
develop and validate new algorithms and to enable new algorithms to quickly 
transition into the high fidelity core. 

GMAT is designed to model and optimize spacecraft trajectories in flight 
regimes ranging from low Earth orbit to lunar applications, interplanetary 
trajectories, and other deep space missions. The system supports constrained 
and unconstrained trajectory optimization and built-in features make defining 
cost and constraint functions trivial so analysts can determine how their 
inclusion or exclusion effects solutions. 

The system also contains initial value solvers (propagation) and boundary 
value solvers and efficiently propagates spacecraft either singly or coupled. 



GMAT's propagators naturally synchronize the epochs of multiple vehicles and shorten run times by avoiding fixed step 


integration or interpolation to synchronize epochs of spacecraft 


A user can interact with GMAT using either a graphical user interface (GUI) or script language that has a syntax similar to 
the MathWorks' MATLAB ® 1 system. All of the system elements can be expressed through either interface and users can 



configure elements in the GUI and then view the corresponding script, or 
write script and load it into GMAT. 

Analysts model space missions in GMAT by first creating resources such 
as spacecraft, propagators, and optimizers to name a few. These 
resources can be configured to meet the needs of specific applications and 
missions. After the resources are configured they are used in the mission 
sequence to model the motion of spacecraft and simulate events in a 
mission's time evolution. The mission sequence supports commands such 
as Nonlinear Constraint, Minimize, Propagate, Function Calls, Inline 
Math, and Script Events among others. 

The system can display trajectories in space, plot parameters against one 
another, and save parameters to files for later processing. The trajectory 
and plot capabilities are fully interactive, plotting data as a mission is run 
and allowing users to zoom into regions of interest. Trajectories and data 
can be viewed in any coordinate system defined in GMAT, and GMAT 
allows users to rotate the view and set the focus to any object in the 
display. The trajectory view can be animated so users can watch the 
evolution of the trajectory over time. 


1 MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 







Development Approach 

GMAT is written to run on Windows, Linux and Macintosh platforms, using the wxWidgets cross platform UI Framework, 
and can be built using either commercial development tools or the GNU Compiler Collection (gcc). The system is 
implemented in C++ using an Object Oriented methodology, with a rich class structure designed to make new features 
simple to incorporate. Extensive documentation is available that describes the architectural design, mathematical models 
and algorithms, testing procedures, system interfaces, and how to use GMAT. 


Project Status 

While GMAT has undergone extensive testing and is mature software, we consider the software to be in Beta form. GMAT 
is not sufficiently verified to be used operationally. The optimization capabilities of GMAT have been used to develop 
optimal solutions for numerous missions. However, we independently verify these solutions in operational systems. 

The GMAT Team is currently working on four activities: Maintenance and bug fixes, expanding the architectural 
specification, testing, and transitioning to an open source development process. The objective of the current development 
cycle is to provide a build for final beta testing in November 2007. 



GMAT on Windows 


Participation 


CHAT - Central Minton Anaiyil* Tool 


▼ •Spacecraft 

I Hardware 
V MMSRtf 
_1 Formations 

▼ • Burns 

MIST 
MALM 

M LunarPhasedV 

V • Propagators 

t LunarSB 

► _J Universe 

► lil Solvers 

V • Plots /Reports 

f\j EarthOistance 
D ReportFilel 

• OCl. Earth MJ2K 

• OCL Earth MoonRot ' 

’** Targeting Completed in 4 iterations 
iFInal Variable values: 

ALM.V - -0 3 54 748809648 


GMAT on Macintosh 



it: /Users/wcshoan/dev/Ec.CMAT /bin/DSC.DLS.scrlpt 


•** Targeting Completed in 4 iterations 
Final Vanable values: 

ALM.V = -0.354476710608 

Mission run completed. 


script: /home7d|c/TS_CodeA3MAT/tiln/DemoScripts/MMSDoubleUinarSwlngfay. iX = -936593 Y = 7 


GMAT on Linux 


The GMAT project has been a collaborative effort between NASA and industry partners at every step in the project 
lifecycle from requirements definition, to design, implementation, and testing. The project is currently transitioning to an 
open source development process. We invite interested parties to send us contact information so we can start to explore 
ways we can work together to make GMAT as useful as possible to the aerospace community. We welcome new 
contributors to the project, either as users providing feedback about the features of the system, or developers interested in 
contributing to the implementation of the system. 


Partners to date include: 


NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
Thinking Systems, Inc. 

Computer Sciences Corporation 
Honeywell Technology Solutions, Inc. 


The following people can be contacted for additional information about the General Mission Analysis Tool. 


Steven P. Hughes 

NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center 
Code 595 

Greenbelt MD 20771 

(301)286-0145 

Steven.P.Hughes@nasa.g ov 


Darrel J. Conway 
Thinking Systems, Inc. 
6441 N Camino Libby 
Tucson, AZ 85718 
(623) 298-4530 
djc@thinksvsinc.com 





