Adoption of Test Driven Development and Continuous 
Integration for the Development of the Trick Simulation 

Toolkit 


John M. Penn 

Trick Development Lead/ Senior Engineer 
L-3 STRAUS Division 
NASA JSC Engineering Directorate 
Software, Robotics, and Simulation Division 
Simulation and Graphics Branch 


This paper describes the adoption of a Test Driven Development approach and a 
Continuous Integration System in the development of the Trick Simulation Toolkit, a 
generic simulation development environment for creating high fidelity training and 
engineering simulations at the NASA/Johnson Space Center and many other NASA 
facilities. 

It describes what was learned and the significant benefits seen, such as fast, thorough, 
and clear test feedback every time code is checked-in to the code repository. It also 
describes a system that encourages development of code that is much more flexible, 
maintainable, and reliable. 

The Trick Simulation Toolkit development environment provides a common architecture 
for user-defined simulations. Trick builds executable simulations using user-supplied 
simulation-definition files (S define) and user supplied "model code". For each Trick- 
based simulation, Trick automatically provides job scheduling, checkpoint / restore, data- 
recording, interactive variable manipulation (variable server), and an input-processor. 
Also included are tools for plotting recorded data and various other supporting tools and 
libraries. 

Trick is written in C/C++ and Java and supports both Linux and MacOSX. 

Prior to adopting this new development approach, Trick testing consisted primarily of 
running a few large simulations, with the hope that their complexity and scale would 
exercise most of Trick's code and expose any recently introduced bugs. Unsurprising, this 
approach yielded inconsistent results. It was obvious that a more systematic, thorough 
approach was required. 

After seeing examples of some Java-based projects that used the JUnit test framework, 
similar test frameworks for C and C++ were sought. Several were found, all clearly 
inspired by JUnit. Googletest, a freely available Open source testing framework, was 
selected as the most appropriate and capable. 

The new approach was implemented while rewriting the Trick memory management 


1 



component, to eliminate a fundamental design flaw. The benefits became obvious almost 
immediately, not just in the correctness of the individual functions and classes but also in 
the correctness and flexibility being added to the overall design. Creating code to be 
testable, and testing as it was created resulted not only in better working code, but also in 
better-organized, flexible, and readable (i.e., articulate) code. This was, in essence the 
Test-driven development (TDD) methodology created by Kent Beck. Seeing the benefits 
of Test Driven Development, other Trick components were refactored to make them 
more testable and tests were designed and implemented for them. 

Jenkins (originally named Hudson) brought significant automation to our development 
process. Jenkins is a freely available (MIT License), easy to use, Java application that 
initiates and monitors repeated job executions. Its primary use is as a continuous 
integration system, for automated building and testing of software projects. Jenkins 
schedules a build of the Trick distribution, on each of the different machine 
architecture/operating system combinations that is supported, every 15 minutes (if our 
Subversion source code repository has been updated). After a successful build, it runs the 
entire unit test suite and then a collection of Trick based test simulations. Je nk ins also 
provides both a summary and a detailed status result. 

Within 1 5 minutes of any source code check in, the state of the entire code base is 
determined. If a problem is detected, Jenkins provides the details that allow the problem 
to be quickly identified. 

The combination of Test Driven Development and a Continuous Software Integration 
System has given us much more confidence in our code. Not only has it made Trick more 
reliable, flexible, maintainable, it’s made Trick development more efficient and more 
pleasant. 


2 



