REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewin g instructions, searching existing data sources gathering 
and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information 
including suggestions for reducing the burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188). 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, Respondents should be award that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to 
comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number J y P y 9 0 

PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS, 


|2. REPORT TYPE 


1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 

19-MAR-2003 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Access To Environmental Data Via NRL's Geospatial Information DataBase 


Conference Proceedings, (refereed) 


13. DATES COVERED (From - To) 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


15b. GRANT NUMBER 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

MICHAEL M HARRIS KEVIN B SHAW FRANK P. McCREEDY ROY VICTOR LADNER 

RUTH ANNE WILSON ELIZABETH G. WARNER UDAYKIRAN KATIKANENi 
JOHN TERRY SAMPLE 


5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

0603704N 


5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Naval Research Laboratory 
Marine Geoscience Division 
Stennis Space Center, MS 39529-5004 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

SPAWAR PMW 155 
4301 Pacific Highway 
San Diego, CA 92110 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

74-7441-B3 


8. REPORTING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

NRL/PP/7440-03-1013 

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 

SPAWAR 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 


Approved for public release,distribution is unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


20030812 059 


14, ABSTRACT 

The Naval Research Laboratory's (NRL) Geospatial information Database (GIDB) Portal System is a standards-based portal for geospatial information discovery, access and 
mapping over the Internet, The system has proven to be a powerful tool for gathering heterogeneous environmental data from disparate databases distributed across the Internet 
Information is displayed in a *GJS like" fashion for data overlay and comparison using NRL's or other popular viewers. Data can be exported in several formats for use in analysis 
packages. The technology is being used in the new Tactical Environmental Data Services (TEDServices) architecture. 

The portal system was developed in Java for platform portability. Its components include a downloadable thick client, a Web browser-based thin client, a PDA client and a flexible 
plug-in server architecture (implemented as a Java servlet) that can allow data of any origin to be distributed to the clients. An open source, all Java object-oriented database 
management system, called Ozone, is also available for deployments requiring custom data storage. 

P0rtal SyStem present,y connects the to nearly 300 Services and 50 Servers across the U.S, The system is government-owned and requires no licensing The 
GIDB Portal System is area-of-interest and theme-of-interest driven for ease of use {from a neighborhood-level to country or world resolution). 

This Portal System technology has been under development at NRL for the past nine yearn with support from multiple sponsors including ONR, NRL NIMA and SPAWAR These 
efforts have culminated in an advanced portal system that is being used operationally by several programs. 

The U.S, National Guard Counter Drug Program is currently using a version of the GIDB Portal System technology as the basis for their Digital Mapping Server (DMS) Portal in supj: 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 

Geospatial Information Database (GIDB) Portal System 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 


b. ABSTRACT 


c. THIS PAGE 


unclassified unclassified unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER OF 

ABSTRACT 

PAGES 

Unlimited 

7 


Michael Harris 

19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code) 

228-688-4420 


Standard Form 298 {Rev. 8/98) 




Access to Environmental Data Via 
NRL's Geospatial Information DataBase 


Mike Harris, Kevin Shaw, Frank McCreedy, Roy Ladner, Ruth Wilson, Elizabeth 
Warner, Udaykiran Katikaneni, John Sample 

Naval Research Laboratory 

Abstract 

The Naval Research Laboratory’s (NRL) Geospatial Information Database 
(GIDB) Portal System is a standards-based portal for geospatial information discovery, 
access and mapping over the Internet, The system has proven to be a powerful tool for 
gathering heterogeneous environmental data from disparate databases distributed across 
the Internet. Information is displayed in a “GIS (Geographic Information System) like” 
fashion for data overlay and comparison using NRL’s or other popular viewers. Data can 
be exported in several formats for use in analysis packages. The technology is being used 
in the new Tactical Environmental Data Services (TEDServices) architecture. 

The portal system was developed in Java for platform portability. Its components 
include a downloadable thick client, a Web browser-based thin client, a PDA client and a 
flexible, plug-in server architecture (implemented as a Java servlet) that can allow data of 
any origin to be distributed to the clients. An open source, all Java object-oriented 
database management system, called Ozone, is also available for deployments requiring 
custom data storage. 

The GIDB Portal System presently connects the user to 128 servers including 
over 800 services across the U.S. The system is government-owned and requires no 
licensing. The GIDB Portal System is area-of-interest and theme-of-interest driven for 
ease of use (from a neighborhood-level to country or world resolution). 

This Portal System technology has been under development at NRL for the past 
nine years with support from multiple sponsors including ONR, NRL, NIMA and 
SPAWAR. These efforts have culminated in an advanced portal system that is being 
used operationally by several programs. 

The U.S. National Guard Counter Drug Program is currently using a version of 
the GIDB Portal System technology as the basis for their Digital Mapping Server (DMS) 
Portal in support of counter drug agents and agencies. This technology is also in use at 
NIMA’s Gateway SIPRNET site allowing the dissemination of local file system 
information at the NIMA Gateway as well as integrating that information with multiple 
other non-NIMA sources. The GIDB technology is being transitioned in FY 04 as the 
next generation delivery mechanism for oceanographic, meteorological and 
environmental data to the U.S. Navy through the SPAWAR PMW-155 program Tactical 
Environmental Data Services (TEDServices). 

Background 

Environmental data must be collected, stored and made readily available to users. 
Many types of environmental data are needed to support naval operations, especially in 
the littoral. As an example bathymetry is required for safe navigation, circulation 
models, mine warfare tactical decision aids, acoustic propagation models, wave and surf 


1 



forecast models, tide models and many others. During operations and exercises high 
resolution real-time data is needed to verify and supplement historical holdings. 
Technology developed under the Geospatial Information DataBase (GIDB™) is one 
solution to the dissemination, storage and connectivity challenges involved with linking 
environmental data from multiple sources to multiple users. 

The Naval Research Laboratory’s (NRL) Mapping Charting and Geodesy 
Branch’s interest in Object Oriented database approaches began in 1991. The National 
Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) established Vector Product Format (VPF) as the 
digital standard for disseminating their mapping and charting data. Under tasking from 
the Oceanographer of the Navy, NRL found the format chosen for the data model 
cumbersome and less than optimal; however, better data models did not exist. 1 An 
Object Oriented (OO) data model was proposed, and in 1994 NRL developed an OO 
prototype of the Digital Nautical Chart, a complex VPF product, for NIMA. This 
successful effort led to the development of several other object models and eventually 
Object VPF. Subsequently object models were also developed for raster and text 
products. CORBA and JAVA were introduced the following year and NRL developed an 
Extended VPF OO model to represent terrain data in three dimensions for the modeling 
and simulation community. By 1997 CORBA 2.0 was a stable standard, JAVA became 
the OO programming language of choice, and NRL began working on web-based digital 
mapping capabilities leading to the GIDB. 

GIDB 

GIDB is an object-oriented, CORBA-compliant spatial database that supports 
remote access and analysis of complex spatial data via a Java Applet over the internet. 2 
Users can query the database by area-of-interest, time-of-interest, distance and attribute. 
The database component of GIDB is an Open Source, all-Java, OO-database management 
system called Ozone. 3 Data is stored into a common OO-data model designed to retrieve 
data in a mapping context in terms of scale, thematic layers, and feature classification 
types. GIDB is able to store data from multiple sources including NIMA, the Naval 
Oceanographic Office, the U.S. Geological Survey, the National Ocean Survey, the U.S. 
Census Bureau, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Most data is stored in either VPF 
format or ESRI’s Shapefile Format. 

Distributed Database Portal 

Storing all mapping data in a single database is impractical. With the introduction 
of the GIDB portal, the system has moved from a monolithic database to a truly 
distributed database system able to connect and retrieve data from disparate databases in 
addition to the GIDB Ozone database. The portal establishes a common data request 
format and a common data transfer format. As a result the GIDB portal allows retrieval 
of data from existing data repositories regardless of whether they are relational databases, 
hybrid systems or pure OO-database management systems (OODBMS). 4 Translation of 
data from its native format to the common data transfer format occurs in the portal. The 
portal is made up of many drivers, one written for each new format, and each providing a 
common interface between the data source and the GIDB system. The GIDB portal 
makes details of data translation transparent to the user. 


2 


New Technology and Standards 

GIDB success has been based on its ability to take advantage of new technology 
and standards. The 00 database design provides for topological support among 
coverages, non-duplication of features (points, lines or areas) among coverages, 
improved data update and increased access speed. Ozone was chosen as the OODBMS 
for GIDB because it is open-source which provides distinct advantages including: access 
to source code to customize the database; and no licensing fees. 5 Object Management 
Group’s CORBA (Common Object Request Broker Architecture) standard is used to 
specify the middleware architecture for distributed object communication between client 
and server. CORBA is the communication element that handles messages between 
objects, converts parameters to common data types, and serves as a translator between 
different programming languages. The standard language is Java. Java is the object- 
oriented programming language embeddable in internet web pages. Java programs are 
commonly called applets. GIDB’s Web Mapping Toolkit is written in Java using 
CORBA standards. This architecture gives a user (client) access to a plethora of map 
data using a standard web browser. 6 GIDB also uses XML-based standards to expand 
its mapping portal capabilities. XML (extensible Markup Language) is a World Wide 
Web Consortium Standard designed for internet use. 7 XML allows users to define the 
data types of information (ex: conductivity, temperature, depth) and include the semantic 
data type (ex: temperature) information in the same file as the data itself (ex: 85, 92, 77). 
Using XML catalogs GIDB can determine what data is available and how to retrieve it. 
Adhering to these standards, GIDB supports VPF products, raster imagery, shape file 
format, video clips, audio clips, temporal data, and industry standards. 

User Interfaces 

NRL has developed several user interfaces for the GIDB including a simple Web- 
based Java Thin-client, a more sophisticated application (Thick-client) that can be 
downloaded, a PDA client, and a plug in. NRL’s viewers let a user select data by 
location, area-of-interest, or theme. The Thick-client allows multiple layers of 
information to be viewed simultaneously and includes a growing number of tools to 
adjust transparency, zoom from a world view down to a neighborhood area, measure 
distances, change colors, mark addresses, perform spatial queries, and other mapping 
functions. Figure 1 shows a screen capture from the Thick-client, Data can be exported 
in several formats including Shape-File, and VPF. Because GIDB is standards based the 
viewer can be replaced with a commercial one like ESRI’s Arc-View or a custom viewer. 
GIDB connectivity between client and server functions normally with data simply 
supplied to a different viewer interface with its particular set of map ping tools. 


3 




Figure 1, 

A sample GIDB Portal System Thick-client display showing integrated cloud cover, 
meteorological information, mineral locations, and other sources. 

TEDServiees 

Portions of the GIDB technology are being used in SPAWAR’s Tactical 
Environmental Data Services (TEDServiees) program to deliver critical environmental 
information to sailors, weapon systems and MetOc data users. TEDServiees provides the 
middleware infrastructure to transport and transform environmental data. Following 
guidance established by the Navigator of the Navy, data complies with the WGS84 datum 
and universal time coordinate standards. The Oceanographer of the Navy established a 
concept of operations to ensure the best data gets to the user. In that concept production 
centers (ex: the Naval Oceanographic Office, and the Fleet Numerical Meteorological 
and Oceanographic Center) generate atmospheric and ocean model predictions based on 
in-situ data. Domain Authorities (environmental data experts) examine data from 
multiple sources, merge it and resolve conflicts in the predictions with other information 
to generate a Virtual Natural Environment (VNE). Centers of Expertise (warfare area 
experts) use the VNE in automated tactical decision aids (TDA) to make judgments on 
the ability to perform certain operations and determine a measure of risk imposed by the 
environment. Remote users afloat or ashore can examine the products from both the 
Domain Authorities and the Centers of Expertise before conducting operations. 

Bandwidth Savers 

TEDServiees incorporates several procedures and new developments to 
compensate for the diminishing bandwidth between production center and user. The first 
is a VNE data cache that is forward deployed to respective components. Next, to 
minimize the amount of data passing over the network, TEDServiees Clients use a 
MetOc/Mission Rules Based Data Order (MRBDO) process to subscribe only to relevant 


4 



data by mission, platform, parameter, application or product. This function is 
complemented by a Local Data Broker (LDB) that minimizes reach back requirements. 
The LDB knows what data is stored locally, and how to contact other TEDServices 
Gateways to request just the needed products in their area of interest. For large data 
transfers TEDServices employs Resumable Object Streams (ROS) for all traffic between 
major components. In the event of a loss of network connection by either the client or 
server, ROS knows how much data was transmitted. When the network comes back up, 
ROS continues data transfer where it left off. Retransmission is not required. At the user 
end a development called Collaborative Application Sharing (CASP) allows remote 
application users to share the “state” of their applications across the internet. For 
instance an expert at a Center of Expertise can use the VNE in a TDA to arrive at a 
particular decision and share only the settings on his machine with a remote user. The 
remote user receives only the “state” of the expert’s application and uses that information 
in his local VNE and TDA to examine the results with a minimum of data transfer. 

USERS 

GIDB technology is supporting a growing number of users. TEDServices, 
described above, is the U.S. Navy’s primary user of the technology for distributing 
critical environmental data. Communications are bi-directional and the design follows 
the Chief of Naval Operations concept of operations for ensuring that the best de- 
conflicted environmental data reaches the user. 

The U.S. National Guard Bureau’s Counter Drug Office uses the portal to support 
drug and law enforcement agencies across the United States with a one-stop web site for 
geospatial information. This system was designed in collaboration with the Intelligence 
Department of the Head Quarters Marine Corps. The portal, which has no data in it per 
se, is currently linked to over 128 servers representing over 800 services nation wide. 
These sources of geospatial information generally represent information in the 
continental United States, selectable by area of interest. Data can be viewed, printed as a 
map or used in PowerPoint presentations. User documentation is provided. 

The National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) hosts a classified version of 
the GIDB Portal at the NIMA Gateway in Missouri. The Naval Oceanographic Office 
also hosts SIPRNET versions of the GIDB technology to support tactical decision aids. 

Exercises supported 

GIDB technology has been used in many fleet and national exercises to 
demonstrate its capabilities. In the spring of 1999 the Marine Corps used GIDB to 
support Exercise Urban Warrior. This exercise demonstrated remote updating of Digital 
Nautical Chart onboard a ship at sea, and the use of three-dimensional representations of 
urban environments to train and track assault troops. GIDB supported Fleet Battle 
Experiment Hotel in July 2000 demonstrating near real-time creation and use of Mission 
Specific Data Set environmental overlays on Digital Nautical Chart. Exercise 
Millennium Dragon, September 2000, used GIDB technology to provide map objects to 
the Marine command center, disseminate imagery from airborne surveys, and track 
vehicles in a simulated amphibious assault inland. The Marine Corps Warfighting 
Laboratory used the GIDB technology in February and June of 2001 to support Exercise 
Capable Warrior on the U.S. west coast during expeditionary warfare training. More 


5 


recently TEDServices supported a major anti-submarine warfare exercise. Fleet Battle 
Experiment Kilo, by providing critical environmental data. Supporting Homeland 
Defense, GIDB was used in the command center for the highly publicized TOPOFF2 
Exercise providing imagery, map and other geospatial information, to the top officials at 
city, county, state and national levels for decision making. 

Conclusions 

The GIDB provides connectivity to heterogeneous databases across the internet 
using portal technology. The portal establishes a common data format, and provides 
translation of data from native formats. GIDB uses CORBA standards, is written in 
JAVA for platform independence, and uses XML standards. Queries are made using a 
web based Thin-elient or a more robust application, Thick-client. Data is easily accessed 
by area-of-interest, theme, location or by a specific database service. 

Distribution and access to environmental data is simplified with GIDB’s flexible 
approach to manage, store and assimilate real-time, historical and model output. Users of 
the technology include: the National Guard for law enforcement and counter drug 
operations; the U.S. Marine Corps for map services; the National Imagery and Mapping 
Agency for product dissemination; and the Navy uses the technology in TEDServices to 
disseminate environmental data needed to support tactical decision aids. GIDB 
environmental data distribution capabilities have been demonstrated in numerous 
exercises. GIDB is government owned, patent protected, and license-free. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors acknowledge the multiple sponsors of the GIDB and TEDServices 
including: SPAWAR PMW150, Captain Robert Clark Program Manager, Program 
Element number 0603704N; the Marine Corps Warfighting Lab under Program Element 
number 0603640M; the Office of Naval Research and the Naval Research Laboratory 
under Program Element 060328N; the national Imagery and Mapping Agency under 
Program element 0603832D; and the National Guard Bureau-CounterDrug Offices, under 
the direction of Colonel William ‘Billy’ Asbell and Major Michael Thomas. 

References 


1 Cobb, Foley, Wilson, Chung and Shaw, “An OO Database Migrates to the Web,” IEEE Software, Vol 15 
No. 3, pg 22-30, May/June 1998 

2 Chung, Ladner, Wilson, Breckenridge and Shaw, “Adding the Third Dimension to Digital Mapping,” 3D 
Synthetic Environment Reconstruction . Chapter 3, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001 

3 http://www.ozone-db.org/ 

4 Wilson, Cobb, McCreedy, Ladner, Olivier, Lovitt, Shaw, Petry and Abdelgurefi, “Geographical Data 
Interchange Using XML-Enabled Technology within the GIDB System ” XML Data Management . Chapter 
13, Addison Wesley, 2003 

5 Warner, Ladner, Katikaneni, and Shea, “New Developments in Internet-Based Delivery of MetOc Data to 
Warfighters,” Proceedings from Oceans 2003 Conference, San Diego, 24 Sep 2003 


6 



6 Wilson, McCreedy, Ladner, Chung and Shaw, “Designs and Lessons Learned in Object-Oriented Web- 
based Mapping,” Proceedings of the Southern Conference on Computing, The University of Southern 
Mississippi, October 26-28,2000, 

7 Chaudhri, Rashid, Zicari, XML Data Management.. Chapter 21, Addison Wesley, 2003 


7 



