//J - o 7 ~ - v^^ 



^ /y 



THB FRICTION AND WEAR OF TPS FIBERS 

PROGRESS REPORT ON 

NASA GRANT NAG 2-444 

November 1987 



W. D. BASCOM AND S. WONG 

MATERIALS SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT 
UNIVERSITY OF UTAH. SALT LAKE CITY. UT 84 1 1 2 

PREPARED FOR 



AMES RESEARCH CENTER. 

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION. 

MOFFETT FiaD. CA 94035 

ABSTRAa 

The sliding friction behavior of single filaments of SiOz, SiC and an 
aluminoborosilicate glass has been determined. These fibers are used in 
thermal protection systems (TPS) and are subject to damage during weaving 
and aero- maneuvering. All fibers exhibited stick-slip friction indicating the 
successive formation and rupture of strong junctions between the contacting 
filaments. The static f fictional resistance of the sized SiC filament was 4X 
greater than for the same filament after heat cleaning. This result suggests 
that the sizing is an organic polymer with a high shear yield strength. Heat 
cleaning exposes the SiC surface and/or leaves an inorganic residue so that 
the adhesional contact between filaments has a low fraaure energy and 
f rictional sliding occurs by brittle fracture. The frictional resistances of the 
sized and heat cleaned SiOz and glass filaments were all comparable to that 
of the heat cleaned SiC. It would appear that the sizings as well as the heat 
cleaned surfaces of the silica and glass have low fracture energies so that the 
sliding resistance is determined by brittle fracture. 

(NASA-CR-181496) THE FRICTION AND WEAR OF N88- 11830 

TPS FIBEBS Progress Report (Utah Univ.) 14 
p Avail: NTIS HC A03/HF A01 CSCL 11B 

nnclas 
G3/27 0106769 



THE FRICTION AND WEAR OF TPS FIBERS 

PROGRESS REPORT ON NASA GRANT NAG 2-444 

November 1987 

INTRODUCTION 

Fabrics and felts of thermal resistant silica, aluminoborosillcate and 
silicon carbide fibers are being evaluated for thermal protection systems 
(TPS) at NASA-Ames for the next generation reentry vehicles. These 
inherently brittle fibers suffer abrasion damage during processmg, especially 
weaving, and during aero-maneuvering at ambient and upper operating 
temperatures (1400 <>C). This damage occurs when individual fibers move 
across each other and is especially severe after the loss oi protective coatings 
(sizing) at temperatures of 330oC and lover. However, the micro- mechanics 
of fiber damage during processing or when a fabric is subjected to stress is 
poorly understood: especially the effect cf fiber sizings. Intuitively, one 
would expea that protective sizings would reduce the sliding friction. The 
results reported here suggest that this is not necessarily true. 



EXPERIMENTAL 

Material! The fibers tested are listed in Table I and were supplied 
by the Thermal Protection Branch, NASA Ames. 

TABLE I 



Fiber 
Designation 


Material 
Type 


Sizing 


NicalonNLM-102 
NicalonNLM-102 


SiC 
SiC 


yes 
HO 


Neitel312 
Neztel312 


AlOBSib 
AlOBSi 


yes 
HC 


Astroquartz 
Astroquartz 


Si02 
Si02 


yes 
HC 


a heat cleaned 

b aluminoborosillcate 





A pparmtus Two single filaments were extracted from a fiber tow one 
of which was mounted horizontally on a mechanical platform and the other 
hung vertically from a microbalance as shown in Figure 1. A device was 
developed to hold the horizontal fiber using minigrabber electronic test 
clips<= . The fiber was held at each end by the clips and the clips were glued 
to vertical Lucite posts mounted on a Lucite stand. The stand was 
constructed so that the distance between the posts could be varied to adjust 
the tension on the fiber. As discussed in the next section, control of the 
tension on the horizontal fiber was critically important in these experiments. 
The fixture holding the horizontal fiber was itself placed on a precision 
mechanical stage that could be moved up or down at preset rates and 
distances. The platform could also be moved in the horizontal direction by a 
fine thread micrometer stage. 



microbalance 



vertical 
fiber 



7^ S 




/ 



platform 



hori2ontal fiber 



enclostire 



Figure 1 - Schematic of the apparatus used to measure the sliding friction of single 
filaments. The vertical filament vas held from a hook at the end of a stiff vire 
attached to the microbalance. 



^ The fliicroclips eliminate the need to glue the fiber ends thus reducing a major source 
of chemical contamination of the fiber surface. The clips held the fragile filaments 
▼ithout crushing. 



The vertical filament was fiied to a wire loop with a small strip of 
pressure sensitive tape and the loop hung on a hook at the end of the wire 
connected to the microbalance (Figure 2). The assembly was enclosed in a 
Lucite box. 



wire loop 




n 



f^ tape 



filament 



Figure 2 - Method used to attach vertical filament to a vire hoop. 

The microbalance was the Cahn Instrument. Model 2000 and the 
mechanical stage including the motor control was built by Rame-Hart, Inc. 
(Mountain Lakes, Nj). 

Procedufe The horizonUl filament was gripped by the microclips 
and the distance between the clips adjusted until there was a slight tension 
on the filament. This procedure was somewhat arbitrary in that the tension 
on the filament could not be measured. Through trial and error it was found 
that the experimental results were most repeatable if the fiber was made 
just slightly taut by a few turns of the screw mechanism used to adjust the 
distance between the clips. 

Friction measurements were made by first weighing the vertical 
filament including the wire and tape (W) on the microbalance. Next the 
horizontal filament was moved against the vertical filament until the latter 
was displaced the distance d and was at an angle 8 to the vertical direction 
as shown in Figure 3- The angle 6 was measured using a telescope fitted with 
a goniometer eyepiece. The force of the vertical filament against the 
horizontal filament (N) was calculated using the expression given in Figure 3. 




■zr 



I 




tane = — = sine 

N - W sin 8 
Figure 3 - Force balance for the contacting filaments. 

Frictional forces between the two filaments were measured by 
lowering and then raising the mechanical platform so that the horizontal 
fiber first moved downward against the vertical fiber than the stage 
direction was reversed so that the horizontal fiber moved upward. The 
length of each traverse was about 3 mm. Only the data for the initial 
downward traverse are reported here since they represent the friaional 
force between "nascent" filaments. The effea of multiple traverses will be 
reported later, 

RESULTS 

Preliminary experiments revealed the importance of the tension on 
the horizontal filament. It the filament is slack than it tends to swing as it 
slides against the vertical filament. When this occurs the force N is not 
constant. If the tension on the filament is too great, then a high frequency 
vibrational oscillation develops in the horizontal filament; the "violin effect" 
An example of this behavior is shown in Figure 4. 




R3«ce 



Figure 4 - High frequency vibration observed vhen the horizontal filament is highly 
stressed ( sized Nextel) 



By applying a slight tension to the fiber, just enough to make it taut, a 
stick-slip behavior is observed as shown in Figure 3 which is assumed to be 
characteristic of the static and dynamic the sliding friction of filaments 
respectively. Stick-slip sliding friction of thin filaments has been observed in 
the extensive work reported by Briscoe (1-5). Moreover, it is reasonable to 
expect that the frictional sliding of filaments should exhibit a stick-slip 
behavior. 

All of the filaments listed in Table I were tested in this preliminary 
study and all exhibited these effeas of the tension on the horizontal 
filament. 

As discussed in the next section, the adhesion between small 
diameter filaments is very strong when they come into contact. As the 
horizontal filament moves against the vertical filament the shearing force 
between the filaments increases until the junction between the fibers shears 
or fractures. The fibers then slide against each other, the slip region, until 
the shear force is reduced to a level that the filaments readhere and the 
entire process is repeated. The peak heights are an index of the static 
frictional force whereas the slip region reflects kinetic friction. 



All of the fibers were relesled at essentially the same contaa force (N 
- 5 to 6m8) and with the horizontal filament under a slight tension. The 
static friaional force, i.e. the peak heights, were averaged and the results are 
given in Table II, Each datum point represents the average of sii tests with 
new filaments used in each test. There was a wide distribution in the static 
contact stress both for a given fiber pair and for different fibers taken from 
the same tow. The standard deviation (SD) given in Table II. includes the 
variance in one test and for replicate tests. 

Table II 

Fiber Static Friction SD 
(mg force) (mg force) 



Nicalon (sized) 11.6 9.4 

Nicalon(HC) 3.1 0.5 

Nextel (sized) 2.2 0.8 

Nextel (HO 2.5 0.92 

Astroquartz (sized) 1.46 0.62 

Astroquartz (HO 1,94 0,31 



8 



ORIGINAL PA.GE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 




Figure 3 - A stick-slip siidiiig friction plot for heat cleaned Nextel filafflents. The 
positive (upper) trace corresponds to the downward movefflent of the horizontal 
filament. The peak heights are the static frictional force to rupture junctions betveen 
the fibers. The curves between peaks are the slip regions that occur as the filaments 
slide against each other. 



DISCUSSION 

Static Friction: -The sliding friction between small diameter 
filaments involves surprisingly high stresses even though the aaual forces 

are relatively small. The geometric area of contact between two 10|lm 
diameter filaments is infinitesimally small. Actually, there is some elastic 
(and possibly plastic deformation) so that the area of contaa is finite as 

shown in Figure 6. Let us assume that the contaa radius is 0.1 |im. If we 
apply a force of 5mg by pushing one fiber against the other as in Figure 2. 
then the stress, the force divided by the area of contact (F/A), is 108 kg- 
force/m2 or about lO-* psi. Moreover, the actual area of contact is likely to 
be smaller than the geometric area due to surface roughness. As shown in 
Figure 7 surface asperities limit the actual contact area. If we assume that 
the area of contact is actually one-tenth of the geometric area, then the 
contact pressure is of the order of 10^ psi. 




10|jm 



Figure 6 - The dimeasions of the contact area betveen crossed filameats is small 
compared to the filament diameter. 




Figure 7 - The actual area of contact is less than the geometric area due to the micro- 
roughness of the surfaces. 



Consequently, when two small diameter fibers are brought into 
contact under a small applied force the stresses are large enough that they 
may actually "weld" together. In the case of inorganic fibers such as glass, 
SiC or Si02 it is difficult to envision the chemical nature of this "weld '. Most 
likely the junction would have the same mechanical properties as that of the 
fibers. 

If the fibers are coated with an organic polymer sizing, the high 
contact stress may cause the polymer coatings to flow together to form a 
junction that has the same shear strength as the polymer itself. 



10 



The strength of a iunction formed between two inorganic fibers such 
as SiOz and the strength of a junaion formed between two fibers with a 
polymer coating will be very different. Although the shear strength of Si02 
is considerably higher than the shear strength of an organic polymer, 
inorganic solids do not fail in shear but fail by brittle fracture at a 
significantly lower strength than their shear strength. Polymers, on the 
other hand fail by shear yielding. 

Now we can understand the difference in the static friction results in 
Table II. The Nicalon fiber is coated with an organic polymer so that when 
the filaments are brought into contaa a junction is formed having a high 
shear yield strength which would explain the high frictional force for this 
fiber. Removal of this coating by heat treatment exposes the SiC fiber 
although the removal of the sizing may not be complete in which case a 
carbonaceous residue is left on the surface. In either event, the strength of 
the junction formed by heat cleaned Nicalon filaments is determined by the 
brittle frarture resistance of the contacting surfaces which is significantly 
less than the shear yield strength erf the junction form by the sized fibers. 

The static frictional behavior d* the sized and heat treated filaments of 
both Nextel and Astroquartz filaments were not significantly different. In 
the case of the Astroquartz. the sizing is known to be a siiane coupling agent 
(aminopropylsilane, Union Carbide A-1 100). These silanes form three 
dimensional, highly crossUnked networks (6) which are very friable and so 
have fracture energies not greatly different than the fiber itself. 

Kinetic Friction: After the junaion between two filaments ruptures, 
the filaments slide against each other; the slip region shown schematically in 
Figure 8. 



stick 



force 




slip 



vertical Mveaent 
of pi at fort (do«n) 



Figure 8 - Schematic of stick-slip friction. 



u 



Only in the case of the Nicalon filaments, sized ys heat cleaned, was there a 
distinct difference in the slip behavior. In Figure 9, typical stick-slip traces 
are shown for sized and heat cleaned Nicalon. The prolonged slip of the sized 
filament suggests a "plowing" of the organic coating resisting the sliding of 
the filaments over each other. On the other hand, the duration of the slip of 
the heat cleaned fiber was short suggesting little resistance to sliding. These 
differences correlate with the static friction resistance of these fibers. 

The slip response d" the Nextel and Astroquartz, both sized and heat 
cleaned, were similar to that of the heat-cleaned Nicalon. This result is 
consistent with the argument made in the preceding seaion that the surfaces 
of these fibers are brittle and so exhibit low kinetic as well as static friclional 
resistance. 



ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
QE POOR QUALITY 



12 





/> 



/aT/*/^^ T^^^x/ C*^'^) 



B 



Figure 9 - Comparisoa of the slip region for sized (A) vs heat cleaned (B) NictUoa fiber. 



13 



CONCLUSIONS 

The static and kinetic sliding friction of the high modulus fibers 
studied here reflect the different mechanical properties of the filament 
surfaces. Based on what is knovn about the sized and heat cleaned Si02 
(Astroquartz) and the aluminoborosiiicate (Neitel) fibers, their surfaces are 
brittle and so eihibit low static and kinetic frictional resistance. The SiC 
fiber (Nicalon) is sized with a low modulus, high shear strength polymer and 
so exhibited a static friction force more than 5X that of the other fibers. 
Removal of this polymer sizing by heat cleaning reduced the static friction to 
a value comparable to that of the other fibers. The difference in the kinetic 
friction (slip) between the sized and heat cleaned Nicalon filaments is 
consistent with the sizing being a tough organic polymer and that after heat 
cleaning the surface is brittle. 

There are unresolved issues from this study that need to be 
addressed; 

a. It would be of considerable interest to observe the wear track that 
forms as the fibers stick and slide against each other. However, attempts to 
observe the wear track for sliding polymer filaments even using scanning 
electron microscopy SEM) have been unsuccessful (7). 

b. The effect of multiple traverses of the filaments is of interest since 
it would provide some indication of surface damage. Also, the wear track 
after many traverses may be visible using SEM. 

c. There was a rather large statistical variation in the static friction 
force (Table I) and m the shape oi the slip traces. This variation may be due 
to difference is the experimental conditions (contact force), differences in the 
surface chemical composition of different filaments taken from the same 
tow, and surface chemical and topographical microheterogeneity. 

Some of these issues are being studied. 

REFERENCES 

1. Briscoe. B.J. and Kremnitzer. S.L.. "A Study of the Friction and Adhesion of 
Polyethyleneterephthalate Monofilaments". J. Phys. D:Appl. Phys.. 12 505 
(1979) 

2. Adams. N. J.. Briscoe. B. J., and ^emnitzer. S. L.. The Effect of Liquids on 
the Autoadhesion and Friction of Polyethyleneterephthalate Monofilaments". 



M 



in Microscopic Asoeas of Adhesion and Lubrication. J. M. Georges. Ed., 
Elsevier. 1982. p.405 

3. Adams, M. J.. Briscoe. B.J. and ICremnitzer. S. L.. "A Survey of the Adhesion, 
Friction and Lubrication of Polyethylene Terephthalate Monofilaments", in 
Phvsicochemical Aspects of Polymer Surfaces. Vol I, K.L.Mittal, Ed., Plenum 
Press. 1983. p.425 

4. Briscoe. B. J. , Winkler. A., and Adams. M.J.. "A Statistical Analysis of the 
Frictional Forces Generated Between Monofilaments During Intermittent 
Sliding". J. Phys D: AppL Phys. li 2143 (1985) 

5. Briscoe, B, J., Wee. T. K.. Winkler, A., and Adams, M.J., " Wear of 
Poly(elhylene terephthalate) Monofilaments', in Polvmer Wear and Its 
ConlEoL L-H. Lee, Ed., ACS Symp. Series 287, American Chemical Society. 
Washington. DC. 1985. p.374 

6. Bascom. W. D.. " Structure of Silane Adhesion Promoter Films on Glass and 
Metal Surfaces". Macromolecuies 1 792(1 972) 

7. Briscoe. B. J., private communication 



