6 76 XotS 



AIAA-2002-^JT7 



DYNAMICS OF A 4x6-METER THIN FILM ELLIPTICAL INFLATED MEMBRANE 

FOR SPACE APPLICATIONS 



Matthew J. Casianof 

Fluid Physics and Dynamics Group/TD63 
Subsystem and Component Development Dept. 
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center 
Huntsville,AL3£*812 



Hamid R. Hamidzadehi 

South Dakota St. University 
Mechanical Engineering Department 
Brookings, South Dakota 



Michael L. Tinker* 

Structural Dynamics and Loads Group/ED21 

Structures, Mechanics, and Thermal Department 

NASA Marshall Space Flight Center 

Huntsville, AL 35812 



Abstract 

Dynamic characterization of a thin film inflatable 
elliptical structure is described in detail. A two-step finite 
element modeling approach in MSC/NASTRAN is 
utilized, consisting of (1) a nonlinear static pressurization 
procedure used to obtain the updated stiffness matrix, and 
(2) a modal "restart" eigen solution that uses the modified 
stiffness matrix. 

Unique problems encountered in modeling of this large 
4x6-meter lightweight inflatable art identified, including 
considerable difficulty in obtaining convergence in the 
nonlinear finite element pressurization solution. It was 
found that the extremely thin poiyimide film material 
(.001 in or 1 mil) presents tremendous problems in 
obtaining a converged solution when internal pressure 
loading is applied. Approaches utilized to overcome these 
difficulties are described. 

Comparison of finite element predictions for frequency 
and mode shapes of the inflated structure with closed-form 
solutions for a flat pre-tensionec membrane indicate 
reasonable agreement. 



tAerospace Technologist, 

tProfessor of Mechanical Engineering; Fellow 

ASME 

^Structural Dynamics Lead Engineer; Associate 

Fellow AIAA 



Copyright Q 2002 by the American institute of Aeronautics 
and Astronautics, Inc. No copyright is asserted in the United 
States under Title 17, U.S. Code. The U.S. government has a 
royalty-free license to exercise all rights under the copyright 
claimed herein for Governmental purposes. All other rights 
are reserved by the copyright owner. 



Introduction and Background 

Inflatable structures have been the subject of renewed 
interest in recent years for space applications such as 
communications antennas, solar thermal propulsion, and 
space solar power (Figs. 1-2). A major advantage of 
using inflatable structures in space is their extremely light 
weight. An obvious second advantage is on-orbit 
deployability and subsequent space savings in the launch 
configuration. A recent technology demonstrator flight 
for inflatable structures was the Inflatable Antenna 
Experiment (IAE) that was deployed on orbit from the 
Shuttle Orbiter. Although difficulty was encountered in 
the inflation/deployment phase, the flight was successful 
overall and provided valuable experience in the use of such 
structures (Ref. 1). 

The Solar Orbital Transfer Vehicle (SOTV), discussed 
in Ref. 2, and Solar Thermal Upper Stage (STUS), 
described in Refs. 3-5, are possible technology 
demonstrator flights for solar thermal propulsion. The 
basic concept behind solar thermal propulsion is to utilize 
sunlight or solar energy as a means of heating a working 
fluid (propellant) to provide thrust at increased specific 
impulse. As described in Ref. 6, thrust is produced by 
expanding the heated propellant through a nozzle. No 
combustion occurs, and the thrust level is low. For this 
reason, solar thermal propulsive systems are mainly 
applicable for orbital transfer vehicles. The engine system 
envisioned for the STUS is designed to utilize hydrogen 
propellant to produce a thrust level of about 2 Ibf. Two 
inflatable parabolic collectors could be used that would be 
rotated and gimbaled for focusing sunlight into an 
absorber cavity (Fig. 1, from Ref. 5). The collectors 
would be inflated after separation of the upper stage from 
the launch vehicle. 

Many investigators have considered the use of 
inflatable structures for space applications. Perhaps the 
earliest was Frei Otto (Ref. 7), who in 1962 published 
ideas for inflated tubular frames for use in structures such 
as orbiting platforms. A more recent proposed application 
involves the use of inflatable beam segments to replace 



1 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



solid segments of the Space Shuttle remote manipulator 
system and thus reduce storage space and inertia of the arm 
(Ref. 8). 

Several papers on static structural analysis of inflated 
cylinders have been written, describing different techniques 
such as linear shell theory, and nonlinear and variational 
methods (Refs. 9-17), but very little work had been done 
in dynamics of inflatable structures until recent years. In 
1988 Leonard (Ref. 18) indicated that elastic beam bending 
modes could be utilized in approximating lower-order 
frequencies of inflatable beams. Main, et al. wrote a very 
significant 1995 paper describing results of modal tests of 
inflated cantilever beams and the determination of effective 
material properties (Ref. 19). Changes in material 
properties for different pressures were also discussed, and 
the beam model was used in a more complex structure. 
The paper demonstrated that conventional finite element 
analysis packages could be very useful in the analysis of 
complex inflatable structures. Reference 20 describes an 
investigation of the dynamics of polyimide thin-film 
inflated cylinders, and Refs. 21-29 discuss recent dynamic 
tests/analyses and potential applications of inflatable solar 
concentrators. 



Description of Inflatable 

Concentrator Investigated in the 

Current Study 

In Fig. 3, a prototype elliptical, off-axis paraboloid 
4x6-meter inflatable concentrator manufactured by SRS 
Technologies, Inc. is shown that consists of a pressurized 
lenticular supported by an aluminum fixture. The 
aluminum fixture will be supported by four I-beam stands 
for testing in a horizontal configuration. The inflatable is 
attached to the fixture by 204 silicon catenaries. The 
lenticular has a 226-in. major axis and a 164.08-in minor 
axis. This collector can function as a space-based antenna 
for communications, surveillance, and radiometry, or as a 
solar concentrator assembly for solar thermal propulsion 
systems. The inflatable lenticular element is constructed 
of NASA Langley Research Center's CP-1 which is .001 
in (1 mil) thick. Silicon-backed Kapton is the adhesive 
used for joints in the inflatable structures. A reflective 
coating on the inner lenticular CP-1 film provides the 
means of collecting radio waves or solar energy. It is 
noted that the particular application for the 
antenna/concentrator depends on the surface accuracy of the 
reflective lenticular surface. Use as an optical system 
would require greater surface accuracy than a solar 
concentrator for propulsion systems, for example. 

In the case of solar thermal propulsion applications 
(Fig. 1), the collector assembly would focus sunlight into 
an absorber or secondary concentrator near the fixed ends 
of the struts. Solar energy stored in the absorber could be 
utilized to heat a propellant and generate thrust as 
described previously. 

Inflatable structures in general are extremely 
lightweight and the collector described in this paper is no 
exception. The thin-film inflatable part of the 
concentrator weighs approximately 3 lb. 



Modeling Approach and Results 

The finite element modeling technique involved two 
main steps: 1. Nonlinear static analysis, in which the 
internal pressure loading was applied to the lenticular 
element and a pretension applied to the catenaries, and 2. 
modal analysis utilizing the results of step 1. Such a 
procedure is needed due to the impossibility of active 
forces in an eigensolution. In step 1, the stiffness matrix 
of the model is updated to capture the tensioning of the 
thin film material caused by internal pressure. This two- 
step modeling and analysis methodology is described in 
detail in Ref. 29, where results are given for inflatable 
cylindrical beams. 

The lenticular film was modeled using NASTRAN 
quadrilateral plate elements, each of which were .001 in. 
(1-mil) thick. Modulus, density, and Poisson's ratio as 
used were provided by the film manufacturers. The CP-1 

film has E=300 ksi, v=0.34, and p=0.0518 lbm/in \ An 
internal pressure of 0.03 in. H 2 (.00108 psig) was 
applied to the lenticular clement. 

Modeling of the catenaries was done using silicon rod 
elements under a temperature load. The suggested 
temperature-loading pretension method was verified by 
comparing stress results to a rod with an applied force. 

The Aluminum-5052 test fixture was also modeled 
using quadrilateral plate elements. The section of the 
aluminum plate with 3600 holes was modeled by altering 
the thickness accordingly to account for the adjusted 
density. 

The steel I-beam stands were modeled using beam 
elements and multipoint constraints. A modal test was 
performed on a stand that was supported on three feet. 
The stands in the finite element model were cantileavered 
but were created with modes and mode shapes equivalent 
to that of the tested stand. Multipoint constraints were 
used to define a plate-sectioned rigid body in the place 
where the stand would be secured to the aluminum fixture. 
Fig. 4. shows the integrated finite element model. 

Several parameter studies were performed to help 
diagnose problems and to aid in understanding of the 
solutions. Mode shapes and frequencies were compared 
while varying thickness, geometry, and material. Studies 
were also made on the effect of an induced strain or applied 
pressure. Drastic effects on mode shapes and frequencies 
would appear by changing only the geometry from 
elliptical-shaped to paraboloid-shaped. The introduction of 
curvature into the problem would not only affect system 
dynamics but also drastically increase computation time of 
the nonlinear static solution. It is interesting to point out 
that the strain of the paraboloid geometry (while averaging 
about 0.03%) did have a varying value across the 
membrane due to the applied pressure. The flat elliptical 
model had an induced uniform strain of 0.03%. But when 
a pressure was applied to the flat elliptical membrane 
giving a much greater and varying strain, the mode shapes 
were identical indicating that the mode shapes seem to be 
a function of geometry. The frequencies were not the 
same in this case. Ref. 30 shows that sag has played an 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



interesting role in cables and cable trusses as shown. 
Fundamental natural frequencies of cables with a small 
amount of sag can be as much as 300% more than those 
of a straight cable. Similar behavior may occur in 
membranes. 

The greatest difficulty encountered in modeling and 
analysis was obtaining convergence of the nonlinear static 
pressurization solution in MSC/NASTRAN. This 
difficulty is due to the extremely thin polyimide material 
of which the inflatable components are constructed (1 mil 
or 1/1000 of one inch). The ratios of film thickness to 
overall geometric dimensions such as lenticular axes 
appear to be the critical parameters in the nonlinear 
pressurization analysis. For example, it was found that 
increasing the film thickness to 10 mils or 1/100 in. 
resulted in solutions that converged easily. The reason for 
this phenomenon appears to be that extremely thin films 
tend to have large displacements and large stiffness 
changes when pressure loading is applied. Obviously, 
increased thickness reduces the magnitude of these 
changes. Another issue in model convergence was fine- 
tuning the NASTRAN parameter 'kdiag'. A value of 
'kdiag' helps convergence by initially adding a small value 
to the stiffness matrix diagonal terms and then is later 
removed. With this assistance, there was convergence of 
iterations early on that normally would have trouble 
converging. The value of 'kdiag' was continually 
decreased until successive results would have similar 
solutions indicating no necessary further change in the 
parameter. 

After all the difficulties encounteed in this modeling 
and analysis effort, it was satisfying to obtain reasonable 
results. The first natural frequency of the integrated model 
was 7.87 Hz, and the mode shape was characterized by an 
up-and-down bobbing of the inflatable through the ring 
fixture as shown in Fig. 5. With the exception of the 4 th 
mode, the first seven modes exhibit rigid-body type modes 
due to the 204 catenaries that connect the inflatable to the 
fixture. Another example of these rigid-body type modes 
is shown in Fig. 6. These types of modes have 
frequencies not equal to zero but display motion in the 
directions of rigid body modes. A breathing mode of the 
entire inflatable occurs at 9.82 Hz, which is the 4 th mode. 
The next system mode excluding the igid-body type mode 
(mode 8) occurs at 13.44 Hz characterized as a 2 nd -order 
breathing mode with node line along major axis of the 
inflatable. Table 1 shows some modes of the entire 
system. Some interesting curvature effects on the mode 
shape are apparent in mode 9 (1 3.98 Hz), Fig. 7. Coupled 
support structure and inflatable structure modes were seen 
for the first time at 26.15 Hz (mode W) shown in Fig. 8. 



Comparison of Finite Element Results to 
Closed-Form Solutions 



and then modeled in NASTRAN using this technique. 
Results of another finite element analysis for this test 
were replicated. A strain of 0.2% due to dry shrinkage and 
other effects was found by comparing the test data with 
the model results. 

A finite element model of the 4x6-meter inflatable 
membrane was modified (converted to a flat 2-D ellipse) 
and re-analyzed in MSC/NASTRAN. In this analysis, the 
support stand and ring fixture were not included in the 
model to allow a focus on the critical aspects of the 
modeling process and to allow comparison to closed form 
solutions. The pressure load was replaced by a uniform 
temperature-induced strain. The catenaries were also 
removed and the perimeter of the ellipse was fixed in all 
directions. Hamidzadeh's closed-form solution had the 
following conditions: flat elliptical membrane, zero 
displacement on the boundary, uniform strain, and CP-1 
properties. A nonlinear static analysis followed by a 
modal 'restart* was performed for this model as well. 

The results are summarized in Table 2. The closed 
form solution compared well with the NASTRAN 
solution. The mode shapes were identical and the 
frequencies were on target. Slight differences in the 
frequencies can be attributed to approximate values for the 
Mathieu functions in the closed form solutions and slight 
geometric discrepancies in the NASTRAN model. A 
polynomial expansion for the Mathieu functions and 
modified Mathieu functions were used in calculating 
natural frequencies. The geometric dimensions in the 
NASTRAN model were slightly different then the design 
dimensions because the geometry followed that of the 
fabricated prototype. 



Summary 

Modeling of a large 4x6-m thin-film inflatable 
concentrator structure has been accomplished. 
Comparisons with modal tests will be made at a later 
lime. This work is significant because of (1) general 
difficulty in accurately representing the nonlinear material 
and geometric characteristics of these structures, (2) the 
large size of this thin-film structure, and most 
importantly, (3) the accomplishment of a modeling 
methodology that realistically represents the internal 
pressure loading and the stiffness properties of the thin 
films in a modal solution. 

It was shown that many workarounds were required to 
obtain convergence of the nonlinear static pressurization 
procedure in MSC/NASTRAN. In this regard, 

MSC/NASTRAN was found to have limitations in its 
nonlinear analysis capability, particularly for large thin- 
film structures of the type investigated in this paper. The 
use of ABAQUS or other finite element packages should 
also be considered for inflatable structures. 



The suggested method of applying a uniform strain to 
the membrane or a pretension to the catenaries is by using 
a change in temperature. This method was verified by 
comparing a catenary in strain to a catenary with an 
applied force. A 17.5-inch diameter membrane was tested 



Acknowledgments 

SRS Technologies is acknowledged for design and 
construction of the 4x6-m structure. Jennie McGee 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



provided geometric and parameter information needed for 
modeling of the structure. 

John Lassiter and Robert Engberg of Marshall Space 
Flight Center's Structural & Dynamics Testing Group 
provided important modal test data. 



References 

1. Freeland, Robert E., 'Inflatable Antenna Flight 
Experiment Experiences", NASA Solar Thermal 
Propulsion Workshop Proceeding s, NASA Marshall 
Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL, March 19-20, 1997. 

2. Partch, Russell, "Solar Thermal Propulsion 
Program at Phillips Lab", NASA Solar Thermal 
Propulsion Workshop Proceeding s. NASA Marshall 
Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL March 19-20, 1997. 

3. Stewart, Jesse F., and Martin, James A. /'Dual 
Fuel Solar Thermal Stage: Ideal Analysis", Journal of 
Spacecraft and Rockets , Vol. 33, No. 5, 1996, pp. 752- 
754. 

4. Patel, S., and Emrich, W. J., Jr., "Solar Thermal 
Upper Stage (STUS) Feasibility Study", Proceedings of 
ASME/JSME/JSES International Solar Energy 
Conference . Maui, HI, March 1995. 

5. Hawk, C.W., Adams, Alan M., et al., 
"Conceptual Design of a Solar Thermal Upper Stage 
(STUS) Flight Experiment", AIAA Paper 95-2842. 

6. Curtis, Leslie, "NASA Solar Thermal Propulsion 
Project", NASA Solar Thermal Propulsion Workshop 
Proceedings . NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, 
Huntsville, AL, March 19-20, 1997. 

7. Otto, Frei, Tensile Structures , Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 1962. 

8. McCarty, L.H., "Inflatable Arm Segments May 
Lighten Shuttle's Manipulator System", Design News 
46(4). pp. 150-151. 1990. 

9. Leonard, R.W., Brooks, G.W., and McComb, 
H.G., Jr., "Structural Considerations of Inflatable 
Reentry Vehicles", NASA Technical Note D-457, 1960. 

10. Topping, A.D., "Shear Deflections and Buckling 
Characteristics of Inflated Members", Journal of 
AircrafUfg), pp. 289-293, 1964. 

11. Bulson, P.S., "Design Principles of Pneumatic 
Structures", Structural Engineering. 51(6), pp. 209-215. 
1973. 

12. Douglas, W.J., "Bending Stiffness of an Inflated 
Cylindrical Cantilever Beam", AIAA Journal. 7(7). pp. 
1248-1253. 1969. 

1 3. Steeves, E.C., "A Linear Analysis of the 
Deformation of Pressure Stabilized Tubes", U.S. Army 
Natick Laboratories Report, AD/A-006 493, NTIS, 
N75-32513. 

14. Fichter, W.B., "A Theory for Inflated Thin-Wall 
Cylindrical Beams", NASA Technical Note D-3466, 
June 1966. 

15. Comer, R.L., and Levy, S., "Deflections of an 
Inflated Circular-Cylinder Cantilever Beam", AIAA 
Journal. 1(7). pp. 1652-1655, 1963. 



16. Webber, J.P.H., "Deflections of Inflated 
Cylindrical Cantilever Beams Subjected to Bending and 
Torsion", Aeronautical Journal 86(858), pp. 306-312, 
1982. 

17. Main, J. A., Peterson, S.W., and Strauss, A.M., 
"Load-Deflection Behavior of Space-Based Inflatable 
Fabric Beams", Journal of Aerospace Engineering. 7(4). 
1994. 

18. Leonard, J.W., Tension Structures. McGraw- 
Hill, New York, 1988. 

19. Main, J.A., Carlin, R.A., Garcia, E., Peterson, 
S.W., and Strauss, A.M., "Dynamic Analysis of Space- 
Based Inflated Beam Structures", Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America. 97(2). pp. 1035-1045. 
Feb. 1995. 

20. Slade, Kara N., and Tinker, Michael L., 
"Analytical and Experimental Investigation of the 
Dynamics of Polyimide Inflatable Cylinders", AIAA- 
99-1518, Proceedings of the 40th Structures. Structural 
Dynamics, and Materials Conference . April 12-15, 
1999, St. Louis, MO. 

21. Tinker, Michael L., "Passively Adaptive 
Inflatable Structure for the Shooting Star Experiment", 
AIAA-98-1986, Proceedings of the 39th Structures. 
Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference . April 
20-23, 1998, Long Beach, CA. 

22. Lassiter, John, "Shooting Star Experiment 
Prototype Inflatable Strut/Torus Assembly Modal 
Survey", ED73(97-69), NASA Marshall Space Flight 
Center, Huntsville, AL, June 1997. 

23. Engberg, Robert, and Lassiter, John, 
"Shooting Star Experiment, Pathfinder 2, Inflatable 
Concentrator Modal Survey in Vacuum Conditions", 
Dynamics Test Branch, Marshall Space Flight Center 
Test Report SSE-DEV-ED97-120, March, 1998. 

24. Engberg, Robert, and Lassiter, John, "Shooting 
Star Experiment, Pathfinder 3, Inflatable Concentrator 
Modal Survey in Thermal-Vacuum Conditions", 
Dynamics Test Branch, Marshall Space Flight Center 
Test Report SSE-DEV-ED97-1 15, February, 1998. 

25. Engberg, Robert, and Lassiter, John, "Shooting 
Star Experiment, Pathfinder 3, Inflatable Concentrator 
Terminator Test, Dynamics Test Branch, Marshall 
Space Flight Center Test Report SSE-DEV-ED98-046, 
July, 1998. 

26. Lassiter, John O., and Engberg, Robert, 
"Dynamic Testing of an Inflatable Structure Under 
Thermal-Vacuum Conditions", AIAA-99-1519, 
Proceedings of the 40th Structures. Structural 
Dynamics, and Materials Conference . April 12-15, 
1999, St. Louis, MO. 

27. Slade, Kara N., Tinker, Michael L., Lassiter, 
John O., and Engberg, Robert, "Comparison of 
Dynamic Characteristics for an Inflatable Solar 
Concentrator in Atmospheric and Thermal Vacuum 
Conditions", AIAA-2000- 1 64 1 , Proceedings of the 41st 
Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials 
Conference . April 3-7, 2000, Atlanta, GA. 

28. Slade, Kara N., "Dynamic Characterization of 
Thin Film Inflatable Structures", Ph.D. Dissertation, 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



Duke University , Dept of Mechanical Engineering and 
Materials Science, Durham, NC, 2000. 

29. Smalley, Kurt B., Tinker, Michael L., and 
Fischer, Richard T., "Investigation of Nonlinear 
Pressurization and Modal Restart in MSC/NASTRAN 
for Modeling Thin Film Inflatable Structures", AIAA- 
2001-1409, Proceedings of the 42nd Structures, 
Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference . April 
16-19, 2001, Seattle, WA. 

30. Blevens, Robert D. Formulas for Natural 
Frequency and Mode Shape. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Co., 1979. 





Figure 3. Vertically Supported 4x6-Meter Inflatable 
Concentrator with Aluminum Ring Fixture 



Figure 1 . Concept for Solar Orbita: Transfer Vehicle 
Utilizing Inflatable Solar Concentrators 





Figure 4. Finite Element Model Representation of 
Inflatable Collector and Supporting Structure 



Figure 2. Space Solar Power Cc ncept Based on 
Inflatable Structures 




Figure 5. Fundamental Mode Shape Obtained in Finite 
Element Analysis (7.87 Hz) 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 





Figure 6. Rigid-Body Type Mode Shape Obtained in 
Finite Element Analysis (Mode 5, 10.34 Hz) 



Mode 
Number 



Freq 
(Hz) 



7.87 



8.51 



8.58 



9.82 



10.34 



6 10.95 x-rot 



Node Lines 



z-trans 



x-trans 



y-trans 



y-rot 



Mode 
Number 



10 



11 



Freq 
IHzl 



.13 



13.44 



13.98 



16.52 



16.54 



12 18.48 



Node Lines 



z-rot 



Table 1. Frequency Results for Finite Element 
Analysis of Concentrator and Support 



Figure 8. Coupling Between Support Structure and 
Inflatable at Mode 30 (26.15 Hz) 



Mode 
Number 



Closed Form 
Freq. (Hz) 



4.1 



5.9 



7.0 



7.5 



8.2 



NASTRAN 
Freq. (Hz) 



4.2 



6.2 



7.3 



8.3 



9.0 



Node Lines 



•gin ■■$£&> 



Table 2. Modes Predicted Using Finite Element 
Analysis and Closed Form Solutions for Flat Ellipse 




Figure 7. Mode 9 ( 1 3.98 Hz) Showing Geometric 
Curvature Effects on Mode Shape 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



