PACICAGING PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARDS - 
A PRODUCTION APPLICATION OF 
INTERACTIVE GRAPHICS 

Walter A. Perrill 
General Dynamics, Pomona Division 

INTRODUCTION 


Packaging electronic circuits onto printed circuit boards (PCB's) is 
becoming an increasingly difficult task. The conflicting requirements of 
"smarter", more complex circuits occupying less space have resulted in 
smaller PCB's containing more components. The increased use of integrated 
circuits and hybrid devices has only partially alleviated this situation. 
The situation is especially acute at General Dynamics, Pomona, because of 
the variety of circuits used. The design engineers package DC, analog, 
high speed digital and high frequency RF circuits - often in combination 
on the same PCB. Computer assistance is required to package these complex 
PCB's effectively. 



Several batch mode programs for packaging PCB's were evaluated (start- 
ing in 1970) but none was satisfactory. The major reasons for this included 
the excessive amount of computer time required and unduly restrictive 
assumptions concerning component shape and number of conductor layers. Many 
of these difficulties seemed to stem from the fact that the programs attempted 
to achieve total automation of the packaging process with little or no 
huBUm intervention. An analysis of the problems involved led to the belief 
that total automation was not likely in the near future. 

Therefore, it was decided to try another approach using interactive 
graphics. This approach wpuld allow the designer to monitor and direct the 
computeif% actions in all phases of the packaging process. The intent was to 
cond>ine the data storage and manipulation power of the computer with the 
imaginative, intuitive power of a human designer. This approach resulted in a 
computer program called the Interactive Graphics Packaging Program (IGPP) , 
which is now in production use. This paper describes the structure and use 
of the IGPP. 


495 



OVERVIEW OF HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE 


The hardware currently In use at General Dynamics, Pomona, Includes 
a CDC 6400 with 65,000 words of main memory and 125,000 words of extended 
core storage. A 30 inch Calcomp drum plotter is on line. The interactive 
graphics system (IGS) equipment consists of two CDC 777 terminals with 20 
inch CRT screens, light pens, and keyboards (see Figure 1). The IGPP program 
is written in FORTRAN IV Extended with the exception of a few functions 
coded in COMPASS (assembly language) . It executes in a field length of 
about 32,000 words. Each major function is implemented as a separate primary 
overlay to reduce the field length. The overlays reside on a random file 
in absolute code to reduce the time needed to locate and load the desired 
overlay. This improves system response to user commands. 

The data base is maintained on a random disc file by an automatic 
data management system. This system partitions the data base into blocks 
and maintains the most frequently used blocks in a buffer in main memory. 

If the requested data is not in memory, the system automatically pulls the 
proper block into the buffer. If the buffer is full the least used block 
is written to the disc to make room for the new block. 

The individual pieces of data are chained together in both random and 
sequential fashion. This structure permits rapid access to any piece of 
data as well as almost unlimited growth of the data base. The program 
continuously updates the data base so that it always reflects tha current 
configuration of the PCB. 


PROGRAM OPERATION 


The IGPP performs four major functions for the designer: 

(1) Data input and display 

(2) Component placement (either automatic or manual) 

(3) Conductor path routing (either automatic or manual) 

(4) Data output 

In addition, the program contains built-in functions for detecting 
system and operator errors, debugging, add insuring the Intmttiny 6f the 
data base. Any of these functions may'tm catered by* the operator at any 

time. 


496 



Data Coding and Entry 


The Initial action by the operator (i.e., the package design engineer) 
is to code the physical and electrical description of the circuit in a 
predefined data format. This includes the size and shape of the PCB, the 
basic grid size (typically .050 or .025 Inches) and the window grid size 
'(typically .5 or 1. inches). The window grid partitions the board surface 
into a set of squares for use in selecting "windows" to view areas of the 
PCB separately. Specific locations may or may not be assigned to each 
component. In addition, components may be locked into a fixed location, 
making them immovable even through operator error. The electrical schematic 
data is represented by assigning a unique number to each electrically 
distinct signal net. This number is associated with each component pin which 
is electrically common to the net. The data is punched into machine cards 
which are read by the program. 


Data Display 


The designer has the option of displaying the entire PCB, or selecting 
any rectangular subset of the window grid squares. The positions of the 
window grid squares are indicated by the letters A, B, C, D, ... displayed 
at the upper and right edges of the PCB. The designer selects the four 
letters which define the left, right, upper and lower boundries of the 
desired area. 

The components are displayed at their assighed locations on the PCB. 
Components without pre-assigned locations are automatically placed at the 
top of the screen (see Figure 2) . This is done to avoid prejudicing the 
designers initial judgement. 


Component Placement 


The designer may select either of two isodes of component placement, 
automatic or manual. In the automatic placement mode the con^uter uses a 
center of mass algorithm to determine the component locations. The designer 
may elect to have all of the components placed at once over the entire PCB 
surface, or he laay select up to sixteen components to be placed into soaw 
specified area. The algorithm groups the components into electrically related 
families but does not attempt to rotate or au>ve components to eliminate 
overlaps (see Figure 3) . After the autoisatlc mode is complete, the designer 
enters the manual placement mode to make the necessary ad justMnts. 

In the manual mode the electrical schematic data is indicated by 
displaying a set of lines, called vectors, from the pins of the component 
being su>ved to all other electrically coaaon pins (see Figure 4) . The 
designer may display vectors from any or all of the pins on the selected 
component. 


497 



To move a component the designer selects it with the light pen, then 
moves the pen with the component following. Components may be rotated as 
well as translated, giving the designer complete control over component 
placement. When the component is released the program automatically rounds 
its position to the basic grid of the PCB. This process continues until the 
designer is satisfied (or nearly so) with the placement of all of the com- 
ponents (see Figure 5) . 


Conductor Path Routing 


The conductor path routing function may be used in either the auto- 
matic or manual mode. In the automatic mode the computer uses a row/column 
algorithm to route the conductor paths. This algorithm is related to the 
concept of a channel router in which the width of the channels is equal to 
the basic grid of the PCB. The channels are horizontal on the front of the 
PCB (rows) and vertical on the rear (columns). Each channel may contain, at 
most, one conductor at any given point. Conductors are routed following the 
channels although short sideways jogs (up to two or three channels) are 
permitted when dodging small obstacles. Longer sideways runs are completed 
by making a via (a drilled hole plated with conductive solder) to the other 
side of the PCB and finishing the run there. The designer may elect to 
route the entire PCB or only a selected area. When the automatic routing 
function is complete (see Figure 6) the designer may enter the manual 
routing mode to make any necessary corrections. 

In the manual mode each electrically distinct signal net is routed 
individually, with the designer selecting the net to be routed. Electrical 
schematic data is indicated by flashing dots in all component pins which are 
common to the selected net; electrically common conductors are also flashed. 
The conductor paths are routed by "drawing" them on the IGS screen with the 
light pen (see Figure 7) . The designer may select the path width and layer 
of the conductor being routed; up to four layers of conductors are per- 
mitted. On the IGS screen the layer of each line is indicated by displaying 
the line in a different style (solid, dashed, or dotted) . Lines may be 
changed from one layer to another or erased completely. Other options 
autoisatically round conductor positions onto the basic grid and align paths 
horizontal or vertical. Dimension checking options arc also available. . 

Due to hardwate limitations on the size of the display file (approximately 
7500 16-bit words) only the center line of each path is displayed. However, 
the path width is indicated during routing by a smell circle displayed at 
the point of the light pen. 


498 



Data Output 


When the PCB design is complete the designer may select any of the 
following output options: 

(1) Pen plots showing component and conductor positions 
(see Figures 8 through 10) . These plots are used both 

in verifying PCB producibility and in formal documentation. 

(2) Pen plot showing the size and location of each hole to 
be drilled. This plot is used in formal documentation 
and in the factory production process (see Figure 11) . 

(3) Card deck for numerically controlled drilling machines. 

This deck, related to (2) above is used in the factory 
production process. 

(4) Card deck to drive a numerically controlled photoplotter 
(Gerber 1232). The photoplotter produces the artmaster 
which becomes part of the formal documentation and is 
used in the factory production process (see Figure 12) . 

(5) Printed listing giving a summary of the entire program 
run. 


Data Base Protection 


The safety of the data base is insured by the checkpoint function. The 
designer selects this function at regular intervals during the program run, 
writing a copy of the current data base to a permanent disc file. A check- 
point file is also written automatically upon program termination. This 
permits the designer to terminate the program run at any time without loss 
of data. At some later time the designer may make another program run, 
access the latest checkpoint file and continue working. In the event of 
machine failure only the changes made since the last checkpoint are lost; 
the Job may be restarted and continued from that point. For long term 
storage the data base may be saved on magnetic tape. In the event of later 
design changes the data base may be restored to the disc and the IGPP used 
to make the necessary changes. 


Error Control 


Minor debugging functions Include printing the last ten light pan 
selections and the last five data base references, data base dumps and 
field length core dumps. These functions may be selected manually by 
the designer, or automatically by the program when certain error conditions 
are detected. 


499 



CURRENT DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS 


The 16PP program la constantly being modified to expand its capa- 
bilities, and to meet changing requirements. Among the improvements currently 
under development are the followingt 

(1) Automatic checking of conductor clearance and other 
design rules. 

(2) Display warning messages to the designer in case of 
violations. 

(3) Optimization of plotter data. This Includes automatic 
fill-in of ground plane areas and reduction of wasted 
plotter motion. 

(4) Gate and lead swapping to allow the designer more 
freedom in digital circuits. 

Although the IGPP was developed for packaging PCB's, it was designed 
to be as general as possible. This generality has permitted the use of the 
IGPP as a basis for new systems. The development time for new systems is 
being reduced since many of the display, data base and output functions 
already exist in the IGPP. 

One version is being developed to package integrated circuits and 
hybrid devices (see Figure 13 and 14). This version contains functions to 
allow for Jumper wire bonds (flying leads), thick film resistors, predefined 
conductor patterns and automatic checking ot critical design rules. 

In another project the IGPP is being merged with a set of programs 
which design passive microwave stripline and microstrip components. Used 
by a microwave engineer this program will accept electrical data (frequency, 
dielectric constant, etc.), design a selected component (filter, coupler, etc.) 
and store it in the data base (see Figure 15) . The engineer may recall the 
stored components, position them on the substrate, and connect them into a 
completed circuit (see Figure 16) . The program will generate the data to 
produce the artmaster and all other required documentation. 

In another project the IGPP was interfaced with a program which 
simulated a naval weapons exercise. Ships and aircraft were displayed on 
the screen along with data on their position and motion. Additional data 
were displayed when the vehicles were selected with the light pan. The 
exercise planners were able to visually monitor the progress of the exercise 
and detect problem areas easily. Calcomp pen plots of each Important event 
were Included in the formal documentation. 


500 



CONCLUSION 


The IGPP has been used in production applications since 1972. During- 
this tlse It has been used to package over 130 PCB's containing an average 
of 50-75 components and two layers of conductors. Electrically the circuits 
were primarily analog and RF although digital circuits account for an 
Increasing portion of the total. The most complex PCB packaged to date 
measured 16.5 cm (6.5 in.) by 19 cm (7.5 in.) and contained 380 components, 
two layers of ground planes and four layers of conductors mixed with ground 
planes. Electrically, the circuit contained RF signals extending into the 
microwave region, high speed digital signals and DC control signals. Con- 
ductor paths Included stripline buried between ground planes as well as normal 
conductors. The IGPP produced the basic documentation for the board although 
the photoplotter data required a good deal of manual manipulation because of 
the extensive ground planes. The time required to package the board was Just 
over four weeks, from schematic diagram to a finished set of artmasters. 
Figures 17 and 18 are reproductions of artmasters for two of the six layers. 

* 

We feel that the IGPP is a proven production tool now and has great 
potential for growth. We intend to improve its capabilities and expand 
Its use until it is the main tool for packaging PCB's at General Dynamics. 





Figure 1. - Design engineer seated at the graphics terminal. The display 
screen, keyboard and light pen are the interactive elements of 
the system. 


502 



Figure 2. - Display of printed circuit board and components. Prior to 

the start of packaging, the components are positioned at the 
top of the screen. The text at the top of the screen indi- 
cates the start of the automatic component placement function. 


503 





Figure 3. - PCB after completion of automatic component placement. 

The placement algorithm groups the components into 
electrically related families but does not optimize the 
placement to eliminate component overlap. This placement 
required about 10 seconds of computer time. 


504 




Figure 4. - Vector display during manual component placement. 

Vectors are displayed from pin 2 of component C2 (the 
one being moved) to all other electrically common pads. 


505 




Figure 5. - Final component placement after completion of the manual 
placement function. 


506 







Figure 6. - PCB after completion of the automatic conductor path 

routing function. The solid paths are on the front side 
of the board and the dashed paths are on the rear. 

This route required about 15 seconds of computer time. 


507 






Figure 7. - Window view of the left half of the FCB during the manual 

conductor routing function. Bright dots appear in conductor 
pads which are electrically common to the signal net being 
routed. The conductor path terminating in a bright spot 
(the tracking symbol) in the lower center of the screen is 
the path being routed. 


508 




LAYER NO . 



Figure 8. - Calcomp pen plot of a small RF board, 4 times actual size. This 

Is the assembly plot showing the position of each component on the 
finished board. 


509 


















LAYER NO. 



Figure 9. - Calcomp pen plot of the PGB of Figure 8. This is a check plot 
showing the components, their connection pads and the conductor 
paths on the front side of the board (layer no. 1). The con- 
ductors are plotted showing both edges of the path and circles at 
the end and turning points. This approximates the appearance of 
the finished artmaster, since the conductors are drawn with a 
round light beam. 


510 













LAYER NO. 


cn 







Figure 10. - Calcomp pen plot of the PCB of Figure 8. These conductors serve 
to outline areas which will become ground planes (areas of metal 
electrically connected to ground) on the finished board. 


511 





Figure 12. - Artmaster for another RF board, shown actual size. The dark 
areas represent areas of metal on the finished board. This 
artmaster (as well as Figures 17 and 18) was produced by a 
Gerber 1232 photoplotter. 


513 



Figure 13. - Display of a hybrid microelectronic device. The component* 
displayed represent integrated circuit chips and thick 
film resistors. The conductors illustrated include 
jumper wires (the short, straight lines) and conductors 
on the substrate. The actual size of the substrate is 
2.54 cm (1 in.) square. 


514 



Figure 14. - Window view of lower left corner of the hybrid substrate 

showing a single integrated circuit (IC) chip. Jumper leads 
are shown connecting the substrate conductors to the bonding 
pads on the upper surface of the IC chip. Also shown is the 
calibrated marker (concentric octagons) for measuring critical 
dimensions . 


515 




tmtm • »• 


Figure 15. 


- Display of the microwave stripline program in the component 
design mode. The performance parameters entered by the 
designer are listed at the right side of the screen. The 
parallel line coupled filter displayed at the center was 
designed to meet those parameters. 


516 


r rri«« 


«actfn 

m 


• mfti c 

• mctT nm 




Figure 16. - Display of the microwave stripline program showing two 

filters and a coupler designed by the program, as well as a 
discrete resistor. Ultimately the program will allow the 
engineer to connect the components together with tuned 
sections of transmission line. 


517 
















