NASA/CR— 2007-2 15011 



NIRSS Upgrades: Final Report 


Marcia K. Politovich 

National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado 


November 2007 



NASA STI Program ... in Profile 


Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the 
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The 
NASA Scientific and Technical Information (STI) 
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain 
this important role. 

The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices 
of the Agency Chief Information Officer. It collects, 
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates 
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI program provides access 
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and its 
public interface, the NASA Technical Reports Server, 
thus providing one of the largest collections of 
aeronautical and space science STI in the world. 
Results are published in both non-NASA channels and 
by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which 
includes the following report types: 

• TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of 
completed research or a major significant phase 
of research that present the results of NASA 
programs and include extensive data or theoretical 
analysis. Includes compilations of significant 
scientific and technical data and information 
deemed to be of continuing reference value. 
NASA counterpart of peer-reviewed formal 
professional papers but has less stringent 
limitations on manuscript length and extent of 
graphic presentations. 

• TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific 
and technical findings that are preliminary or 
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release 
reports, working papers, and bibliographies that 
contain minimal annotation. Does not contain 
extensive analysis. 

• CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and 
technical findings by NASA-sponsored 
contractors and grantees. 


• CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected 
papers from scientific and technical 
conferences, symposia, seminars, or other 
meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA. 

• SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific, 
technical, or historical information from 
NASA programs, projects, and missions, often 
concerned with subjects having substantial 
public interest. 

• TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English- 
language translations of foreign scientific and 
technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission. 

Specialized services also include creating custom 

thesauri, building customized databases, organizing 

and publishing research results. 

For more information about the NASA STI 

program, see the following: 

• Access the NASA STI program home page at 
http://www.sti. nasa.gov 

• E-mail your question via the Internet to 
help@sti.nasa.gov 

• Fax your question to the NASA STI Help Desk 
at 301-621-0134 

• Telephone the NASA STI Help Desk at 
301-621-0390 

• Write to: 

NASA Center for AeroSpace Information (CASI) 
7115 Standard Drive 
Hanover, MD 21076-1320 



NASA/CR— 2007-2 15011 



NIRSS Upgrades: Final Report 


Marcia K. Politovich 

National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado 


Prepared under Contract NAS3-00145 


National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 


Glenn Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 


November 2007 



Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identification 
only. Their usage does not constitute an official endorsement, 
either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration. 


Level of Review. This material has been technically reviewed by NASA technical management. 


Available from 


NASA Center for Aerospace Information 
7115 Standard Drive 
Hanover, MD 21076-1320 


National Technical Information Service 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, VA 22161 


Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov 




NIRSS Upgrades: Final Report 


Marcia K. Politovich 

National Center for Atmospheric Research 
Boulder, Colorado 80301 

Introduction 

Under this contract work proceeded in these areas: NIRSS Upgrades and comparisons of Version 2 
outputs with in situ data. 


NIRSS Upgrades 

This work was leveraged with a University of Colorado Computer Science Department Senior Project. 
Three students, Patrick Carmichael, Matt Hulse and Stephan Zednik, formed a team to work on this. Details 
of the Senior Project program can be found at http://www.cs.colorado.edu/ugrad/seniorproject/about/ and the 
NIRSS Project is summarized at http://www.cs.colorado.edu/ugrad/seniorproject/projects/nirss.html. 
Documents related to this project, including design requirements, system architecture, user manual and other, 
are available on a CD sent to QSS. 

Stephan Zednik was also employed by NCAR as a student assistant under this contract. His work was 
divided as follows: Senior Project tasks were to rewrite the Lab VIEW (National Instruments) code in 
C++, with subsequent testing and implementation at NASA Glenn Research Center (GRC); NCAR tasks 
were to implement bug fixes, corrections, upgrades to the cloud, liquid water and icing logic, and produce 
log files and plots for data comparisons. 

A poster on the NIRSS was presented at the 12 th Aviation, Range and Aerospace Meteorology 
Conference held in Atlanta, Georgia, in January 2006. The extended abstract focuses primarily on 
comparisons with the Version 1 system and can be found online at 
http://ams.confex.com/ams/Annual2006/techprogram/paper_100499.htm. 

Comparisons of NIRSS2 with AIRS-2 Twin Otter Data Sets 

The Alliance Icing Research Study 2 nd -Field Project (AIRS-2) was conducted from November 2003 
through February 2004. Most operations centered around Mirabel Airport near Montreal, Canada. The 
AIRS II operational objectives were to: a) develop techniques/systems to remotely detect, diagnose and 
forecast hazardous winter conditions at airports, b) improve weather forecasts of aircraft icing conditions, c) 
better characterize the aircraft-icing environment and d) improve our understanding of the icing process and 
its effect on aircraft. 

An array of remote sensing instruments were sited at the Mirabel Airport, including NIRSS. The 
NASA Twin Otter (TO) and National Research Council (of Canada) Convair 580 flew in the vicinity to 
obtain in situ measurements of atmospheric parameters to compare with and/or verify the remote 
measurements. Spiral descents over the airport and missed approaches to the runway adjacent to the 
instrument suite were both flown. Eight cases from four days have both NIRSS retrievals and Twin Otter 
data sets as shown in table 1 . 


Overall Comparisons 

NIRSS retrieves cloud base height from the ceilometer. These heights agreed well with the TO 
measurements (defined as FSSP drop concentration > 0.01 for more than 1 s during the ascent or descent). 
Height could also be derived from the IR cloud base temperature by matching to the radiometer 
temperature profile; the results are shown as IRTZ. The correlation coefficient (r) between the ceilometer 
and measurement is 0.95, between the IRTZ and measurement is 0.52 (fig 1). 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


1 



TABLE L— THE COMPARISON DATA SET 


Date 

Time 

(UTC) 

Notes 

11 Nov 

1630-1657 

No cloud top 


1942-2009 

No cloud top 


2009-2021 

No cloud top 

18 Nov 

1233-1246 

Cloud >0 °C 

25 Nov 

1809-1830 



1852-1859 


10 Dec 

1617-1637 



1720-1732 



Cloud base temperature is estimated by matching the ceilometer-measured cloud base altitude to the 
retrieved temperature profile. These values were slightly higher values than those recorded from the TO 
by 2 to 5 °C. The correlation coefficient is 0.97. The IR sensor on the profiling radiometer does a better 
job at estimating cloud base temperature (IRTC) with r of 0.99 and measurements generally within 1 to 
2 °C of the aircraft-measured value (fig. 2). There was a slight cold bias. The conversion to height shown 
above is compromised by inaccuracies in the retrieved temperature profile. 

The NIRSS cloud top is defined as the altitude at which the X-band radar reflectivity is <1 dBZ above 
the noise level. This was not in as good agreement with the aircraft measurements, with overestimation by 
NIRSS at lower cloud top heights (<-2000 m). The correlation coefficient is 0.91 (fig. 3). There were 
several flights for which cloud top was not sampled by the TO (see table 1). 

Similar to the cloud base temperature, the NIRSS cloud top temperature is found from the retrieved 
height and the radiometer sounding. The agreement is only as good as either estimation, and in this case the 
correlation coefficient is 0.87 (fig. 4). NIRSS temperatures are too high (warm) for the colder cloud tops. 

Freezing level (height of T = 0 °C) determines the warm extent of the icing hazard. The radiometer 
sounding was used to determine this level, or in the 10 December cases, the multiple freezing levels. The 
correlation coefficient is 0.93 (fig. 5). The comparison is good, with one point estimated too high by -500 
m (second sounding, 1 1 November). 

Integrated liquid water (ILW) was calculated from the two channels of the radiometer using the 
method of Hogg et al. (1983), and was derived from the aircraft measurements by integrating the 
measured liquid water content over the depth of the cloud. The values are in fairly good agreement 
(r = 0.81) (fig. 6). The point with NIRSS ILW at 0.47 is from the 10 December case, which will be 
discussed below and is the only point in strong disagreement. 

Finally, maximum liquid water content (LWC) from both NIRSS and the TO were compared. The 
retrieved LWC are over 100-m depths; the TO measurements are 1-s values. From that difference in 
scaling, we’d expect the TO values to be higher. However, the agreement is fairly good (r=0.53) (fig 7), 
with one point (18 Nov) having high measured maximum LWC and low derived value. This will be 
discussed below. 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


2 




Cloud base height (m MSL) 



TO 

Figure 1 . — NIRSS to TO cloud base height comparison. 
Cloud top height (m) 



TO 

Figure 3. — NIRSS to TO cloud top height comparison. 
Freezing level (m) 



Figure 5. — NIRSS to TO freezing level comparison. 


Cloud base temperature (C) 



TO 

Figure 2. — NIRSS to TO cloud base temperature comparison 
Cloud top temperature (C) 



Figure 4. — NIRSS to TO cloud top temperature comparison 


Integrated liquid water (mm) 



Figure 6. — NIRSS to TO ILW comparison. 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


3 


Maximum liquid water content (g m' 3 ) 



TO 

Figure 7. — NIRSS to TO maximum LWC comparison. 


11 November 2003 

This case was covered extensively in the 12 th Aviation, Range and Aerospace Meteorology 
Conference sponsored by the American Meteorology Society (see 
http://ams.confex.com/ams/Annual2006/techprogram/session_l 93 1 3 .htm). 

Three Twin Otter missed approaches were made to the Mirabel Airport during this storm event. 

First, a word on the formats of these plots (figs. 8 to 15). The left hand side shows the temperature 
comparisons. The black line is static air temperature (Ts) from the Twin Otter. The darker line is the 
average radiometer temperature profile during the sounding time (table 1) and the lighter lines are the 
minimum and maximum during that time. The orange line shows the IR temperature from the 3005 
radiometer. On the right the liquid water profiles are shown. Black is from the TO FSSP, which includes 
drop sizes in the 5 to 45 pm range (no drizzle). Grey is from the CSIRO liquid water probe, which is a 
hot-wire instrument. Both are shown to suggest the uncertainty in the liquid water measurements. Again, 
the darker and lighter lines in color (pink in this case) are the average and min/max of the retrieved 
NIRSS values. Various other features are pointed out on the plots and are discussed for the different case 
studies. 

During the first sounding on 1 1 November (fig. 8), the cloud was mostly ice crystals with some 
drizzle. Altitude ranges of different ice crystal types recorded by the 2-D-grey probe are shown. Since the 
drizzle was observed well above the freezing level (at -1600 m MSL according to NIRSS), it was not 
formed from melting ice. The aircraft did not fly to the top of the cloud. Temperature retrieved from the 
profiling radiometer was close to the aircraft-measured profile, but the radiometer did not identify 
numerous small inversions. These are probably not significant for liquid water distribution or icing hazard 
analysis. Cloud bases (black and purple double-headed arrows) were in fairly good agreement: NIRSS at 
-2 °C, TO at —0.5 °C. Freezing levels were (ZLN and ZLTO) nearly the same, although the TO just 
barely descended to 0 °C. The IR temperature was -4.9 °C; with a poorly-defined cloud of mostly ice 
crystals and little liquid, the IR detector had problems detecting a good cloud base. There was very little 
liquid water in this cloud; total integrated value from the radiometer was 0.16 mm. The measured liquid 
water content values fell within the range of retrieved values, although both are < 0.1 g m“ 3 , with most < 
0.04 g m -3 . 

The second sounding (fig. 9), which was a descent to the Mirabel airport, showed temperatures again 
in reasonable agreement, with the greatest differences near 0 °C. This is important for identifying the 
freezing level and thus the altitude range for icing. The radiometer-retrieved freezing level was -800 m 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


4 


higher than that measured from the TO, but there was excellent agreement in temperatures below 1000 m 
(although they are >0 °C). Again, the aircraft didn’t climb to cloud top. This was another deep cold cloud 
with the NIRSS-detected top at -17 °C. In the lower part of the cloud (base to about 2500 m), the 
agreement between observed and retrieved LWC was good, but above~2700 m the retrieval retained high 
LWC whereas the measurements included much lower values. NIRSS did not separate the two cloud 
layers but rather analyzed one thick cloud. All cloud bases were in good agreement. 

The third sounding was the ascent part of the missed approach to Mirabel airport and sampled the 
same deep cold cloud (fig. 10). The TO did not sample the top so only lower levels (<2100 m) of the 
cloud can be compared. The temperatures, freezing levels, and cloud bases (including IR detector) again 
are in fairly good agreement. LWC estimates from NIRSS are lower than measured, with liquid 
distributed through a deep cloud. It is not known if there was a layered structure during the ascent time. 



Ts(DegC) LW C (g/m3) 

Figure 8. — 11 November 2003 — Case 1 sounding. 



Ts(degC) LWC (g/m3) 

Figure 9. — 1 1 November 2003 — Case 2 sounding. 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


5 



Ts(degC) LWC (g/m3) 

Figure 10. — 11 November 2003 — Case 3 sounding. 



Ts(degC) LWC (g/m3) 

Figure 11. — 18 November 2003 sounding. 


18 November 2003 

All of the cloud sampled 18 November was at T>0 °C, and the TO-measured profile was the wedge 
shape often seen in more simple stratiform cloud layers (fig. 1 1). There were two temperature 
inversions — one near the surface and one at the cloud top. The retrieval smoothed these inversions with 
the warmest temperature similar to the TO measurement, but about 500 m higher; it is not a good 
retrieval. NIRSS placed the cloud base at an altitude similar to that observed but detected deeper cloud — 
however, the TO sounding only went to -1500 m so there may have been higher cloud aloft. The IR 
temperature of 1.5 was not very different from the TO-measured temperature of 2.2, but matching this to 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


6 


the retrieved temperature profile would give large errors in cloud base height (either too high or low 
because of the strong inversion). The radiometer ILW was 0.05 mm; the TO-integrated value was 
0.127 mm. The effect of higher cloud top and lower ILW in the NIRSS retrieval is seen as smaller LWC 
over a greater depth. 


25 November 2003 

This was another case with strong inversion and wedge-shaped LWC profile (fig. 12). The retrieved 
temperature is close to that measured in the lowest (<500 m) levels, then deviates perhaps in reaction to 
that inversion. The IR temperature is near the TO-measured value but matching that temperature to its 
height on the retrieved sounding would place the cloud base more than a kilometer too high. In reality, the 
atmospheric temperature inversion marks the cloud top detected by the FSSP. The CSIRO probe detects 
some hydrometeors (possible larger than detectable by the FSSP) both above and below the FSSP cloud 
which may explain the deeper NIRSS cloud. The ILW values were 0.09 mm from NIRSS, 0.0477 mm 
from the TO. The base heights were similar. Thus, the NIRSS cloud depth was about twice that of the real 
cloud, with about double the ILW to distribute so the actual LWC values were actually similar, but 
misplaced in height. The assumption of a wedge-shaped profile for this stratiform cloud was a good 
first-guess. 

For this day’s second sounding (fig. 13), the temperature comparison looks very bad until you 
consider this as being a tiny part of the sounding shown in the previous sounding (taken -20 to 30 min 
earlier). There is a strong inversion hinted at the top of the TO sounding, and again the retrieval did not 
include that feature but smoothed the profile throughout its depth. The NIRSS cloud base is within 100 m 
of the TO-measured base. ILW from the radiometer was 0.158 mm, from the TO, 0.0642 mm. The top 
altitudes were in better agreement than for the first sounding. The NIRSS LWC had a wedge shape 
similar to the TO measurements, although the values had considerable variability. There may have been 
hydrometeors above and below the FSSP cloud as in the first sounding but since the aircraft sampled such 
a small depth the information is not available. 



Ts(degC) LWC (g/m3) 


Figure 12. — 25 November 2003 — Case 1 sounding. 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


7 


3500 


3000 - 


2500 - 

cr 

c n 

^ 2000 - 

E 

|) 1500 - 

<D 

X 

1000 - 


500 - 


0 



0.4 


Ts(degC) LWC (g/m3) 

Figure 13. — 25 November 2003 — Case 2 sounding. 


10 December 2003 

For this day’s first sounding, the TO-measured temperature profile was very complex with several 
inversions (fig. 14). These are smoothed out considerably by the radiometer profile. The inversion crosses 
the 0 °C isotherm, so placement of temperatures is important in this case to determine where icing will 
occur. The warm layer had a maximum temperature of nearly 8 °C in the retrieval, but only 5 °C in the 
measurement. However, the depth of the warm layer was similar in both cases. The cloud was also 
complex with three layers. The retrieval appeared to diagnose the layers but had considerable cloud in 
between. ILW values were similar (NIRSS = 0.30 mm, TO = 0.31 mm) but NIRSS distributed the liquid 
though a greater depth. The IR temperature was slightly lower than that measured by the TO; the 
instrument detected the base of the uppermost cloud layer rather than the thin lower layer. 

The second sounding was nearly an hour later, and the TO didn’t fly low enough to sample the low- 
level inversion (fig. 15). The retrieved temperature profile was similar to the first sounding. This time the 
TO-measured warm layer extended much higher than the retrieved warm layer. The cloud retained its 
multi-layer structure which NIRSS smoothed into one cloud, with top and base close to the highest top 
and lowest TO-measured base. Values of LWC were similar although the high LWC in the lowest layer 
was missed — NIRSS would have warned for less icing hazard than was really present. ILW values were 
0.47 mm for NIRSS and 0.272 mm for the TO. The IR detector matched the cloud base well, but if this 
were used to determine cloud base from the sounding it would have placed the cloud either well below or 
above the real cloud due to the retrieved inversion. 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


8 



Ts (degC) LWC (g/m3) 

Figure 14. — 10 December 2003 — Case 1 sounding 



Ts (degC) LWC (g/m3) 

Figure 15. — 10 December 2003 — Case 2 sounding 


Conclusions 

These revisions to the NIRSS logic are progressing toward more accurate retrievals of cloud, liquid 
water, and icing hazard from a remote sensing system. Further work is needed to establish how the 
retrievals could be improved, either by limiting the system to its own components (X-band radar, 
ceilometer and profiling radiometer) or allowing external data to be used (satellite, NEXRAD radar, 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


9 


METARS, model output). Supercooled large drop conditions have not yet been examined nor has the 
effect of precipitation on the retrievals. The icing hazard index should also be made compatible with icing 
products such as CIP, and/or the present thinking about the relation of atmospheric variables to ice 
accretion and subsequent performance loss. 

Cloud top height and temperature retrieval are the most obvious areas of improvement. Many of the 
discrepancies seen in these comparisons arose from the retrieved cloud top being unrealistically high. In 
the cold cloud case of 1 1 November, the radar may well have detected ice crystals in glaciated cloud 
where liquid was not present; a warmer limit on liquid distribution (the current temperature limit is 
-25 °C) may help in those cases. Or, incorporation of new satellite-based cloud products developed by 
the NASA Langley Research Center may help determine the nature of the cloud top — whether it’s ice or 
liquid. For the warmer clouds of 18 and 25 November it is not likely that the radar detected ice cloud 
above any water cloud. The source of the error in cloud top is not well understood and needs to be 
pursued. 


Overall Summary and Suggestions for Future Studies 

his year we were able to further the NIRSS program by re-writing the data ingest and display code 
from Lab VIEW to C++ and Java. This was leveraged by a University of Colorado Computer Science 
Department Senior Project. The upgrade made the display more portable and upgradeable. 

Comparisons with research aircraft flights conducted during AIRS-2 were also done and demonstrate 
reasonable skill in determining cloud altitudes and liquid water distribution. Improvements can still be 
made to the cloud and liquid logic. Some specific areas needing attention are: 

• More in situ aircraft data are needed for comparisons with NIRSS profiles to enable upgrades in 
cloud and liquid water distribution logic. 

• Cloud top height and temperature are problematic; satellite imagery ingest may help. 

• Cloud base temperature is well-detected by the IR sensor and cloud base height is well- 
determined by the laser ceilometer (both in non-precipitating clouds). Conversion of temperature 
to height and vice-versa depends on the accuracy of the radiometer-derived temperature profiles. 
Perhaps the profile could be adjusted to match the IR temperature at the ceilometer-measured 
cloud base. Also, the performance of the IR sensor and the ceilometer has not been fully 
examined in precipitation. 

• SLD conditions have not yet been incorporated into the NIRSS and should be considered in light 
of possible future regulations for certification of flight into those environments. 

The icing hazard index was not evaluated here since that represents work in progress and needs to be 
made compatible with the new CIP-Severity algorithm. CIP is the Current Icing Potential product 
(Bernstein et al., 2005) that uses a combination decision tree/fuzzy logic algorithm to combine numerical 
weather model output with operational sensor data (NEXRAD, GOES, METARs and voice pilot reports) 
to produce an hourly icing diagnosis across the CONUS. The new severity algorithm seeks to diagnose 
liquid water production through rising, cooling air, and depletion by ice processes. The information used 
by CIP is very different from that ingested by NIRSS but some common ground does exist. 

Additionally, the role of NIRSS and the information it both needs and provides needs to be 
determined in context of the Next Generation Air Traffic System (NGATS). The Weather Integrated 
Products Team has a plan for an Initial Operating Capability to take place in 2012. NIRSS is not 
explicitly a part of that IOC but should be considered as a follow-on as part of the development path to a 
2025 full capability. 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


10 



Publications and Presentations 


12 th Aviation, Range and Aerospace Meteorology Conference Poster 

See http://ams.confex.com/ams/Annual2006/techprogram/paper 100499.htm 

References 

Bernstein, B.C., F. McDonough, M.K. Politovich, B.G. Brown, T.P. Ratvasky, D.R. Miller, C.A. Wolff 
and G. Cunning, 2005: Current Icing Potential: Algorithm Description and Comparison with Aircraft 
Observations. J. Appl Meteor ., 44 , 969-986. 

Hogg, D.C., F.O. Guiraud, J.B. Snider, M.T. Decker and E.R. Westwater, 1983: A steerable dual-channel 
microwave radiometer for measurements of water vapor and liquid water in the troposphere. J. 
Climate Appl Meteor ., 22, 789-806. 


NAS A/CR— 2007-21501 1 


11 


REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the 
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this 
burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302. 
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB 
control number. 

PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 

1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 
01-11-2007 

2. REPORT TYPE 

Final Contractor Report 

3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

NIRSS Upgrades: Final Report 




5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

NAS3-00145 






5b. GRANT NUMBER 






5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Politovich, Marcia, K. 




5d. PROJECT NUMBER 






5e. TASK NUMBER 






5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

WBS 609866.02.07.03.04 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Center for Atmospheric Research 
Boulder, Colorado 80301 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

E-16187 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, DC 20546-0001 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORS 
ACRONYM(S) 

NASA 






11. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
REPORT NUMBER 

NASA/CR-2007-215011 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Unclassified-Unlimited 
Subject Category: 06 

Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov 

This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 301-621-0390 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

14. ABSTRACT 

Under this contract work proceeded in these areas: NIRSS Upgrades and comparisons of Version 2 outputs with in situ data. 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 

Aircraft icing; Aviation meteorology; Flight hazards; Remote sensing; Multisensor fusion; Meteorological radar; Microwave 
radiometers; Cloud height indicators 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

17. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 
OF 

19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

STI Help Desk (email :help@ sti.nasa.gov) 

a. REPORT 

U 

b. ABSTRACT 

U 

c. THIS 
PAGE 

U 

UU 

PAGES 

17 

19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area code) 

301-621-0390 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 





























