i ri r 



NASA SP-6001 



Z 
> 

CO 

> 

co 

I 

t> 
o 
o 



MAURY OCEANOGRAPMIC LIBRARY 
Steams Space Center, MS 39622-5301 



(NASA-SP-6001) APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 
(NASA) 112 p 



N93-720B1 



Unci as 



Z9/82 0163152 



APOLLO 

TERMINOLOGY 



TL 
521 
.A333 
no. 6001 



AUGUST 1963 




L AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION 



Ocl^ ^ 2- b 7 $ '/ £■ 






5g 



^APOLLO 

TERMINOLOGY 



/ *- 

NASA SP-6001 

ft 33s 



/ / -> 



Prepared for Office of Manned Space Flight 




PUBLISHED Br 



^Office of Scientific and Technical Information 
^NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION 



1963 



"Washington, D.C. 



For sale by Office of Technical Services, Department of Commerce, 
Washington, D. C. Price $2. 75 



PREFACE 



Apollo Terminology definitions presented herein are in- 
tended to provide Apollo program participants with an updated 
collection of terminology used on the Apollo program. Nothing 
contained herein shall be construed to modify or effect in any 
way any existing contract or subcontract. 

This publication will be maintained current by periodic 
supplements or revisions. Forms are provided in the back of 
this publication to provide the user with a simple and effective 
means of submitting comments, recommendations for additions, 
deletions, or revisions to Apollo Terminology. Comments re- 
garding Apollo Terminology are solicited and should be for- 
warded to: 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Code MII-E 
Washington, D. C. 20546 

Requests for additional copies of this publication for use 
by NASA activities should be forwarded to: 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Code AFSS-A 
Washington, D. C. 20546 



A 



ABLATION 

Sublimation, vaporization, or melting of a surface material 
due to heating resulting from a fluid moving past it at high 
speed. This phenomenon is often used to protect a structure 
from overheating by providing an expendable ablation sur- 
face, such as the heat shield on a reentry vehicle, or a pro- 
tective coating in a combustion chamber. 

ABLE 

Upper stage of a launch vehicle based on either Thor or 
Atlas missiles. 

ABORT 

Premature and abrupt termination of a mission because of 
existing or imminent degradation of mission success 
probability. 

See— pad abort 



ABORT MODE 

The technique employed for abort. 

ABSOLUTE MINIMUM POINT 

In statistics a point at which the value of the function is 
less than at any other point in the entire region being 
considered. 

ACC 

Acceptance. 

ACCELEROMETER 

An instrument which measures acceleration or gravitional 
forces capable of imparting acceleration. 

See— pulsed integrating pendulum accelerometer 

ACCEPTABLE ENVIRONMENTAL RANGE TEST 

Test to determine the range of the environmental conditions 
in which an equipment has a reliability at least as high as 
required. 

ACCEPTABLE QUALITY LEVEL AQL 

A nominal value expressed in terms of percent defective or 
defects per hundred units, whichever is applicable, speci- 
fied for a given group of defects of a product. 

ACCEPTABLE RELIABILITY LEVEL ARL 

A nominal value expressed in terms of percent failure per 
thousand operating hours specified for acceptance of parts 
or equipment. It is a measure of reliability which will be 
accepted, some preassigned percentage of the time, by a 
reliability sampling plan. 

ACCEPTANCE ACC 

The act of an authorized representative of the Government 
by which the Government assents to ownership of existing 



and identified articles, or approves specific services 
rendered as partial or complete performance of the contract. 
See— probability o/ acceptance 

ACCEPTANCE INSPECTION 

Examination and testing, to determine conformance of the 
supplies or services to certain specified requirements, 
which serve as a basis for acceptance. 

ACCEPTANCE NUMBER 

The largest number of defectives (or defects) in the sample 
or samples under consideration that will permit the accept- 
ance of the inspection lot. 

ACCEPTANCE SAMPLING 

The art or science that deals with procedures in which de- 
cisions to accept or reject lots or processes are based on 
the examination of samples. 



ACCEPTANCE SAMPLING PLAN 

A specific plan which states the sample sizes, and the 
criteria for acceptance, rejection, or the taking of another 
sample. 

ACCEPTANCE TEST 

Test to determine conformance to design or specifications 
as a basis for acceptance. When specially designed they 
may apply to parts, equipments or systems. 
See— component acceptance test 

flight acceptance test 

statistical acceptance test 

vehicle acceptance test 

ACCESSIBILITY 

A quality of design that permits ready access for testing, 
fault detection, and repair or replacement. 

ACCESSORY ACCRY 

A part, subassembly or assembly designed for use in con- 
junction with or to supplement another assembly, unit, or 
set. An accessory contributes to the effectiveness of the 
assembly or set thereof without extending or varying the 
basic function. 

ACCRY 

Accessory. 

ACE 

Automatic Checkout Equipment 

ACHIEVED RELIABILITY 

The reliability demonstrated by the physical item. It con- 
sists of inherent reliability with any degradation that 



ACOUSTIC VELOCITY 



occurs in manufacture, shipping, handling, storage, mainten- 
ance, or use. Statement of achieved reliability must include 
specifications of conditions under which demonstrated. 



ACOUSTIC VELOCITY 

The speed of propagation of sound waves, 
speed of sound. 



Also called 



ACOUSTIC VIBRATION 

Vibration, with respect to operational environments, trans- 
mitted through a gas. The vibration may be sonic, subsonic, 
or ultrasonic. 

ACOUSTICAL NOISE 

A vibration of audible frequency. 

ACPM 

Attitude Control Propulsion Motors. 

ACTIVE REPEATER SATELLITE 

A communications satellite which, using on-board power 
supplies, receives, amplifies, and retransmits radio signals- 
from around terminals. 



ADVANCED SCHEMATIC 

A schematic diagram that additionally identifies connections 
and terminals, but still without giving physical locations of 
components. * 

ADVANCED SYNCOM 

An advanced 24-hour orbit, wideband, active-repeater, 
communications satellite, capable of transmitting up to 
4 TV channels or several hundred two-way radio channels. 
Tentatively scheduled for launch in 1965 and 1966. 

ADVANCED SYSTEMS 

A composite of equipment, skills, and techniques used as a 
vehicle for advancing technology. Design, development, 
and construction of advanced systems are directed toward 
extending scientific knowledge and early attainment of an 
operational capability. 

AEC 

Atomic Energy Commission. 

AEDC 

Arnold Engineering Development Center. 



ACTUAL FIT 

The relationship existing between them with respect to the 
amount of clearance or interference which is present when 
they are assembled. 

ACTUAL SIZE 

Measured size. 



AEROBALLISTICS 

Term derived from aerodynamics and ballistics, dealing 
primarily with the motion of bodies whose flight path is 
determined by applying the principles of both sciences to 
different portions of the path. 



ACTUAL WEIGHT 

Weight of a part determined by weighing-in after assembly. 



AEROBIOLOGY 

The study of the distribution of living organisms freely 
suspended in the atmosphere. 



ACTUATOR 

See—gimballed actuator 

rotary hydraulic actuator 



ADAPTER SKIRT 

A flange or extension of a space vehicle stage or section 
that provides a ready means for fitting some object, such 
as another stage or section to it. 



AERODUCT 

A ramjet-type engine designed to scoop up ions and 
electrons freely available in the outer reaches of the atmos- 
phere or in the atmospheres of other spatial bodies. A chem- 
ical process within the duct of this engine expels particles 
derived from the ions and electrons as a propulsive jet 
stream. 



ADAPTIVE CONTROL SYSTEM 

Control system which is capable of adjusting its parameters 
to meet changing performance requirements. 



ADDITIVE 

A substance added to a base to achieve some purpose such 
as a more even rate of combustion in a propellant, or 
improved lubrication properties of working fluids such as 
RP-1 etc. 

ADP 

Automatic Data Processing. 

ADVANCED SATURN 

Previous designation for Saturn V. 



AERODYNAMIC HEATING 

The heating of a body by the high speed passage of air or 
other gases over the body, caused by friction and by com- 
pression processes. 

AERODYNAMIC VEHICLE 

A device, such as an airplane or glider, capable of flight 
within a sensible atmosphere and relying on aerodynamic 
forces to maintain flight. 

AERODYNAMICS 

Science of motion of bodies relative to the air and the forces 
acting on the bodies, especially in flight through the air. 

AEROELASTICITY 

The study of the effect of aerodynamic forces on elastic 
bodies. 



AIR FORCE BALLISTIC SYSTEMS DIVISION 



AEROEMBOLISM 

(1) The formation or liberation of gases in the blood vessels 
of the body, as brought on by a change from a relatively 
high atmospheric pressure to a lower one. 

(2) The disease or condition caused by the formation or 
liberation of gases in the body. The disease is charac- 
terized principally be neuralgic pains, cramps, and swell- 
ing which sometimes results in death. Also called decom- 

. pression sickness. 

AEROLITE 

A meteorite composed principally of stony material. 

AEROMEDICINE 

Alternate for aerospace medicine. 

AERONAUTICAL SYSTEMS DIVISION ASD 

Division of the Air Force Systems Command, located at 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio. Responsible for 
aircraft and air launched missile programs assigned to the 
Air Force for conducting research and development, test, 
evaluation in aerodynamics, human factors, materials, 
electronics, and aerospace sciences. Formerly called 
Wright Air Development Division. 



AFB 

Air Force Base. 

AFBSD 

Air Force Ballistic Systems Division. 

AFCS 

Automatic Flight Control System. 

AFMTC 

Air Force Missile Test Center. 

AFRM 

Advanced Flight Research Model. 

AFSC 

Air Force Systems Command. 

AFSSD 

Air Force Space Systems Division. 

AFTERBURNING 

Irregular burning of fuel left in the firing chamber of a 
rocket after fuel cutoff. 



AERONOMY 

The study of the atmosphere, especially its relation to the 
Earth and the effect upon it of bombardment by radiation 
from space. 

AEROPAUSE 

A region of indeterminate limits in the upper atmosphere, 
considered as a boundary or transition region between the 
denser portion of the atmosphere and space. 

AEROS 

Meteorological satellite in stationary orbit (NIMBUS 
follow-on). 



AGANI 

Apollo Guidance and Navigation Information. 

AGARD 

Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development. 



AGAVE 

Automatic Gimballed Antenna Vectoring Equipment. 



AGC 

Apollo Guidance Computer. 



AEROSPACE GROUND EQUIPMENT AGE 

All equipments required on the ground to make an aerospace 
system operational in its intended environment. 

AEROSPACE MEDICINE 

That branch of medicine dealing with the effects of flight 
through the atmosphere or in space upon the human body, 
and with the prevention or cure of physiological or psycho- 
logical malfunctions arising from these effects. 
See— space medicine 

AEROSPACE VEHICLE 

A manned or unmanned vehicle which may be operated either 
in atmosphere or in space. 

'AEROTHERMODYNAMIC BORDER 

An altitude at about 100 miles, above which the atmosphere 
is so rarefied that the motion of an object through it at high 
.speeds generates no significant surface heat. 

AEROTHERMODYNAMICS 

The study of the aerodynamic and thermodynamic problems 
connected with aerodynamic heating. 



AGE 

Aerospace Ground Equipment. 

AGGD 

Apollo Guidance Ground Display. 

AGNIS 

Apollo Guidance and Navigation Industrial Support. 

AGRAVIC 

Unaffected by gravitation, weightless. 

AIR BREAKUP 

Disintegration of a vehicle by aerodynamic forces upon its 
reentry into the atmosphere. May be induced deliberately 
to reduce the impact velocity of test records and instruments 
to be recovered. 

AIR FORCE BALLISTIC SYSTEMS DIVISION AFBSD 

Division of the Air Force Systems Command, located at 
Inglewood, Calif., responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Minute- 
man Intercontinental Ballistic-Missile Programs, including 
activation of missile sites. 



AIR FORCE SPACE SYSTEMS DIVISION 



AIR FORCE SPACE SYSTEMS DIVISION AFSSD 

Division of the Air Force Systems Command, located at 
Inglewood, Calif., responsible for military space programs. 
Assigned to the Air Force and used for development projects 
in support of the Army, Navy, and National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration. Formerly called Ballistic Missile 
Division. 

AIR FORCE SYSTEMS COMMAND AFSC 

Major command of the Air Force, headquartered at Andrews 
AFB, Md., responsible for research, development, procure- 
ment, checkout, and delivery to the using command of 
Aerospace Weapon Systems and Equipment. Formerly called 
Air Research and Development Command. 



ALLOWANCE 

The prescribed difference between the maximum material 
condition of mating parts. It is the minimum clearance 
(positive allowance) or maximum interference (negative* 
allowance) between such parts. 

ALOUETTE 

US— Canada ionospheric research satellite (part of Topside 
Sounder). 

ALTERNATE MISSION 

A secondary flight plan which may be selected when the 
primary flight plan has been abandoned for any reason other 
than abort. 



AIR SHOWER 

A grouping of cosmic-ray particles observed in the 
atmosphere. 



AMAL 

Aviation Medical Acceleration Laboratory (USN). 



AIR SOUNDING 

The act of measuring atmospheric phenomena or determining 
atmospheric conditions at altitude, especially by means of 
apparatus carried by balloons or rockets. 



AMBIENT CONDITION 

Environmental conditions such as pressure, temperature, 
etc., which are normal for the location under discussion. 



AIR-BREATHING ENGINE 

An engine which requires the intake of air for combustion of 
the fuel, as in a ramjet or turbojet. This is contrasted with 
the rocket engine which carries its own oxidizer and can 
operate beyond the atmosphere. 

AIRFOIL DIVERGENCE 

The static torsional instability which occurs when the air- 
foil structural rigidity is exceeded by aerodynamic twisting 
effects. 

AIRFRAME 

The assembled principal structural and aerodynamic compo- 
nents of a vehicle, less propulsion systems, control and 
guidance equipments, and payloads. The airframe includes 
only the basic structure, that is, the space frame on which 
equipment is mounted. 



AMES RESEARCH CENTER ARC 

This NASA center, located at Moffett Field, Mountain View, 
Calif., conducts basic and applied research on 
aerodynamics of reentry vehicles, flight control of space 
vehicles and aircraft, and space environment physics. NASA 
life sciences advanced research and technology has been 
assigned to Ames Research Center. 

AMR 

Atlantic Missile Range. 

ANACOUSTIC ZONE 

Zone of silence in space. The region of altitude where 
distances between rarefied air molecules are so great that 
sound waves are not propagated. 



AIRGLOW 

The visible light, appearing at night, in the upper atmosphere 
that results from energy released by dissociated molecules 
and ionized atoms which had absorbed energy from solar 
radiation during the daytime. 



ANALOG COMPUTER 

A computing machine that works on the principle of measur- 
ing (as distinguished from counting) in which the input data 
are made analogous to a measurement continuum, such as 
voltage, linear lengths, resistance, light intensity, etc., 
which can be manipulated by computer. 



ALBEDO 

The ratio of the amount of electomagnetic radiation reflected 
by a body to the amount falling upon it, commonly expressed 
as a percentage. 



ALGA 

(Usually plural, algae). Unicellular and multicellular plants 
considered as a potential source of food and oxygen in a 
closed ecological system for space vehicles. 



ANALYSIS 

See— failure mode analysis 
failure mode analysis 
function analysis 
maintenance analysis 
mission analysis 
task analysis 

ANALYTIC MODEL 

A mathematical model which is represented by continuous, 
differentiable equations. 



ALIGNMENT SYSTEM 

See— vertical alignment system 



ANECHOIC 

Without echoes. 



APOLLO PROJECT DIRECTIVE 



ANGLE OF ATTACK 

The acute angle between a reference line in a body and the 
line of relative wind direction, projected on a plane contain- 
ing the reference line and parallel to the axis of symmetry. 

ANGSTROM 

A unit of length, used chiefly in expressing short wave- 
lengths. Ten billion angstroms equal one meter. 

ANGULAR DIMENSIONING 

A method for indicating the position of a point, line or 
surface by means of a linear dimension and angle, other than 
the 90 percent angle implied by the horizontal and vertical 
center lines. 

ANHYDROUS 

Free of water. 

ANNULAR ECLIPSE 

An eclipse in which a thin ring of the source of light 
appears around the obscuring body. 

ANNULAR SPACE 

Term refers to the space between the walls of a thermos 
jug, dewar, or storage tank, such as a LOX or LH-2 (liquid 
hydrogen), storage tank. 

ANOMALISTIC PERIOD 

The interval between two successive perigee passages of 
a satellite in orbit about a primary. Also called perigee- 
to-perigee period. 

ANOXIA 

An absence of oxygen in the blood, cells or tissues of the 
body. A condition which rarely exists, hypoxia is the more 
perferable term. 

ANTHROPOMETRY 

The science of measuring the human body, its parts and 
functional capacities. 

ANTI-G SUIT 

A tight fitting suit that covers parts of the body below the 
heart. It is designed to retard the flow of blood to the lower 
body in reaction to acceleration or deceleration. Bladders 
or other devices are used to inflate and increase body con- 
striction as G force increases. 

ANTIATOM 

Postulated elemental particle consisting of a negative 
nucleus with positive electrons in orbit. The atom of the 
known world consists of a positive nucleus with negative 
electrons in orbit. 

ANTICRITICALITY CONCEPT 

A concept for a safety measure that prevents too rapid an 
energy release from a nuclear reaction so that a dangerous 
state may not be reached by the reactor. 

ANTIGRAVITY 

A hypothetical effect that would arise from some energy 
field's cancellation of the effect of the gravitational field 
of the Earth or other body. 



ANTIMATTER 

Matter theoretically considered to exist, consisting of 
antiatoms. 

AOQ 

Average Outgoing Quality. 

AOQL 

Average Outgoing Quality Limit. 

AP 

Auto Pilot. 

APERTURE CARD 

A file or tabulating card with a rectangular hole specifically 
designed for the mounting of a film image or images. 

APHELION 

The point at which a planet or other celestial object, in its 
orbit about the sun, is farthest from the sun. 

AP0CYNTHI0N 

The point in an elliptical orbit about the moon at which an 
orbiting vehicle is farthest away from the moon. 

APOGEE 

A point on the orbit of a body which is at the greatest dis- 
tance from the center of the earth. 

APOGEE ROCKET 

A rocket attached to a satellite or spacecraft designed to 
fire when the craft is at apogee, the point farthest from the 
Earth in orbit. The effect of the apogee rocket is to estab- 
lish a new orbit farther from the Earth or to allow the craft 
to escape from Earth orbit. 

APOLLO 

A term generally used to describe the NASA Manned Lunar 
Landing Program but specifically used to describe the effort 
devoted to the development test and operation of the space 
vehicle for long duration, Earth orbit, circumlunar, and lunar 
landing flights. 

APOLLO GUIDANCE AND 

NAVIGATION INFORMATION AGANI 

A communication medium giving technical information on all 
aspects of the Apollo work at Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT). It is a working document for all personnel 
of the laboratory who have need to refer to authoritative 
Apollo data. 

APOLLO GUIDANCE COMPUTER AGC 

A general purpose computer incorporating fixed and erasable 
memory storage. 

APOLLO GUIDANCE GROUND DISPLAY AGGD 

Ground support equipment (GSE) to display and record 
guidance information transmitted via the operational com- 
munication link. 

APOLLO PROJECT DIRECTIVE 

A consolidated summary of the objectives, management 
structure, policies, and schedules for the project, required 



APOLLO SPACECRAFT 



in order to assure technical, managerial, and administrative 
control. 

APOLLO SPACECRAFT 

The vehicle required to perform the Apollo mission after 
separation of the final launch stage. It consists of the com- 
mand module (CM), the service module (SM), the lunar excur- 
sion module (LEM), the launch escape system (LES), and 
the spacecraft adapter. 

APPROVED PART 

A part considered acceptable for an application based on 
engineering evaluation and past useage, but which has not 
passed a qualification test. 

APPROVED PARTS AND MATERIAL LIST 

A list of all parts and materials that are approved for the 
application intended. The list includes equipment qualified 
either as a part of the program in question or from previous 
programs. 

APU 

Auxiliary Power Unit. 

AQL 

Acceptable Quality Level. 

ARC 

Ames Research Center. 

ARC-JET 

An electric rocket system in which a gas is heated by being 
passed through an electric arc and accelerated through a 
nozzle, similar to a chemical rocket nozzle, to produce 
thrust. 

ARIEL 

US— United Kingdom ionospheric research satellite. 



ARL 

Acceptable Reliability Level. 

ARM 

See— launch support and bolddown arm 
launch support arm 
umbilical service arm 
umbilical swing arm 

ARMING TOWER 

A steel tower like structure which will be used for installa- 
tion of space vehicle ordnance items and may be used for 
loading the space vehicle hypergolic storable propellants 
and the spacecraft high purity LOX and LH-2 (liquid 
hydrogen). 

ARRANGEMENT DRAWING 

Shows projection or perspective of items, with or without 

controlling dimensions, to indicate their relationship. 

ARTICLE 

A unit of hardware, or any portion thereof, required by the 
contract. 



ARTIFICIAL ENVIRONMENT 

The state or conditions produced in a controlled test space 
which generates a simulated natural environment as an input 
to the equipment under going test. * 

ARTIFICIAL EARTH SATELLITE 

A man-made Earth satellite, as distinguished from the Moon. 
Usually called Earth satellite. 

ARTIFICIAL GRAVITY 

A simulated gravity established within a space vehicle, as 
by rotating a cabin about an axis of a spacecraft. The cen- 
trifugal force generated being similar to the force of gravity. 

ASCS 

Automatic Stabilization and Control System. 

ASIS 

Abort Sensing and Implementation System. 

ASME 

American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 

ASN 

Average Sample Number. 

ASPIRATOR 

Any device used as a suction pump, for producing the move- 
ment of fluids by suction. 

ASPO 

Apollo Spacecraft Project Office. (NASA/MSC) 

ASSEMBLY ASSY 

A number of parts or subassemblies or any combination 
thereof joined together to perform a specific function. 
See— cable assembly 

detail assembly drawing 

harness assembly 

inseparable assembly drawing 

interdependent assembly or unit of equipment 

major assembly 

minor assembly 

nondependent assembly or unit of equipment 

permanently fastened assembly drawing 

ASSEMBLY DRAWING 

Depicts the assembled relationship of two or more items or 
a group of items and assemblies, or a group of assemblies 
required to make up an assembly. 
See— cable assembly drawing 
detail assembly drawing 
inseparable assembly drawing 
permanently fastened assembly drawing 

ASSIGNABLE CAUSE 

A factor contributing to the variation in quality and is 
economically feasible to identify. Assignable causes must 
be identified and removed to attain statistical control. 

ASSOCIATE CONTRACTOR 

The contractor who under direct contract to NASA performs 
work excluded from the principal contract. The associate 



ATTACHMENT 



contractor is responsible to the principal contractor for 
technical integration of the (sub) system and must coordi- 
nate technical developments and requirements in a timely 
and organized manner. The associate contractor is directly 
responsible to NASA for administrative and contractual 
matters. 

ASSY 

Assembly. 

ASTEROID 

One of the many small celestial bodies revolving around the 
Sun, most of the orbits being between Mars and Jupiter. 
Also called planetoid or minor planet. 

ASTIA 

Armed Services Technical Information Agency. 

ASTRIONICS 

Electronics as applied especially to astronautics. 

ASTRO 

A prefix meaning star or stars and, by extension, sometimes 
used as the equivalent of celestial, as in astronautics. 

ASTROBIOLOGY 

A branch of biology concerned with the discovery or study 
of life on planets. 



ASTRODYNAMICS 

The practical application of celestial mechanics, astrobal- 
listics, propulsion theory, and allied fields to the problem 
of planning and directing the trajectories of space vehicles. 



ASTROGATION 

Contraction of astronavigation. 



ASTROMETRICS 

A branch of astronomy concerned with the measurements of 
celestial bodies and the determination of their movements 
and positions. 

ASTRONAUT 

One who navigates through space. 

ASTRONAUTICS 

The science and technology of space flight. 

ASTRONAVIGATE . 

To guide and direct a spacecraft from within the vehicle, 
by means of observations on celestial bodies. 

ASTRONOMICAL UNIT 

The mean distance between the Earth and the Sun. Approxi- 
mately 93,000,000 miles. 

ASTRONOMY 

See— galactic astronomy 
radar astronomy 
radio astronomy 



ASTROPHYSICS 

The study of the physical and chemical nature of celestial 
bodies and their environments. 

ASTROTRACKER 

Instrumentation required for celestial navigation aboard a 
spacecraft. 

ATI 

Average total inspection. 

ATLANTIC MISSILE RANGE AMR 

An instrumented missile test range extending some 5000 to 
6000 miles from Cape Canaveral, Florida to a point beyond 
ascension auxiliary AFB. It includes a series of island 
based tracking stations and ocean range vessels to gather 
performance data. 

ATMOSPHERE 

The body of air surrounding the earth. Also the body of 
gases surrounding or comprising any planet or other celestial 
body. 

See—cytherean atmosphere 
effective atmosphere 

ATMOSPHERIC BRAKING 

The action of atmospheric drag in decelerating a body that 
is approaching a planet. Can be deliberately used, where 
sufficient atmosphere exists, to decrease the vehicle veloc- 
ity before landing. 

ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION 

Refraction of light from a distant point by the atmosphere, 
caused by its passing obliquely through varying air 
densities. 

ATMOSPHERIC TRAJECTORY 

That portion of the return mission from orbital condition 
which is conducted within the atmosphere. 



ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION AEC 

The U. S. Civilian Governmental Agency, established by the 
Atomic Energy Act of 1946, to supervise and control the 
production of nuclear-fissionable radioactive materials in 
the United States. 

ATOMIC LATTICE 

The arrangement of particles on the atomic nuclei to form a 
crystal. 

ATOMIC ROCKET ENGINE 

Projected rocket engine in which energy for the jet stream 

would be generated by atomic fission or fusion. 

ATTACHING DEVICES 

Those parts, such as bolts, rivets, clamps, etc. which are 
used to affix one part, component, assembly or installation 
to another. 

ATTACHMENT 

A part, subassembly or assembly designed for use in con- 
junction with another assembly or a unit or set, contributing 



ATTITUDE 



to the effectiveness thereof by extending or varying the 
basic function of the assembly unit or set. 

ATTITUDE 

The position of a vehicle or craft etc., as determined by the 
inclination of its axis to some frame of reference. If not 
otherwise specified, this frame of reference is fixed to the 
earth. 

ATTITUDE CONTROL PROPULSION MOTORS ACPM 

Vernier engines that are used to control attitude of the 
spacecraft. They are part of the reaction control system 
(RCS). 



AUTOMATIC GROUND CONTROL STATION 

A concrete structure located beneath the launch pad. 
It contains a portion of the check-out equipment necessary to 
perform vehicle prelaunch tests, serves as a distribution' 
point for cables, provides space for vehicle test power equip- 
ment, and serves as a distribution point for all high pressure 
gases. 

AUTOMATIC OPERATION 

An automatic process in which a series of mechanical 
actions are caused to occur in a pre-selected pattern or 
sequence. To be distinguished fron. automatic control which 
involves a feedback loop. 



ATTITUDE-CONTROL SYSTEM 

A system within the flight-control system to maintain the 
desired attitude of a vehicle. 

ATTRIBUTE 

A characteristic or property which can be appraised only in 
terms of whether it does or does not exist. 
See— inspection by attributes 
method of attributes 

ATTRIBUTES TESTING 

Testing to determine the qualities of an item with regard to 
determining the presence or absence of some characteristic 
or attribute. 

AUGMENTOR 

A duct usually enclosing the exhaust jet behind the nozzle 
exit section to provide increased thrust. 



AURORA 

The sporadic visible emission from the upper atmosphere 
over middle and high latitudes. Also called "Northern 
Lights". 



AUTO PILOT AP 

An assembly, containing gyros with rotating mass, that is 
vehicle fixed and referenced to the vehicle, and supplies 
attitude signals to the vehicle control system. 



AUTO-IGNITING PROPELLANT 

Any liquid propellant that ignites, 
at room temperature. 



with a small time delay, 



AUTO-IGNITION-TEMPERATURE 

The temperature at which combustible materials ignite 
spontaneously in air. 

AUTOMATIC GIMBALLED ANTENNA 

VECTORING EQUIPMENT AGAVE 

A device used to assist in the acquisition of a target by a 
narrowbeam radar. It can be used, with modifications, as a 
telemetry receiving antenna. 



AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT 

Equipment used in support of a prime equipment but is not 
permanently attached to prime equipment. Auxiliary equip- 
ment is essential for the proper functioning of the prime 
equipment. 

AUXILIARY POWER UNIT APU 

A separate electrical or hydraulic power supply unit, either 
engine or turbine driven, used to furnish the electrical and 
hydraulic requirements of a spacecraft. 

AVAILABLE TIME 

Time measured from the correction of a malfunction or the 
ending of preventive maintenance, to the next succeeding 
malfunction or the next preventive maintenance action. 

AVERAGE LIFE 

The mean value for a normal distribution of equipment life- 
cycle. Generally applied to mechanical failures resulting 
from wear-out. 

AVERAGE OUTGOING QUALITY LIMIT AOQL 

Themaximum average outgoing quality (AOG) for a sampling 
plan. 

AVERAGE SAMPLE NUMBER ASN 

The average number of sample units inspected per lot in 
reaching a decision to accept or to reject. 

AVERAGE TOTAL INSPECTION ATI 

The average number of units inspected per lot, including all 
units in rejected lots (applicable when the procedure calls 
for 100 percent inspection of rejected lots). 

AVIONICS 

Contraction of aviation electronics. 

AXIS 

See— inner gimbal axis 
longitudinal axis 
outer gimbal axis 

AZIMUTH 

Horizontal direction or bearing. 



B 



B/M 

Bill of material. 

BACK PACK 

Self-contained extra-vehicular pressure suit support system. 

BACKOUT 

Step-by-step reversal of procedures from a specific point 
during a countdown. 

BACKUP ITEM 

An additional item under development to perform the general 
functions of another item under development. The item may 
be secondary to an identified primary item or a parallel 
development to enhance the probability of success in per- 
forming the general function. 

BALLISTIC TRAJECTORY 

The trajectory followed by a body being acted upon only by 
gravitational forces and the resistance of tne medium through 
which it passes. 

BALLISTICS 

The science or art that deals with the motion, behavior 
appearance or moaification of missiles acted upon by pro- 
pellants, rifling, wind, gravity, temperature or any other 
modifying substance, condition or force. 
See— exterior ballistics 
interior ballistics 

BASE LINE DIMENSIONING 

The establishment of a group of dimensions from a common 
base line or datum line. This system eliminates cumulative 
tolerances that would exist if the dimensions were estab- 
lished in a chain series. 

BASELINE CONFIGURATION 

The documented and approved design concept or arrange- 
ment of components as established at a given point in the 
procurement cycle for systems or equipment. 

BASIC 

A term used for identifying a theoretical value, or a de- 
desired dimension from winch limits are derived by the appli- 
cation of an allowance and tolerances. 

BASIC DIMENSION 

Specified on a drawing as a theoretical value used to de- 
scribe the exact size, shape or location of a feature. It is 
used as a basis from which permissible variations are estab- 
lished by tolerances on otner dimensions or notes. 

BASIC HOLE SYSTEM 

A system of fits in which the minimum limit of each hole 
size is basic. The fit aesired is obtained by varying the 



allowance of the shaft and the tolerances of tne mating 
parts. 

BASIC NAME 

A single word or a minimum numoer ^: .vor.l.:; which estab- 
lishes the basic concept of an iter,. 

BASIC OVERALL POLARITY BOP 

Refers to the overall system polarity from mertial input 
to control acturator deflection. 

BASIC SHAFT SYSTEM 

A system of fits ir. wmc.-i tne ;:; iximun umit of eacn hole 
size is basic. The fit aesirea is obtained by varying the 
allowance of the nole and the tolerances of the mating parts. 

BASIC SIZE 

The basic size is ttiat from which tne limits of size are 
derived by the application of allowances and tolerances. 

BATTERY 

See—gas storage battery 

BATTERY CHARGER TEST SET 

Equipment which is used to charge and !es* the space 
vehicle storage batteries. 



BATTERY DISCHARGER TEST SET 

Equipment which is used to discharge and chect; the space 
vehicle storage batteries and cneck the battery neater 
blanket circuitry and thermostat. 



BATTLESHIP TEST 

Static test program utilizing a partially or completely over- 
designed non-flight venicle to provide performance data 
on original design and design cnanges. 



BB 

Breadboard. 

BEAM 

A ray or collection of focused rays ot radiated energy. 
Radio waves used as a navigation aid. 
See—hypervelocity neutral beam 
ion beam neutralization 

BEAM-RIDER 

A craft following a beam, particularly one which does so 
automatically, the beams providing the auidance. 

BEAST 

Colloquial term for a large rocket. 



BECO 



BECO 

Booster Engine Cutoff. 



BELTS 

See— radiation belts 
Van Allen belts 

BETA SIGNAL OR BETA FEEDBACK SIGNAL 

That signal coming from an engine's hydraulic actuator to 
give an indication of engine deflection. 

Bl 

A prefix meaning two. Occurring every two, as in biennial, 
appealing every two years, or biweekly, appearing every two 
weeks. Compare with semi. 

BILATERAL TOLERANCE 

A tolerance in which variation is permitted in both directions 
from the design size. 

BILL OF MATERIAL 

A list of all material and parts used to fabricate a part or 
assembly. Used for ordering required material. All parts 
and requirements listed in the B/M shall coincide with those 
called out on the drawing of the part or assembly. 

BINARY NOTATION 

A system of positional notation in which the digits are coef- 
ficients of powers of the base 2 in the same way as the 
digits in the conventional decimal system are coefficients 
of powers of the base 10. 

BINARY STAR 

Two stars revolving around a common center of gravity. 

BIO-SENSOR 

Equipment to determine biological reactions, including de- 
tectors taped to various parts of man's anatomy, during 
flights and tests. 

BIOASTRONAUTICS 

Study of the effects of space flight upon animal or plant 
life. 

BIODYNAMICS 

Study of forces acting upon bodies in motion or in the 
process of changing motion, as they affect living beings. 

BIOENGINEERING 

The science by which knowledge of properties of matter and 
sources of power are applied to the design of structures and 
machines that will be directly used by man. 

BIOINSTRUMENTATION 

Instrumentation techniques and principles for the measure- 
ment of physical, physiological and biological factors in 
man or other living organisms. 

BIOMEDICINE 

Combined discipline of biology and medicine for analysis 
human tolerances to, and protection against, environmental 
variances. 



BIONICS 

The study of systems which function after the manner of, 
or in a manner characteristic of, or resembling, living 
systems. * 

BIOPAK 

A container for housing a biological organism in a habitable 
environment, and to record biological functions during space 
flight. 

BIOPOWER SYSTEM 

An organic assemblage of living organisms or substances 
that produce measurable electric potential. 

BIOS 

Biological Investigation of Space. 

BIOSATELLITE 

An artificial satellite designed to carry a human, animal or 
plant for the purpose of a scientific experiment. 

BIOTECHNOLOGY. 

The technology of the relation of man to the products of the 
industrial technology with which he works, especially in 
space. 

BIOTELEMETRY 

The electrical measuring, transmitting, and recording quali- 
ties, properties, and actions of organisms and substances, 
usually by means of radio transmissions from a remote site. 

BIRD 

Colloquial term for a rocket, satellite, or spacecraft. 



BLACK BOX 

A component or combination of parts contained in one pack- 
age so arranged that it can be inserted or removed from its 
place in a larger system without knowledge of its internal 
structure. 

BLACKOUT 

(1) A fadeout of radio communications due to environmental 
factors such as ionospheric disturbances, or a plasma sheath 
surrounding a reentry vehicle. 

(2) A condition in which vision is temporarily obscured by 
a blackness, accompained by a dullness of certain of the 
other senses, brought on by decreased blood pressure in the 
head and a consequent lack of oxygen. May occur in pull- 
ing out of a high-speed dive in an airplane. 

BLASTOFF 

Colloquial term for launch. 

BLEED-CYCLE OPERATION 

Refers specifically to those liquid rocket engines in which 
the turbopump is driven by hot gases bled from the combus- 
tion chamber of the main thrust chamber assembly during 
mainstage operation. 

BLOCK DIAGRAM 

A line drawing with block outlines to designate units or 
functional groups for general arrangement studies, functional 



10 



BREAKOFF PHENOMENON 



explanation, product familiarization, etc., within a system, 
set or item. 

BLOCKHOUSE 

Heavily reinforced building designed to withstand blast and 
heat. It houses the electronic controls and equipment for 
preparing and launching a vehicle. In Apollo, the term refers 
to the LCC (Launch Control Center). 

BLOW-OUT DISC 

A mechanism, consisting of a thin metal diaphragm, used 
as a safety device to relieve excessive gas pressure. 

BLOWOFF 

A rudimentary term used to describe the separation of a part 
of a missile by explosive force for recovery purpose. The 
term loses significance with the refinements in separation 
design techniques. 

BOATTAIL 

The cylindrical section of a ballistic body that continually 
decreases in diameter toward the tail to reduce overall aero- 
dynamic drag. 

BOILERPLATE BP 

A piece of test hardware, generally non-functioning, which 
structurally simulates weight, center of gravity, and aerody- 
namic configuration. It may incorporate interim structural 
shells or dummy structures. Internal systems may be inert 
or contain selected functional sub-systems for obtaining 
flight data for development purposes. A functional mock-up 
modeled to simulate a subsystem or system for the purpose 
of evaluating the performance. 

BOILOFF 

The vapor loss from any volatile liquid (e. g. liquid oxygen) 
particularly when stored in a vehicle ready for flight. 

BOLT 

See— explosive bolt 

BOLT CIRCLE 

The circle locating centers of holes, lugs, etc. Sometimes 
called pitch circle. 

BOMBER 

See— orbital bomber 

BONDING 

Establishment of complete electrical contact between vari- 
ous adjoining structures or units. 

BOOSTER 

Short for booster engine or booster rocket. 
See— two-burn booster 

BOOSTER ENGINE 

An engine, especially a booster rocket, that adds power to 
the thrust of the sustainer engine, or provides propulsion for 
a special phase of flight. 

BOOSTER ENGINE CUTOFF BECO 

The point at which the booster engine stops firing. 



BOOSTER ROCKET 

(1) A rocket engine, either with solid or liquid fuel, that 
assists the normal propulsive system or sustainer engine of 
a rocket or aeronautical vehicle in some phase of its flight." 

(2) A rocket used to set a missile vehicle in motion before 
another engine takes over. 

BOOTSTRAP 

A self-generating or self-sustaining process. Refers spe- 
cifically to those liquid rocket engines in which, during 
mainstage operation, the gas generator is fed by the main 
propellants pumped by the turbopump. The turbopump in 
turn is driven by hot gases from the gas generator system. 
Such a system must be started by a starting system which 
supplies outside power or propellants. When rocket-engine 
operation is no longer dependent on outside power or pro- 
pellants it is said to be in "Bootstrap" operation. 



BOP TEST 

Basic overall polarity test 

BORDER 

See—aerothermodynamic border 
mechanical border 



BOUND VECTOR 

Vector which has a specific point of application associated 
with it. 

BOUNDARY LAYER 

A thin layer of fluid next to the surface of a body in a mov- 
ing stream (e. g. an airfoil in an airstream) having distinc- 
tive flow characteristics as a result of friction between the 
fluid and the surface of the body. 

BP 

Boilerplate. 

BRAKING 

See— atmospheric braking 

BRAKING ELLIPSE 

An orbital ellipse such that portions of the orbit are within 
the atmosphere. Its purpose is to decelerate the orbiting 
body by exposing it to the aerodynamic drag of the 
atmosphere. 

BREADBOARD BB 

An assembly of preliminary circuits or parts used to prove 
the feasibility of a device, circuit, system, or principle with- 
out regard to the final configuration or packaging of the 
parts. 

BREAKDOWN 

See— generation breakdown 

BREAKOFF PHENOMENON 

The feeling, which sometimes occurs during high-altitude 
flight, of being totally separated and detached from the 
earth and human society. Also called breakaway 
phenomenon. 



11 



BREAKUP 

BREAKUP 

See— air breakup 

BREMSSTRAHLUNG 

Electromagnetic radiation produced by the rapid change in 
the velocity of an electron or another fast, charged, parti- 
cle as it approaches an atomic nucleus and is deflected by 
it. 



BUILDING 

See— environmental test and service building 
gas converter building 
vertical assembly building ' 

BUILDING-BLOCK CONCEPT 

The assembly oi a complex structure by combining standard- 
ized and proven sub-assemblies. 



BRENNSCHLUSS 

German for combustion termination. Cessation of fuel burn- 
ing resulting from consumption of the propellants, deliberate 
shutoff or other cause. 

BRUTE FORCE METHOD 

Optimization technique in which the raw data produced by 
hand calculation or by a computing machine, either as num- 
bers or as cathode ray tube plots, must be compared and 
evaluated by people to find an optimum point. 

BUBBLE COLONY 

Colony of persons placed on the Moon or other spatial body 
provided with individual or group environmental capsules. 

BUFFETING 

A term often used to describe the vibratory motion of a 
component or the airframe as a whole which is being sub- 
jected to the vibratory impulses contained within an aero- 
dynamic wake. 



BURN POND 

A man made pond which contains water a few inches above 
a mechanical burner vent. The purpose of the pond is to 
dispose, by burning, of dangerous ana undesirable gases 
such as hydrogen which are vented, purged or dispelled 
from the space vehicle propellant tanks and ground storage 
tanks. 



BURNOUT VELOCITY 

The velocity of the vehicle at burnout. 

BUTTON 

See-EGADS button 

BY-PASS RATIO 

In a turbofan engine, the ratio of the air passing through the 
annular fan duct to the air passing through the compressor, 
combustion, and turbine section. 



12 



c 



c&i 

Communications and Instrumentation. 

C-BAND 

Frequencies in the region of 5,000 megacycles per second. 

C-l BLOCK I VEHICLE 

Previous designation for Saturn I 31ock I. 

C-l BLOCK II VEHICLE 

Previous designation for Saturn I Block II. 

C-1B VEHICLE 

Previous designation for Saturn IB. 

C-5 VEHICLE 

Previous designation for Saturn V. 

c/o 

Checkout. 
CABIN 

See— pressurized cabin 
sealed cabin 

CABIN LEAKAGE 

The leakage or loss of spacecraft atmospheric pressure 
through the various closures, seals, and gasketed apertures 
in the spacecraft body. 

CABLE 

See— interconnecting cable 

CABLE ASSEMBLY 

Consists of two or more conductors with a concentric lay, 
assembled connectors, and having the protective cover or 
jacket integral with the cable. 

CABLE ASSEMBLY DRAWING 

A drawing which shows the complete construction of a cable 
or a group of cables. 

CALCULATED RISK 

A risk of known proportions considered to be present if a 
given action is undertaken, but one deliberately accepted 
if alternative actions are believed inadequate for attaining 
the objective, or believed to involve greater risks. 

CALENDAR AGE 

Age measured in terms of the time from manufacture of the 
object. 

CALIBRATE 

To make careful adjustment, to achieve a given standard 
of accuracy. 



CALIBRATION 

Comparison between two instruments or devices, one of 
which is a standard of known accuracy, to detect and to 
correlate or adjust any variation in the accuracy of the 
instrument being compared. 
See— final calibration curve 

stage calibration equipment 

CALIBRATION TEST 

Tests to determine tne output characteristics of a measuring 
device, component or assembly and to see if the characteris- 
tics are within specification. 

See— laboratory calibration test 
vehicle calibration test 

CALLOUT 

A note or instruction on the face of drawing which clearly 
designates, by arrow or description, the portion of the draw- 
ing to which it refers. 

CANNIBALIZATION 

A maintenance modification or repair method in which the 
required parts are removed from a similar system or assembly 
for installation on another. 

CAPE CANAVERAL 

Cape on the East Coast of Florida used as a laboratory for 
launching missiles and space vehicles. It is operated by 
the Air Force Missile Test Center. 



CAPSULE 

A sealed, pressurized cabin with an acceptable environment. 
Usually for containing a man or animal for extremely high- 
altitude flights, orbital space flight, or emergency escape. 
See— ejection capsule 

CAPTIVE TEST 

A static or hold-down test of a rocket engine, stage or motor. 
Distinguished from a flight test. 
See— static testing 

CARD 

See— aperture card 

CARDIOVASCULAR REACTIVITY 

The response and function of heart and blood vessels to 
various types of stress such as exercise, acceleration, heat, 
and cold. 

CASSEGRAIN MICROWAVE OPTICS 

A method of placing the antenna feed away from the prime 
focus of the antenna, wherein the feed again reflects the 
waves reflected by the antenna, intensifying the strength of 
the waves. 



13 



CATALYST 



CATALYST OR CATALYTIC AGENT 

Any substance which, by virtue of its presence, affects the 
rate of a chemical reaction and which may be recovered 
practically unchanged at the end of the reaction. 

CATAPULT 

A mechanical structure which, by its action, provides an 
accelerating force to an air vehicle, and which at the same 
time provides directional constraint during the launching. 



CATASTROPHIC FAILURE 

A sudden failure without warning, as opposed to degradation 
failures. Such failures occur suddenly within the operational 
time period after all efforts have been made to eliminate de- 
sign defects and unsound components and before any forseen 
wearout phenomena have time to appear. 



CAVITATION 

Rapid formation and collapse of vapor pockets in a flowing 
fluid under very low pressures. A frequent cause of struc- 
tural damage to rocket components. 



CAVITY REACTOR 

A conceptual nuclear propulsion reactor in which the fuel 
is in a gaseous state and is suspended and separated from 
the propellant by centrifugal or gasdynamic means. 



CBA 

Cocoa Beach Apollo. 

CCP 

Contract Change Proposal. 

CCS 

Change Control System. 

CDU 

Coupling Display Unit. 

CELESCOPE 

Telescope and spectroscope payload for orbiting astronomi- 
ical observatory (OAO). 

CELESTIAL GUIDANCE 

The guidance of a missile or vehicle by reference to celes- 
tial bodies. 

CELESTIAL MECHANICS 

The study of the theory pertaining to the motions of celestial 
bodies under the influence of gravitational fields. 

CELESTIAL NAVIGATION 

Onboard navigation using the celestial bodies for reference. 
Celestial guidance. 

CELESTIAL SPHERE 

Imaginary sphere of infinite radius, assumed for navigational 
purposes, the center of which coincides with the center of 
the Earth. 



CELL 

See— electro-chemical cell 
fuel cell 
solar cell * 

CENSORED SAMPLE 

Some of the items removed from observation before they fail. 
The total number of sample specimens is known, but measure- 
ments on some of this number are lacking. 

CENTER 

See— Ames Research Center 

Arnold Engineering and Development Center 

Control Center 

electronic data processing center 

Flight Research Center 

Goddard Space Flight Center 

Langley Research Center 

launch operations center 

Lewis Research Center 

Harmed Spacecraft Center 

Marshall Space Flight Center 



CENTER OF GRAVITY CG 

For an extanded body or collection of particles subject to 
gravitation, the point through which the resultant force of 
gravity acts no matter how the body is oriented. 



CENTER OF MASS CM 

The point in a body at which the entire mass of the body can 
be considered to be concentrated. 



CENTRIFUGAL FORCE 

A force directed away from the center of rotation in a rota- 
ting system. 

CENTRIFUGE 

Specifically, a large motor-driven apparatus with a long arm 
at the end of which human and animal subjects or equipment 
can be revolved and rotated at various speeds to simulate 
the prolonged accelerations encountered in a high-perform- 
ance aircraft, rockets, and spacecraft. 

CENTRIPETAL FORCE 

A force directed toward the center of rotation of a rotating 
system. 

CFE 

Contractor Furnished Equipment. 

CFP 

Contractor Furnished Property. 

CG 

Center of Gravity. 

CHAMBER 

See— environmental space chamber 
firing chamber 
ion chamber 



14 



CIRCUMPLANETARY SPACE 



CHANCE FAILURE 

A failure which occurs at random within the operational time 
of an equipment after all efforts have been made to elimi- 
nate design defects and unsound components, and before 
wearout becomes predominant. 

CHARGE 

See— electrostatic charge 

CHASSIS 

That portion of an assembly that is the basic frame upon 
which stiffening members, brackets, qussets, subassem- 
blies, and components, are mounted. 

CHECK-OUT TIME 

Time required to determine whether the performance charac- 
teristics of a system are within specified values. 

CHECKING LAYOUTS 

Accurate layouts of checked details and assemblies drawn 
in the proper order of assembly to assure the proper fitting 
of all parts. When drawing parts, consideration is given to 
the most critical variations of the parts. 

CHECKLIST 

A list of procedures or items summarizing the activities 
required for an operator or technician in the performance of 
his duties. A condensed guide. An on-the-job supplement 
to more detailed job instructions. 

CHECKOUT C/0 

A test or procedure for determining whether a person or de- 
vice is capable of performing a required operation or 
function. When used in connection with equipment, a check- 
out usually consists of the application of a series of opera- 
tional and calibrational tests in a certain sequence, with the 
requirement that the response of the device to each of these 
tests be within a predetermined tolerance. For personnel, 
the term checkout is sometimes used in the sense of a brief- 
ing or explanation to the person involved, rather than a test 
of that person's capability. 

See— horizontal pre-flight checkout system 

spacecraft operations and checkout facility 

vehicle horizontal checkout 

vehicle vertical checkout 

CHECKOUT EQUIPMENT 

Electric, electronic, mechanical, and pneumatic equipment, 
both automatic or manual, which is required to perform the 
checkout function of engines, systems, or stages. 

CHEMICAL FUEL 

A fuel depending upon an oxidizer for combustion or for 
development of thrust, such as liquid or solid rocket fuel, 
jet fuel, or internal-combustion engine fuel. Distinguished 
from nuclear fuel. 

CHEMICAL ROCKET 

A rocket using chemical fuel, which requires an oxidizer 
for combustion, such as liquid or solid rocket fuel. 

CHEMILUMINESCENCE 

Light produced through chemical reactions. 



CHEMOSPHERE 

The vaguly defined region of the upper atmosphere in which 
photochemical reactions take place. 

w 

CHI-SQUARED FUNCTION 

A gamma function that expresses a distribution of many 
independent standardized variables. The form of the chi- 
squared function differs for each number of degrees of free- 
dom. Chi-square is the sum squares of independent normal 
variates divided by their common variance. 

CHOKES 

A form of decompression sickness believed to be due to the 
evolvement of gases in the lung tissue upon ascent to alti- 
tude. It is characterized by a deep substernal pain or burn- 
ing sensation, difficulty in respiration, and a non-productive 
cough. 

CHROMOSPHERE 

One of the atmospheric shells of the Sun, lying above the 
photosphere and best visible at time of total eclipse. Can 
be observed spectroscopically at other times. 

CHUFFING 

A noise resulting from a combustion instability, especially 
in a liquid-propellant rocket engine, characterized by a 
pulsing operation at a low frequency. 

CHUGGING 

Same as chuffing. 

CIRCADIAN RHYTHM 

A particular regular recurrence or alteration in features, 
elements, and phenomena of living organisms. 



CIRCUIT 

A group of elements or parts, connected and related so as 
to perform a specific function in a component, assembly, 
or system. 

See— passive circuit 

CIRCULAR ORBIT 

An orbit which describes a complete constant altitude revo- 
lution around the Earth. 

CIRCULAR VELOCITY 

The speed required to maintain a body in a circular orbit. 

CIRCUMLUNAR 

Specifically, around the Moon. Generally this term has be- 
come associated with the program missions in which a space- 
craft will circle the Moon one or more times and return to 
Earth. 

CIRCUMLUNAR TRAJECTORY 

A trajectory programed to orbit the spacecraft one or more 
times around the Moon. 

CIRCUMPLANETARY SPACE 

Space relatively close to a planet, especially the space 
close to the Earth, including the outer reaches of the 
atmosphere. 



15 



CISLUNAR 



CISLUNAR 

Of or pertaining to space between the Earth and the orbit of 
the Moon, or to a sphere of space centered on the Earth with 
a radius equal to the distance between the Earth and the 
Moon. 

CLASS 1 DRAWING 

Government design activity drawings winch are furnished or 
prepared in accordance with MIL-D-70327 as Government 
agency drawings by a Government design activity or a con- 
tractor and for which the Government agency retains or 
assigns responsibility for the preparation of maintenance. 
These drawings are assigned a Government identification 
code and drawing numbers from a block of numbers issued by 
a Government activity. 

CLASSIFICATION OF DEFECTS 

The enumeration of possible defects of the unit of product 
classified according to their importance. 

CLEARANCE 

The space between mating parts. 

CLEARANCE FIT 

One having limits of size so prescribed that clearance always 
results when mating parts are assembled. 

CLIMATIC ENVIRONMENTS 

Environments consisting of ambient atmospheric conditions 
such as degree of vacuum, radiation, and temperature. 

CLIMATIZATION 

All measures taken to provide for the satisfactory operation, 
packaging, transportation, and storage of ground equipment 
regardless of climatic conditions. 



CLOSE ABOARD MODE 

One of the modes of operating the sextant to obtain a fix 
on a star and a landmark to determine position in space, 
while in orbit. 

CLOSED ECOLOGICAL SYSTEM 

A system that provides for the maintenance of life in an iso- 
lated living chamber, such as a spacecraft cabin, by means 
of a cycle wherein exhaled carbon dioxide, urine, and other 
waste matters are converted chemically or by photosynthesis 
into oxygen, water, and food. 

CLOTH PRINT 

A photo reproduction image on a woven fiber base. 

CLUSTER 

Two or more engines bound togettier so as to function as one 
propulsive unit. 

CLUTCH (DIRECTIONAL) 

Device for transmitting a driving force in either of two 
directions. 

CLUTCH (SEPARATING) 

A device for disengaging a driven member with the driving 
power. 



CLUTCH (SLIP) 

A device which permits the driving force to be partially 
relieved of the driven load. 

w 

CM 

Command Module. 
Center of Mass. 

CM CENTER STATION 

The middle crew position in the command module (CM), from 
which the navigator can assist the commander and the sys- 
tems manager in any of their functions during launch and 
reentry. 

CM CONTROL STATION 

The left-hand crew position in the command module (CM), 
from which the commander normally monitors and controls all 
flight. 

CM NAVIGATION STATION 

The crew position located in the lower aft equipment bay of 
the command module (CM) from which the navigator aligns the 
IMU, makes navigational fixes, monitors delta velocity 
maneuvers and the IFTS panel, and performs maintenance for 
the guidance and navigation system. 

CM SYSTEM MANAGEMENT STATION 

The right-hand crew position in the command module (CM) 
from which the systems manager normally monitors and con- 
trols the operating condition of all spacecraft systems. 

CMPT 

Component. 

CO 

Sometimes used as abbreviation for checkout. Use of the 
preferrable C/0 will avoid confusion with the abbreviation 
for company. 

COLD GAS ATTITUDE CONTROL SYSTEM 

A vehicle stabilization system using the expulsion of a cold 
inert gas under high pressure to provide motive force. 

COLD-FLOW TEST 

Test of a liquid rocket without firing, to check efficiency of 
a propulsion subsystem that provides for the conditioning 
and flow of propellants, including tank pressurization, pro- 
pellant loading, and propellant feeding. 

COLLIMATION TOWER 

A tower used to mount electronic and optical targets which 
are used to determine and check proper alignment of an 
antenna. 

COMBINED MISSION ENVIRONMENTS 

The simultaneous application of climatic and dynamic 
environments expected during the operational cycle of 
equipment. 

COMBINED STRESS 

The stresses resulting from the simultaneous action of such 
factors as primary stresses, secondary stresses, and thermal 
stresses. 



16 



COMPLEX 



COMBUSTIBLE 

Any material or structure which can burn. A relative term. 
Many materials will not bum in one state but will in another. 
E.g., steel will burn, structural steel will not. 

COMBUSTION 

A chemical process characterized by the evolution of heat. 
Commonly, the chemical reaction of fuel and oxidizer, but 
by extension includes the decomposition of monopropellants 
and the burning of solid propellants. 

COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 

Unfavorable, unsteady or abnormal combustion of fuel, 
especially in a rocket engine, e. g., unfavorable combustion 
oscillation. 

COMBUSTION OSCILLATION 

High frequency pressure variations in the combustor. Com- 
bustion oscillation is caused by uneven propellant 
consumption. 

COMET 

A luminous member of the solar system composed of a head 
or coma at the center of which a presumable solid nucleus 
is sometimes situated, and often with a spectacular gaseous 
tail extending a great distance from the head. 

COMM 

Communications . 

COMMAND 

A signal which initiates or triggers an action in the device 
which receives the signal. 

COMMAND DESTRUCT 

A system which destroys the vehicle, actuated on command 
of the range safety officer whenever vehicle performance de- 
grades enough to be a safety hazard. 

COMMAND DESTRUCT SIGNAL 

A radio signal that detonates an explosive in a rocket, 
missile or vehicle so as to destroy it. 

COMMAND MODULE CM 

The portion of the spacecraft which houses the crew, serves 
as the center for crew-initiated command functions and is 
the recoverable portion of the spacecraft. 

COMMAND AND SERVICE MODULE CSM 

Combination of the command module (CM) and the service 
module (SM) that remains when the lunar excursion module 
(LEM) is separated for lunar descent or return to Earth. 

COMMAND MODULE SIMULATOR 

An auxiliary device for testing the service module (SM) sys- 
tems with the service module and command module (CM) 
unmated. The simulator includes subsystems and compo- 
nents to generate and receive electrical signals for perform- 
ing checkout functions. 

COMMANDER 

The first member of the Apollo flight crew. The spacecraft 
commander occupies the control station on the left side, 



which is a couch facing the main panel. He has primary 
cognizance of those controls and displays requiring time- 
critical response to insure crew safety and mission success. 
Under normal circumstances, his activity encompasses flight 
mode selection, implementation of navigation and guidance, 
and monitoring operational or exploration direction. He also 
serves as the commander of the lunar excursion module 
(LEM). 

COMMERCIAL ITEM 

Supplies or services which normally are offered and sold to 
the public commercially by any supplier. 

COMMON HARDWARE 

Expendable hardware items having multiple applications, 
E.g., nuts, bolts, screws, washers, pins, keys, and 
grommets. 

COMMUNICATIONS COMM 

A method or means of conveying information of any kind 
from one person or place to another. In aerospace applica- 
tion, communications generally means the voice and data 
links employed during any phase of the launch and flight 
operations either by hardwire or RF. Included are telephone 
systems, TWX's, television, radio transmission, commutated 
UHF, telemetry, lasers, etc. 



COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE 

A satellite designed to reflect or relay electromagnetic 
waves used in the communications media. 



COMPANION BODY 

A nose cone, last-stage rocket, or other body that orbits 
along with an earth satellite. 



COMPARISON INSPECTION 

The examination and testing performed at intervals, on 
samples representative of production runs, after the supplies 
or services have passed the qualification inspection. 

COMPATIBILITY 

A characteristic ascribed to a major subsystem that indi- 
cates it functions well in the over-all system. 

COMPLETE INTERCHANGEABILITY 

The ability to interchange without restriction. 

COMPLETE OPERATING EQUIPMENT 

An equipment together with the necessary parts, acces- 
sories, and components, or any combination thereof, required 
for the performance of a specified operational function. 

COMPLEX 

Entire area of launch site facilities. This includes block- 
house, launchpad, gantry, etc. Also referred to as a launch 
complex. 

See— ground computer complex 

liquid hydrogen (LH-2) system complex 

liquid oxygen (LOX) system complex 

RP-l fuel system complex 



17 



COMPONENT 



COMPONENT CMPT 

An article which is normally a combination of parts, sub- 
assemblies, or assemblies and is a self-contained element 
within a complete operating equipment. 

COMPONENT ACCEPTANCE TEST 

Acceptance test of an individual component (consisting of 
a number of parts) to determine if these components will meet 
specifications prior to assembly in a subsystem. 

COMPONENT AND PART RELIABILITY 

A component or part is reliable when it will operate to a pre- 
determined level of probability under its maximum ratings at 
most severe combination of enviroments for which it was 
designed and for the length of time or number of cycles 
specified. 

COMPONENT DRAWING 

Mechanical or electrical drawing providing necessary 
information for fabrication and testing of a specific 
component. 

COMPONENT STRESS 

The stresses on component parts are those factors of usage 
or test which tend to affect the failure rate of these parts. 
This includes voltage, power, temperature, frequency, rise 
time, etc. However, the principal stress, other than electri- 
cal, is usually the thermal-environmental stress. 



COMPOSITE MATERIALS 

Structural materials of metal alloys or plastics with built-in 
strengthening agents which may be in the form of filaments, 
foils, or flakes of a strong material. 



COMPOSITE PROPELLANT 

A solid rocket propellant consisting of an elastomeric fuel 
binder, a finely ground oxidizer, and various additives. 

COMPRESSED GAS CYLINDERS 

Any tubes, bottles, or other type of pressure cylinders used 
for the purpose of storing or transporting liquids or gases 
under pressure. 

COMPUTED RELIABILITY 

The synthetic calculated probability of a system performing 
its purpose within specifications based on estimates or tests 
of the reliability of its components. 

COMPUTER 

A machine for carrying out calculations and performing 
specified transformations on information. 
See— analog computer 

Apollo Guidance Computer 

digital computer 

hybrid computer 

real-time computer 

CONCENTRICITY 

A condition wherein the axis of one symmetrical feature 
coincides with the axis of one or more other symmetrical 
features within a part or assembly. 



CONCEPT 

See—anticriticality concept 
building-block concept 
integration, transport and launch concept 

CONCEPTUAL PHASE 

That period in the system life cycle which usually terminates 
with publication of a specific operational requirement. 

. CONDITIONING 

The exposure of sample units or specimens to a specific 
environment for a specified period of time to prepare them for 
subsequent inspection. 

CONFIDENCE FACTOR 

The percentage figure that expresses confidence level, or 
proportion of times the statement should be correct. 

CONFIDENCE INTERVAL 

A range of values estimated from a random sample on the 
premise that the range will include a sought-for true para- 
meter if the sampling process were to be repeated many 
times. 

CONFIDENCE LEVEL 

The percentage of statements, tests, etc., expected to be 
correct. The certainty with which data from a small group 
apply to a specific confidence interval. By using appropri- 
ate data and a selected confidence coefficient, the expected 
correct answers can be obtained. 

CONFIDENCE LIMITS 

The upper and lower extremes of the confidence interval. 

CONFIG 

Configuration. 

CONFIGURATION CONFIG 

The technical and physical description required to fabricate, 
test, accept, operate, maintain and logistically support 
systems or equipment. 

CONFIGURATION ACCOUNTING 

Act of documentating proposed and approved changes made 
to systems and equipment in order to maintain knowledge of 
configuration status. 



CONFIGURATION CONTROL 

Systematic evaluation, coordination, approval or disapproval 
of all changes to the baseline configuration. 



CONFIGURATION IDENTIFICATION 

The technical documentation defining the approved configura- 
tion of systems or equipment under development, test, and 
production. 

CONNECTION DIAGRAM 

A diagramatic drawing that shows physical arrangement 
of items in an assembly or system, and also the connections 
between the items. An electrical wiring diagram is, for 
instance, one type of connection diagram. 



18 



CONTROL SYSTEM 



CONSOLE 

Contains controls and indicators for the monitoring and con- 
trol of a particular sequence of actions, as in the checkout 
of a rocket, countdown action, or a launch procedure. 

CONSTRAINT 

Limit beyond which a variable cannot be permitted to vary 
under any condition. 

CONSTRUCTION DRAWING 

An engineering drawing that illustrates the design of build- 
ings and structures, including complete facilities. 



CONSUMABLES 

Parts and materials of both contractor and Government fur- 
nished origin expended in the course of performing mainten- 
ance or operational objectives. 



CONSUMER'S RISK 

The probability of accepting an item which is, in fact, 
unsatisfactory. 

CONTACT IONIZATION 

Ionization caused by contact with a surface, either because 
of the high surface temperature or the catalytic effect of the 
surface. 

CONTACT PAPER 

Photographic paper designed to be exposed when directly 
in contact with a reproducible document. 

CONTACT PRINT 

A reproduction made by exposure of sensitized material by 
direct contact with that which is to be copied. 

CONTR 

Contractor. 

CONTRACT 

A legally binding document executed by the Government and 
the prime contractor which, in addition to the terms and 
conditions thereof, includes by reference or otherwise, spec- 
ifications, drawings, exhibits and other data necessary to 
its proper performance. 

CONTRACT SCHEDULE 

That portion of a Government prime contract which describes 
the articles or services desired. Not to be confused with 
contract time-schedule or delivery schedule. 

CONTRACTING OFFICER 

Any officer or civilian employee authorized to enter into and 
administer contracts and to make determinations and findings 
with respect thereto. 

CONTRACTOR 

Individuals or concerns who enter into a prime contract with 
the Government. 

See— associate contractor 

prime contractor 

principal contractor 



CONTRACTOR FURNISHED EQUIPMENT CFE 

That portion of contractor-furnished property which is in- 
cluded in the system by the contractor. 

CONTRACTOR FURNISHED PROPERTY CFP 

That property, other than Government property, used by the 
contractor in the performance of a contract. 

CONTRACTUAL COVERAGE 

. The coverage of a legally binding document which requires 
the contractor to satisfy government requirements for sup- 
plies or services defined by such document. 

CONTROL 

See— configuration control 
control center 
operational /light control 
orientation control 
program control 
quality control 
reaction control facility 
reliability control 
thrust vector control 
vector control 

CONTROL CENTER 

See— launch control center 
mission control center 
simulation control center 
vehicle propellant loading control center 

CONTROL JET 

Synonym for attitude control propulsion motor (ACPM). 

CONTROL RATIO 

The relationship between the movement of a control and the 
movement of that which is controlled. 

CONTROL ROCKET 

A vernier rocket, ullage rocket, retrorocket, or other such 
rocket, used to guide, accelerate, or decelerate a space 
vehicle. 

CONTROL SURFACE REVERSAL 

The change in the direction of the lift increment from that 
normally produced by deflecting a movable control surface. 
It results from the torsional deflection of the fixed surface 
caused by the aerodynamic moments applied when the mov- 
able control surface is deflected. 



CONTROL SYSTEM 

A system in a missile or space vehicle that serves to main- 
tain attitude stability during powered flight and to correct 
deflections caused by gusts or other disturbances. 
See—addaptive control system 

attitude-control system 

cold gas attitude control system 

enviromental control system 

ground environmental control system 

guidance and control system 

pneumatic control system 

reaction control system 



19 



CONTROLLED LEAKAGE SYSTEM 



CONTROLLED LEAKAGE SYSTEM 

A system that provides for the body's metabolism, in an 
aircraft or spacecraft cabin, by a controlled escape of car- 
bon dioxide and other waste from the cabin, with replenish- 
ment provided by stored oxygen and food. 



CONTROLLED PROCESS 

A process which yields samples whose characteristics re- 
main consistently within the control limits of a shewhart 
chart. 



CONTROLLED TEST 

A sampling method designed to solve a problem or group of 
problems concerning a given product. 



CONTROLS 

Those parts of the equipment which are provided for the 
operator's use in order to effect changes in the equipment 
performance. 



CONVECTIVE HEATING 

The exchange of heat energy between a body and the fluid 
or gas passing over it. 



COOLING 

See— film cooling 

regenerative cooling 
sweat cooling 



COOLING SYSTEM 

The system which prevents excessive temperatures of acces- 
sories, equipment, components, and structure. 



COOPERATIVE RENDEZVOUS 

Rendezvous using both radar and optical tracking methods. 

COORDINATED PLANNING 

The over-all detail planning and agreement between engineer- 
ing, manufacturing, and other interested functions. Prefer- 
ably incorporated in drawings prior to initial issue. 

CORIOLIS FORCE 

Deflection of a projectile during its flight across the earth's 
surface, caused by the rotation of the earth. 



CORONAGRAPH 

Device to scan and record the solar corona. 

CORRELATION 

The degree to which two or more variables are so related 
that a change in one is accompanied by a corresponding 
change in the other. The degree of concomitance is 
measured by the correlation coefficient. 

. CORROSION 

See— destructive corrosion 
COSMIC DUST 

Small meteoroids of a size similar to dust. 

COSMIC RAYS 

The extremely high-energy subatomic particles which bom- 
bard the atmosphere from outer space. On colliding with 
atmospheric particles they produce many different kinds of 
lower-energy secondary cosmic radiation. 
See— primary cosmic rays 
secondary cosmic rays 

COSMOS 

Totality of the observed and postulated physical universe. 

COSPAR 

Committee on space research of the international council of 
scientific unions, to which the United States belongs 
through the National Academy of Sciences. 

COUNTDOWN 

The step-by-step process leading to a launch. It is per- 
formed in accordance with a predesigned time schedule, 
measured in terms of T-time (T minus time prior to initi- 
ation of engine start sequence and T plus time thereafter). 



COUPLED SERVO FLUTTER 

A low frequency oscillation of the airframe structure, caused 
by feedback (through the airframe or the air) of the structural 
and rigid body vibrations of servomechanisms located within 
the airframe, causing actuation of the space vehicle controls 
in response to the vibrations. 



COUPLING DISPLAY UNIT CDU 

An assembly of electromagnetic transducers and gears with 
a display readout. The CDU presents coordinated data from 
the subsystems included in Apollo guidance and navigation 
equipment (AGE). Provisions are also made to manually 
set-in inertial orientation for emergency modes of operation. 



CORIOLIS REACTION 

A mixed sensory illusion (eyes and semicircular canals) of 
the oculogyral type where in if a pilot while in a spin moves 
his head in the opposite direction, resultant fluid movement 
in the canals produces severe vertigo, (dizziness, nausea, 
pallor, etc). 

CORONA 

The faintly luminous outer envelope of the sun. Also called 
solar corona. 



CRAWLER-TRANSPORTER 

The prime mover used to position the launcher umbilical 
tower (LUT) in the vertical assembly building (VAB), move 
the LUT/SV configuration from the VAB to the launch pad, 
and move the arming tower from its park position to the 
pad. The crawler-transporter will be 131-feet long and 
1 14-feet wide, and will contain two diesel generators which 
provide 5600 hp for the electric drive motor system. It 
will move on four double-tracked crawlers, with hydraulic 
jacking pads on 90-foot centers. 



20 



CYLINDERS 



CRAWLERWAY 

A specially prepared dual roadway providing access for the 
crawler-transporter to the launch pads, arming tower parking 
areas, and the vertical assembly building (VAB). The road- 
way will be designed to support 17.5 million pounds. The 
two lanes will be spaced on 90-foot centers to match the 
tractor units, and each lane will be 40-feet wide. The 
crawlerway will have a 5% grade approaching each pad. 

CREW 

A group of specialists who perform simultaneous and sequen- 
tial duties and tasks involved in the accomplishment of an 
assigned operation. 
See— flight crew 

CREW SAFETY 

Safe return of all three crew members whether or not the 
mission is completed. 



CREW SAFETY PROBABILITY 

The probability of crew return without exceeding prescribed 
emergency limits. 

CREW SAFETY SYSTEM 

Consists of the necessary sensors, test equipment, and 
displays, on board the spacecraft to detect and diagnose 
malfunctions, and to allow the crew to make a reasonable 
assessment of the contingency. For emergency conditions, 
the CSS is capable of initiating an abort automatically. 



CRITICAL AND LIMITED LIFE 
ITEM REFURBISHMENT 

Periodic rework or partial replacement of items having a 
critical function or a limited life after a failure has occurred 
on such items. 



CRITICAL DEFECT 

A defect that judgment and experience indicate could result 
in hazardous or unsafe conditions for individuals using or 
maintaining the product, or result in failure in accomplish- 
ment of the ultimate objective. 

CRITICAL DESIGN REVIEW 

The comparative evaluation of worth of parameters, such as 
producibility, time, schedule, cost, weigh, geometric space 
envelope, performance, reliability, and maintainability, in 
order to achieve optimum over-all system effectiveness. 

CRITICAL FAILURE 

Any failure which results in mission loss, but which allows 
crew initiation of the escape sequence. 

CRITICAL FLIGHT EXPERIMENTS 

Those flight experiments which determine the feasibility of 
a concept. 

CRITICAL ITEM 

The classification of an item according to its strategic value 
to an operation or mission. 



CRITICAL PARTS LIST 

A listing of those parts whose failure would cause a degrada- 
tion in mission success or crew safety. 

* 

CRITICAL PATH 

That particular sequence of activities that has the greatest 
negative or least positive activity slack. 

CRITICALITY 

Assignment of relative importance to hardware or systems. 

CRITICALITY FACTOR 

See— importance factor 

CRYOGENIC 

An adjective referring to low temperatures, usually those at 
which gases become liquid. 

CRYOGENICS 

The science of low-temperature conditions. 

CRYOGENIC GYRO 

A magnetically supported gyro using super conductive metals 
associated with very low fluid temperatures to maintain the 
magnetic field. 

CRYOGENIC PROPELLANT 

A rocket fuel, oxidizer, or propulsion fluid which is liquid 
only at very low temperatures. 

CSM 

Command and Service Module 

CUMULATIVE DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION 

The probability that a random variable takes on any value 
less than or equal to its stated value. 

CURTAILED INSPECTION 

Sampling inspection where, as soon as a decision is certain, 
the inspection of the sample is stopped. As soon as the re- 
jection number for defectives is reached no further inspection 
is necessary. A first sample is always completed for the 
purpose of estimating the process average quality. 



CURVE 

See— final calibration curve 
synergic curve 

CUTOFF 

The cessation of burning in a jet or rocket engine owing to 
an intentional command action. Distinct from burnout which 
signifies a cessation of burning because of the exhaustion 
of the fuel. 

See— rough combustion cutoff 

CYCLE 

See— liquid-air cycle engine 
operating cycle 
sunspot cycle 

CYLINDERS 

See— compressed gas cylinders 



21 



CYTHEREAN ATMOSPHERE 

CYTHEREAN ATMOSPHERE 

The atmosphere of Venus. 

CYTO-CHEMICAL 

Chemical aspects of the structure, function, multiplication, 
pathology, and life history of living cells. 



22 



D 



D&C 

Display and Control. 

D-REGION 

Region of absorbing ionization considered to exist as a 
consequence of particle radiation from hydrogen bursts of 
the Sun, bringing about complete inhibition of short-wave 
communication, but some improvement in long-wave 
communication. 

DATA FIELD 

One or more columns on a tabulating or aperture card that 
are reserved for specific information entered in a specified 
manner. 

DATA REDUCTION 

Transformation of observed values into useful, ordered, or 
simplified information. 

DATUM ELEMENTS 

Datum parts, lines, and surfaces are features assumed to be 
exact for purposes of computation or reference and from 
which the location of other features may be established. 

DATUM FEATURE 

One of a group of features whose function is to act as a 
reference for the other features in the group. 



DDAS 

Digital Data Acquisition System. 



DECLINATION 

Angular distance north or south of the celestial equator. 
The arc of an hour circle between the celestial equator 
and a point on the celestial sphere, measured through 90 
degrees, and labeled N or S to indicate the direction of 
measurement. 

DECOMPRESSION SICKNESS 

A disorder in the body caused by reduced barometric pres- 
sure and evolved or trapped gas bubbles in the body, marked 
by pain in the extremities, occasionally leading to severe 
central nervous system and neurocirculatory collapse. 

DEEP SPACE INSTRUMENTATION FACILITY DSIF 

A combination of three radar and communications stations in 
the United States, Australia, and South Africa so located as 
to keep a spacecraft in deep space under observation at all 
times. 

DEFECT 

Any nonconformance of the unit of product with specified 
requirements. 

DEFECTIVE 

See— percentage defective 

DEFLECTOR 

See— launcher deflector 

DEGRADATION 

Gradual deterioration in performance. 



DE-\D MAN CONTROLS 

Devices for shutting off or rendering mechanisms safe in 
case of accident or illness of the operator. 

DEBUGGING 

A reliability conditioning procedure which is a method of 
aging the equipment by operating it under specified environ- 
mental and test conditions in accordance with an established 
procedure in order to eliminate early failures and age or 
stabilize the equipment prior to final test and shipment. 
Also known as bum-m or infant mortality. 

DEC 

Deceleration. 



DECELERATION 

Negative acceleration (slowing down). 



DEC 



DECISION DEVICE 

The device which determines which branch of a standby 
redundant system will be used. 



DEGRADATION FACTOR 

The factor by which reliability is changed due to treatment 
of the equipment such as manufacture, maintenance, etc. 



DEGRADATION FAILURE 

A failure that results from a gradual change in performance 
characteristics of an equipment or part with time. 



DEI 

Development Engineering Inspection 

DELINEATION (GRAPHIC) 

The lines which represent the form, outline, or contours of 
the object as differentiated from the dimensions, notes, or 
other nonpictorial representation or description of the part 
or its details. 

DELTA 

3-stage launch vehicle using THOR first stage (also called 
THOR-DELTA). 



23 



DELUGE COLLECTION POND 



DELUGE COLLECTION POND 

A pond at the launch site that collects water used to cool 
the flame deflector. Called "Skinner Basin". 

DEPENDENT VARIABLE 

Variable whose value is determined by fixing the values of 
all the independent variables. 

DEPTH OF FIELD 

That area of tolerance where in the distance from lens to 
document can vary and still be considered in sharp focus. 

DERATING 

A reduced level of application relative to designed 
capability. 

DESICCANT BANK 

A device used to filter hydrocarbons and water vapor from 
gaseous fluids such as nitrogen. It may be used in a high 
pressure gas storage system. 



DESIGN DSGN 

As applied to a product, it is the engineering drawings and 
specifications which permit fabrication of the product. 
See— critical design review 

factorial design 

(ail-safe design 



DESIGN ACTIVITY 

Activity having responsibility for the design, preparation, 
and maintenance of engineering drawings for a given item of 
supply. 

DESIGN BURST PRESSURE 

The maximum relief valve pressure, or maximum operating 
pressure, plus hydrostatic head (if applicable), multiplied 
by the appropriate ultimate factor of safety. 

DESIGN CRITERIA 

Standards upon which a design is based. 



DESIGN LAYOUT 

A final approved layout of a product or apparatus declared 
suitable for manufacture. 

DESIGN LOAD 

The limit load multiplied by the required minimum factor of 
safety. 

DESIGN RELIABILITY 

The reliability inherent in the design. Generally, the maxi- 
mum reliability that can be achieved if all equipment is 
produced, maintained, and operated exactly as specified. 
It is determined by the selection and application of materials, 
parts, and circuits and related to the application of environ- 
mental and operational stress. 

DESIGN RELIABILITY ASSURANCE 

The function of ensuring that all design disciplines that 
contribute to reliability have been followed. 



DESIGN RELIABILITY CREATION 

The function of applying recognized disciplines for reliabil- 
ity achievement during the actual design phase. 

DESIGN REVIEW 

A progressive review, starting after the design study and 
continuing through theprototype stage. Provides an assess- 
ment of reliability and reliability trends by use of applicable 
tests and prediction techniques. 

DESIGN SIZE 

A size from which the plus or minus limits of size are de- 
rived by the application of tolerances. When there is no 
allowance the design size is the same as the basic size. 

DESIGN STRESS LEVEL 

The maximum anticipated operating stress encountered over 
the expected life of the equipment. This level is defined as 
not including safety factors or safety margins. 

DESIGN STUDY 

The phase during which the initial study and layout of the 
system, major combination, or item is made. It concludes 
with the preparation of drawings adequate for the initiation 
of design and fabrication of a mock-up. 



DESTINATION INSPECTION 

The inspection performed at the receiving point of the 
consignee of material to ascertain whether the shipment is 
in conformance with purchase specifications. 

DESTRUCT 

The action of detonating or otherwise destroying a vehicle 
after it has been launched, but before it has completed its 
course. Usually for reasons of safety. 
See— command destruct 

command destruct signal 

DESTRUCTIVE CORROSION 

Any type of corrosion which, in any way, interferes with 

mechanical or electrical performance. 

DESTRUCTIVE TESTING 

Testing of any nature which may materially affect the life 
expectancy of the item tested, whether or not failure occurs 
during the test. 

See— mono detail drawing 
multi detail drawing 

DETAIL ASSEMBLY DRAWING 

A drawing wherein some items are depicted in detail on the 
drawing in lieu of preparing separate detail drawings. 

DETAIL DRAWING 

Delineates information to describe an item, and shall include 
materials, finish, tolerances, and other requirements as 
applicable. 

DETAIL PART 

An article which is an element of a subassembly, minor 
assembly, or installation (complete equipment), and is of such 
simple or inexpensive construction that it is neither practical 



24 



DIGITAL DATA ACQUISITION SYSTEM 



nor economical to further disassemble for maintenance 
purposes. 



technically sound, reliable, safe, and meet established spec- 
ifications or requirements. 



DETAIL SPECIFICATION 

A detail description of a particular model of an item pre- 
pared by the designer which cites all specific design and 
construction criteria. 



DEV 

Deviation. 



DEVELOPMENT 

The application of known techniques and principles to pro- 
duce a desired result from the discoveries of research. In 
the development stage a device is visualized and its per- 
formance is anticipated. Development is characterized by 
deliberate planning, by ingenuity, and by synthesis of 
knowledge in many fields. The result of development is the 
creation of plans or models for a new device, and the demon- 
stration by test that the prototype of the device fulfills the 
objective of the development. 

DEVELOPMENT DATA 

The data to be submitted after award of a contract for the 
development of a system with operational configuration for 
service evaluation. 



DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING INSPECTION DEI 

Inspection conducted to evaluate plans and insure that de- 
sign objectives are being accomplished with respect to 
producibility, performance, all-weather capabilities, safety, 
ease of operation, reliability, maintainability, and other 
criteria. 



DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING TEST 

The phase during which the proper function of the components 
of the system, in relation to one another, is assured. It 
includes the development engineering test of the prototype, 
necessary redesign and testing, modification of drawings 
and specifications. 

DEVELOPMENT MODEL 

A model designed to meet specified performance requirements 
or to establish technical requirements for production items. 

DEVELOPMENT TEST 

Test employed to generate engineering knowledge concern- 
ing a design or piece of equipment. Development testing 
will be used to determine and verify safety margins and ex- 
plore modes of failure. 



DEVELOPMENT TESTING AND EVALUATION 

Conducted to determine if theories, techniques, and material 
are practicable, or if equipment and component items are 



DEVELOPMENT VEHICLE 

A vehicle whose primary planned and programmed purpose 
is for flight test of the vehicle under development as dis- 
tinguished from the primary objective of launching satellites 
or other payloads. 



DEVIATION DEV 

A specific authorization, granted before the fact, to depart 
from a particular requirement of specifications or related 
documents. 

See— standard deviation 



DEWAR 

A multiple-wall, highly-insulated container for storing 
cyrogenic liquids such as liauia nydrogen. Constructed 
much in the manner of the familiar "thermos" vacuum bottle. 



DF 

Direct Flight. 



DIAGRAM DRAWING 

A drawing that delineates by symbols the features and 
relationships of items and systems. 
See— connection diagram 

interconnection diagram 

logic diagram 

schematic diagram 

DIELECTROPHORESIS 

The motion of electrically neutral bodies in a nonuniform 
electric field. 



DIELECTROPHORETIC PROPELLANT 
ORIENTATION 

In theory, the use of dielectropnoresis at zero gravity in 
which non-uniform electric fields can be produced in liquid 
propellant tanks by the addition of an electrode and a high 
voltage power supply. The propellant tank acts like a giant 
condenser with high voltage, but no current flow, between 
the electrodes. Propellant globules are then collected to a 
desired location by applying the electric field. 

DIGITAL COMPUTER 

A computer which operates on the principle of counting as 
opposed to measuring. 
See— analog computer 

DIGITAL DATA ACQUISITION SYSTEM DDAS 

A system used for instrumentation hardwire checkout. The 
stage part of this system consists of time division multi- 
plexers, an electronic scanning switch, and an A-D converter. 
The ground equipment consists oi the digital decoding re- 
quired to present data words to the LCC for evaluation. 



25 



DIMENSION 

DIMENSION 

A numerical value expressed in appropriate units of measure 
and indicated on drawings with lines, symbols, and notes 
to define the geometrical characteristics of an object. 
See— angular dimensioning 

base line dimensioning 

basic dimension 

form dimension 

gage dimension 

limit dimensioning system 

limits of a dimension 

location dimension 

progressive base line dimensioning 

rectangular dimensioning 

reference dimension 

size dimension 

DIPLEXER 

A device permitting an antenna system to be used simul- 
taneously or separately by two transmitters. Compare with 
duplexer. 



DIRECT ASCENT 

A boost trajectory that goes directly to the final burnout 
conditions and the coast trajectory without requirements 
for a parking orbit or staging location. 



DIRECT FLIGHT 

A mode that accomplishes a mission without rendezvous or 
combination after leaving the earth's surface. 



DISC 

See— blow-out disc 



DISCONNECTS 

See— fly-away disconnects 

DISH 

A parabolic type of radio or radar antenna, similar to the 
shape of a soup bowl. 

DISLOCATION MOTION 

The slip of adjacent rows of molecules in an imperfect 
crystalline structure which has a profound effect on the 
properties of the material. 

DISPLACEMENT 

In vibratory motion,, the instantaneous distance of the object 
from the zero or rest position. The single amplitude dis- 
placement is the maximum distance the object travels from 
the zero position. The double amplitude displacement is the 
maximum total distance the object travels both sides of the 
zero position. 

DISPLAY 

The visual or graphic presentation of the output data of any 
device or system. 

See— Apollo Guidance Ground Display 
coupling display unit 



DISPLAY AND CONTROL (SUBSYSTEM) D&C 

A console in which all display and control devices of the 
various subsystems are mounted. It will include a map and 
visual display unit, computer devices, etc. 

DISTRIBUTION 

See— cumulative distribution function 
frequency distribution function 
gaussian distribution 
normal distribution function 

DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION OF LIFETIMES 

The probability that a new product will fail by time T. 
The distribution function of lifetimes therefore represents 
that fraction of the original population expected to fail by 
time T. 

DOCKING 

The technique of closing and locking together two or more 
spacecraft in orbit. The final stage of the rendezvous 
operation. 

DOCUMENTATION 

Information that is generated to record data required for con- 
trol of design, production, procurement, maintenance, and 
supply of material, e.g., drawings, specifications, hand- 
books, manuals, etc. 

See— Type I Documentation 

Type II Documentation 

Type III Documentation 

DOCUMENTED STAGE 

A portion of a launch vehicle as described in the technical 
requirements of the stage contractor's contract. 

DOD 

Department of Defense. 

DOGHOUSE 

A protuberance or blister that houses an instrument on an 
otherwise smooth skin of a rocket or space vehicle. 

DOLLY 

A small wheeled truck or platform which can be used to move 
pieces of equipment or assemblies. 

DOPPLER EFFECT 

The apparent change in frequency of a sound or radio wave, 
reaching an observer or a radio receiver, during a change 
in distance or range between the source, the observer, or 
the receiver. The magnitude of the frequency shift is pro- 
portional to the relative velocity of the source with respect 
to the receiver. 

DOPPLER RADAR 

Radar that measures the velocity of a moving object by 
measuring the shift in carrier frequency of the return signal. 
The shift is proportional to the velocity with which the ob- 
ject approaches or recedes from the radar station. 

DOPPLER SHIFT 

The change in frequency with which energy reaches a re- 
ceiver when the source of radiation or a reflector of the 



26 



DYNAMIC ENVIRONMENTS 



radiation and the receiver are in motion relative to each 
other. The doppler shift is used in many tracking and navi- 
gation systems. 

DOPPLER VELOCITY AND POSITION DOVAP 

A tracking system wherein radio signals, sent by a ground 
station to a receiver in a spacecraft, are returned to the 
earth on a different frequency. 

DOSIMETER 

A device, generally worn by persons working near radio- 
active material, which indicates the amount (dose) of 
radiation exposure. 

DOSIMETRY 

The measurement of small quantities or doses of radiation. 

DOUBLE SAMPLING 

Sampling inspection in which the inspection of the first 
sample leads to a decision to accept, to reject, or to take a 
second sample. The examination of a second sample when 
required, always leads to a decision to accept or to reject. 

DOVAP 

Doppler Velocity and Position. 

DOWN TIME 

The total time during which the system is not in condition 
to perform its intended function. Down time can in turn be 
subdivided into repair time, logistic time and administrative 
time. 

See—supply downtime 

total mean downtime 

DOWNRANGE 

A direction away from the launch site toward the impact or 
target area. Missile test range. 

DRAG 

Aerodynamic force in a direction opposite to that of flight 
and due to the resistance of the body to motion in air. 
See— lift drag ratio 



DRAWING 

Representation of components or system. 
See— arrangement drawing 
assembly drawing 
class I drawing 
component drawing 
construction drawing 
detail drawing 
diagram drawing 
engineering drawing 
envelope drawing 
erection drawing 
form drawing 
installation drawing 
inter/ace drawing 
kit drawing 

matched parts drawing 
modified drawing 
official drawing 
plan drawing 



DRWG 



process drawing 
production drawing 
roll size drawing 
sketch drawing 
source control drawing 
tabulated drawing 
undimensioned drawing 
word description drawing 

DRIFT 

See— gyro drift 

DROGUE PARACHUTE 

A type of parachute attached to a body, used to slow it down. 

Also called deceleration parachute, or drag parachute. 

DRY CONDITION 

A condition of a stage or module such that no fluids (liquid 
or gaseous) other than those used for purging, drying, or 
storage are contained within the module or stage. 

DRY RUN 

A practice exercise or rehearsal especially observed in prep- 
aration for equipment operation or rocket launching. 

DRY WEIGHT 

The weight of a vehicle without its fuel, or propellants, or 
other fluids. 

DSGN 

Design. 

DSIF 

Deep Space Instrumentation Facility. 



DUAL THRUST 

Thrust derived from two propellant grains using the same 
propulsion section of a missile or space vehicle. 

DUPLEXER 

A device which permits a single antenna system to be used 
for both transmitting and receiving. 

DUST BED REACTOR 

A nuclear reactor with the fuel in the form of a finely divided 
powder rather than coventional solid structure. 

DRWG 

Drawing. 

DYNAMIC BEHAVIOR 

The behavior of a system or component under actual opera- 
tion conditions e.g., acceleration, vibration. 

DYNAMIC CONVERSION 

The conversion of energy from one form to another through 
the use of a moving device, e. g., a reciprocating engine or 
turbo-alternator. 

DYNAMIC ENVIRONMENTS 

Environments consisting of dynamic forces such as those 
due to vibrations, shock, and accelerations. 



27 



DYNAMIC LOAD 



DYNAMIC LOAD 

A load associated with the elastic deformations of a struc- 
ture subjected to time-dependent external forces. 

DYNAMIC LOCK-UP 

Results from a simulated flow stoppage under operational 
conditions using a solenoid actuated valve. 

DYNAMIC PRESSURE 

Symbol (Q) 

(1) The pressure exerted by a fluid, such as air, by virtue of 
its motion. 

(2) The pressure exerted on a body, by virtue of its motion 
through a fluid. E.g., the pressure exerted on a rocket 
moving through the atmosphere. 

DYNAMIC RESPONSE 

The time varying motion of a given structure to a given force 
input. For instance, for a space vehicle that is exposed to 
side acting winds during flight, the dynamic response would 
consist of a rigid body rotation of the vehicle plus a bending 
deformation, both varying with time. 



DYNAMIC STABILITY 

The property of a body (a rocket or airplane) that, when dis- 
turbed from an original state of steay flight or motion, damp- 
ens the oscillations set up by the restoring movements, 
gradually returning the body to its original state. 



DYNAMIC TEST STAGE 

Flight-type, non-propulsive stage for use in composite 
• Satum vehicle dynamic testing. Capable of being filled with 
a fuel substitute, pressurized, and drained, with weight and 
center of gravity the same as for flight. Non-gimballing 
masses simulate engines. 

DYSBARISM 

A general term which includes a complex variety of symptoms 
within the body caused by changes in ambient barometric 
pressure, exclusive of hypoxia. Characteristic symptoms are 
bends and abdominal gas pains at altitudes above 25,000 to 
30,000 feet. Also at increased barometric pressure, as in 
descent from high altitude, the symptoms are characterized 
by painful distention of the ear drums and sinuses. 



28 



E 



E MAD 

Engine Maintenance Assembly and Disassembly Building. 

EAFB 

Edwards Air Force Base. 

EAM 

Electric accounting machine. 

EARLY FAILURE PERIOD 

The period of equipment life starting just after final assem- 
bly where equipment failures occur initially at a higher than 
normal rate due to the presence of defective parts and ab- 
normal operating procedures. Also called "Debugging" or 
"Burn-in" period. 

EARTH FIXED REFERENCE 

An oriented system using some earth phenomena for 
positioning. 

EARTH LANDING SYSTEM ELS 

A parachute deployment system in the command module (CM) 
for returning the flight crew safely to Earth following re- 
entry. It provides post-entry stabilization, velocity control, 
and impact attenuation. 

EARTH ORBIT RENDEZVOUS EOR 

A mode involving rendezvous and coupling, fueling, or 
transfer in an earth parking orbit to accomplish a mission. 



EARTH-STABILIZED SATELLITES 

Satellites whose axes maintain a constant relationship to 
the center of the Earth, although not to a fixed spot on the 
surface of the Earth. 



EARTH'S HEAT BUDGET 

The integrated consideration of gains and losses in the 
Earth's radiation. The major gains deriving from solar radi- 
ation. The major losses being those from emitting radiation. 



EBULLISM 

The formation of bubbles, with particular reference to water 
vapor bubbles in biological fluids, caused by reduced 
ambient pressure. 



EBW 

Exploding Bridge Wire. 

ECCENTRIC 

Not having the same center. 
eccentric orbit. 



Varying from a circle, as in 



ECCENTRIC ORBIT 

A highly eliptical orbit having a very high apogee and low 
perigee. 

ECCENTRICITY 

The degree of deviation from a circular orbit. 

ECHO 

Passive reflecting inflatable satellite. 

ECLIPSE 

See— annular eclipse 

ECLIPTIC 

Plane of the earth's orbit around the sun. Used as a refer- 
ence plane for other interplanetary orbits. 



ECLIPTIC PLANE 

The plane of the earth's motion about the sun. 

ECOLOGICAL SYSTEM 

A habitable environment, either created artificially such as 
in a manned space vehicle or occurring naturally such as the 
environment on the surface of the earth in which man, 
animals, or other organisms can live in mutual relationship 
with each other. 

See— closed ecological system 

ECOSPHERE 

Spherical extent inhabited by living organisms or suitable 
for life of such organisms. Also, layer of space about the 
sun extending from and including Venus through Mars. 

ECP 

Engineering change proposal. 

ECS 

Environmental Control System. 

EDP CENTER 

Electronic data-processing center. 

EDPC 

Electronic data processing center. 

EFFECTIVE ATMOSPHERE 

That part of the atmosphere which effectively influences a 
particular process of motion, such as aerodynamic support, 
or air friction. 

EFFECTIVE EXHAUST VELOCITY 

The velocity of an exhaust stream after being reduced by 
the effects of friction, heat transfer, nonaxially directed 
flow, and other conditions. 



29 



EGADS BUTTON 



EGADS BUTTON 

A button used by the range safety officer to destruct a mis- 
sile in flight. The word EGADS is an acronym for Electronic 
Ground Automatic Destruct Sequencer. 

EGO 

Eccentric Geophysical Observatory (part of 0G0) 

EGRESS 

The act of or the mechanism for exit from an enclosure. In 
spacecraft this can relate to the act of a crew member exit- 
ing from the vehicle or it can describe the exit chamber, 
pressure lock and hatchways. 

EJECTION CAPSULE 

(1) In an aircraft or manned spacecraft, a detachable com- 
partment serving as a cockpit or cabin, which may be ejected 
as a unit and parachuted to the ground. 

(2) In an artificial satellite, probe, or unmanned spacecraft, 
a boxlike unit usually containing recording instruments or 
records of observed data, which may be ejected and returned 
to Earth by a parachute or other deceleration device. 

EKG 

E lectrocardiograph . 

ELASTICIZER 

An elastic substance or fuel used in a solid rocket propel- 
lant to prevent cracking of the propellant grain and to bind 
it to the combustion chamber case. 

ELECTRIC ENGINE 

Projected ion or plasma engine, so named because of the 
separation of charged particles. 

ELECTRICAL POWER SYSTEM 

There are two independent electrical power systems in the 
Apollo spacecraft. The one which supplies power to the 
command module (CM) has major components located in both 
the command module and the service module (SM). The 
other supplies, regulates, and distributes all electrical 
power required by the lunar excursion module (LEM). Major 
power sources are fuel cells and batteries. 

ELECTRIC PROPULSION 

The generation of thrust for a rocket engine involving accel- 
eration of a propellant by some electrical device such as 
an arc jet, ion engine, or magnetohydrodynamic accelerator. 



ELECTRO-CHEMICAL CELL 

Genetic term for chemical battery. 
electricity by chemical reaction. 



Device for producing 



ELECTROCARDIOGRAPH EKG 

An instrument which measures and records the electric 
current or voltage wave forms associated with the action of 
the heart muscles. The record produced is called an elec- 
trocardiogram or cardiogram. 

ELECTRODE EROSION 

The gradual destruction of the component of an electric arc 
from which the arc emanates by a combination of heat, 
chemical reaction, and physical shock. 



ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM 

The measurement and recording of brain voltages or waves. 
The instrument used for this purpose is called an 
electroencephalograph. 

ELECTROJET 

A concentrated stream of electricity of limited width. One 
such stream flows westward on the morning side of the 
Earth, and a weaker one flows eastward on the evening side. 



ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION 

Energy propagated through space or through material 
media in the form of an advancing disturbance in electrical 
and magnetic fields existing in space or in the media. Also 
called simply radiation. 



ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM 

A collective term for all known radiation from the shortest- 
waved gamma rays thru x-rays, ultraviolet, visible light, 
infrared waves, to radio waves. 



ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVE 

Form in which radiant energy travels, produced by oscilla- 
tion of an electric charge, and including waves of radio, 
infrared, visible light, ultra-violet light, x-rays, gamma rays, 
and cosmic rays when considered as quanta of energy. 



ELECTRON 

The subatomic particle that possesses the smallest possible 
electric charge. 



ELECTRONIC DATA PROCESSING 

The use of electronic devices and systems in the processing 
of data so as to interpret the data and put it into usable 
form. 



ELECTRONIC DATA PROCESSING CENTER EDPC 

A center that maintains automatic equipment, including com- 
puters, designed to simplify the use and interpretation of 
the mass of data gathered by modern instrumentation instal- 
lations or information collection agencies. 

ELECTRONIC GROUND AUTOMATIC 

DESTRUCT SEQUENCER EGADS 

A destruct system control used by the range safety officer 
to destroy a missile in flight. 

ELECTRONIC NOISE INTERFERENCE 

Any electrical disturbance generated in an equipment, which 
may produce an undesirable indication, response, or malfunc- 
tion in some other equipment. This is exclusive of inter- 
ference which may be caused by a transmitter radiating its 
proper fundamental signal. 



ELECTROSTATIC 

Electricity at rest. 



Stationary electrical particles. 



30 



ENVELOPE DRAWING 



ELECTROSTATIC CHARGE 

The difference in electric potential of a material and its sur- 
roundings in the condition when there is no flow of elec- 
trical current between this material and its surroundings. 

ELECTROSTATIC GYRO 

A gyro supported by an electrostatic field. 

ELS 

Earth landing system. 

EMISSIVE POWER 

See— monochromatic emmissive power 
total emissive power 

EMISSIVITY 

The term for the relative power of a surface or a material, 
composing a surface, to emit heat by radiation. 

EMITTANCE 

See— hemispherical emittance 
monochromatic emittance 
total emittance 

EMPIRE 

Early Manned Planetary Interruptionless Round-trip 
Expedition. 

EMPTY WEIGHT 

The design gross weight less the design useful load. 

END ITEM 

A combination of parts, assemblies, accessories, or attach- 
ments, which are integrated to form an equipment that ac- 
complishes a specific function when put to use. An end 
item is complete within itself and classified as such for 
purposes of separate manufacture, procurement, drawings, 
specifications, storage, issue, maintenence, or use. 

END PRODUCT 

A term used to denote the product being offered for sale by 
manufacturing concerns. It is synonomous with end item. 

END USE 

The purpose for which the ultimate consumer employs a 
device. 

ENERGETIC PARTICLE 

An electron, positron, neutron, or other elementary particle 
of matter traveling at extremely high speeds. Such particles 
originate in outer space or from the Sun and lose their energy 
in the atmosphere. 

ENGINE 

See— booster engine 
electric engine 
F-l engine 
H-l engine 
ion engine 

liquid-air cycle engine 
lunar retrograde engine 
M-l engine 
oxygen-hydrocarbon engine 



photon engine 
plasma engine 
reaction engine 
rocket engine 
sustainer engine 
vernier engine 

ENGINE MAINTENANCE ASSEMBLY 

AND DISASSEMBLY (BUILDING) E MAD 

. A facility at the nuclear rocket development station (NRDS) 
for thenerva engine. 

ENGINE SLING 

A piece of equipment consisting of a spreader bar provided 
with a hoist eye and lifting legs for attachment to the engine. 

ENGINE SURGE 

Uneven performance of an engine. 

ENGINE-STAGE INTEGRATION 

The uniting of the engine and vehicle stage to determine 
interface problems. 

ENGINEERING 

See— human engineering 
quality engineering 
systems engineering 

ENGINEERING CONFIDENCE 

Confidence, in a design or product, which is based on 
engineering calculations and tests. 

ENGINEERING DATA 

Engineering drawings, supporting specifications, indexes, 
and related engineering documents. 

ENGINEERING DRAWING 

Dimensionally verifiable engineering delineations setting 
forth pictorial or descriptive language representations, or 
combinations thereof. They present the complete engineering 
requirements for fabrication inspection, evaluation, and 
identification of all details, assemblies, and units of the 
finished product. 

ENGINEERING MODEL 

First development model of the complete technical system 
used to demonstrate the technical principles of operation. 
It is the first approach to a system including tactical, logis- 
tical, and technical considerations. 

ENGINEERING TEST 

A test conducted by, or under supervision of, the technical 
service concerned, with a scientific approach where the 
objective of the test is to determine inherent structural, 
electrical, or other physical and chemical qualities of the 
item or system tested, including those of an environmental 
nature. 

See— development engineering test 
final engineering test 

ENVELOPE DRAWING 

An envelope drawing shows outline, overall and mounting 
dimensions, and other dimensions and data necessary to 



31 



ENVIRONMENT 



disclose mechanical, electrical, functional and physical 
interchangeable ty of items regardless of the detail design. 

ENVIRONMENT 

The aggregate of all the conditions and influences which 
affect the operation of equipments and components. 
See—artifical environment 

induced environment 

immediate environment 

natural environment 

physical environment 

ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL SYSTEM ECS 

This system, with components located in all three space- 
craft modules but primarily in the command module (CM), 
maintains cabin environment in the command module and 
the lunar excursion module (LEM), provides a conditioned 
atmosphere for pressure suit operation, provides thermal 
control of equipment in all three modules, and is used for 
recharging the portable life support subsystems. 

ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL 
SYSTEM RADIATOR 

A heat exchanger used in the environmental control system 
to dissipate, in space, heat from the environmental control 
system in the spacecraft. 

ENVIRONMENTAL RANGE 

The range of environment throughout which a system or 
portion thereof is capable of operation at the specified level 
of reliability. 

See— acceptable enviromental range test 

ENVIRONMENTAL SPACE CHAMBER 

A chamber (sometimes a simulated spacecraft) in which hu- 
midity, temperature, pressure, fluid contents, noise and 
movement may be controlled so as to simulate different 
space conditions. It is normally used for astronaut training. 

ENVIRONMENTAL TEST AND 
SERVICE BUILDING 

A facility that provides the equipment checking and testing 
of environmental systems and components installed in the 
spacecraft. 

ENVIRONMENTAL TOLERANCE 

The ability of a system, or portion thereof, to operate within 
a specified range. 

EOR 

Earth Orbit Rendezvous. 

EPHEMERIS 

Book of tables giving daily positions of celestial bodies. 

EQUATORIAL ORBIT 

An orbit in the plane of the Earth's equator. 

EQUI-PERIOD TRANSFER ORBIT 

Elliptical lunar orbit utilized by the lunar excursion module 
to approach within approximately 50,000 feet of the lunar 
surface while maintaining the same orbital period as that of 
the command module and service module. 



EQUIP 

Equipment. 

EQUIPMENT EQUIP* 

One or more assemblies, or a combination of items, capable 
of independently performing a complete function. 
See— auxiliary equipment 

checkout equipment 

complete operating equipment 

contractor furnished equipment 

government furnished equipment 

ground servicing equipment 

ground support equipment 

IMU ground support equipment 

inertia! component test equipment 

mass properties determination equipment 

operational ground equipment 

stage calibration equipment 

EQUIPMENT FAILURE 

When an equipment no longer meets the minimum acceptable 
specified performance and cannot be restored through opera- 
tor adjustment of controls. 

EQUIPMENT LONGEVITY 

The length of the normal operating period of equipment life 
specified either in terms of equipment hours or operations 
per calendar time. 

EQUIPMENT RELIABILITY 

The probability of performing a specified function, under 
given conditions, at a measured reliability index (average 
failure rate in terms of its reciprocal mean-time-between- 
failures) and for measured equipment longevity (the total 
period of time during which this quality is maintained). 



ERECTION DRAWING 

Shows procedure and operation sequence for erection or 
assembly of individual items or assemblies of items. 

ESCAPE 

A sufficient velocity outward from a primary body so as 
neither to fall back to the body nor to orbit it. 

ESCAPE TOWER 

A tower, mounted atop the command module, containing a 
cluster of small rockets to jettison the spacecraft from the 
booster in the event of a mission abort. 

ESCAPE TRAJECTORY 

That path a body must follow to escape a central force field. 

ESCAPE VELOCITY 

The velocity which is required by an object to overcome the 
gravitational pull of the earth or other astronomical body 
to move into space. The escape velocity from earth's grav- 
ity field is approximately seven miles per second. 

ESSENTIAL REPAIR 

Only those repairs necessary to ensure that an end item is 
restored to a serviceable condition and will efficiently 
accomplish its intended purpose. 



32 



EYEBALLS UP 



EXHAUST NOZZLE 

That portion of the thrust chamber which lies on the down- 
stream side at the nozzle throat. 

EXHAUST STREAM 

The stream of gaseous, atomic or radiant particles, that 
emit from the nozzle of a reaction engine. 

EXHAUST SYSTEM 

A part of an air vehicle's power plant installation. It in- 
cludes all manifolds or stacks used for collecting and con- 
ducting exhaust gases to points of discharge, for utilizing 
exhaust heat, or cooling exhaust gases, for effecting flame 
damping, and for silencing exhaust noise. 

EXHAUST VELOCITY 

The velocity of exhaust gases through the nozzle of a rocket 
engine or motor. 

See— effective exhaust velocity 

EXOBIOLOGY 

The study of living organisms existing on celestial bodies 
other than the Earth. 

EXOSPHERE 

The outermost fringe or layer of the atmosphere where col- 
lisions between molecular particles are so rare that only the 
force of gravity will return escaping molecules to the upper 
atmosphere. 

EXOTIC FUEL 

Any fuel considered to be unusual, as a boron-based fuel. 

EXPANSION LOOP 

A device included in the transfer line of the RP-1 fuel sys- 
tem complex which compensates for expansion and contrac- 
tion due to changes in temperature. 

EXPERIMENT 

See— critical flight experiment 
piggy back experiment 

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL 

A model of the complete equipment to demonstrate the techni- 
cal soundness of the basic idea. 

EXPERIMENTS 

See— critical flight experiments 

EXPLODING BRIDGE WIRE EBW 

A metal or metal alloy wire which is violently disintegrated 
by the compression of a large pulse of electrical energy, 
producing a shock wave, temperatures up to 10* degrees 
kelvin, and electromagnetic radiation, infrared through 
X-rays. Such equipment in conjunction with ordnance is 
commonly used in systems for initiating stage retrorocket, 
separation and destruct systems. 



EXPLODING BRIDGE WIRE SYSTEMS 

Equipment and ordnance capable of initiating stage 
retrorocket, separation and destruct system ordnance 
equipment. • 

EXPLORER SATELLITE SERIES 

A series of small scientific satellites (up to 300 pounds) 
launched into near-earth orbits to investigate space 
phenomena. 

EXPLOSIVE BOLT 

A bolt incorporating an explosive which is detonated on com- 
mand, thus destroying the bolt and releasing the mated unit. 
Used to separate one stage from another. 

EXPLOSIVE-DEVICES SIMULATOR SET 

Auxiliary equipment facilitating GSE combined systems 
checkout of the spacecraft and launch devices. The simu- 
lator measures the magnitude of the firing impulse to deter- 
mine whether the explosive device would have fired, and 
verifies that no undesired impulses are present to cause 
accidental firing. 

EXPOSED TEST POINT 

A test point which is readily accessible when the eguipment 
is in normal operating condition and position. 

EXTERIOR BALLISTICS 

A branch of ballistics concerned with the behavior of a mis- 
sile during flight, influenced By conditions of air density, 
temperatures, velocity etc. 



EXTRAGALACTIC NEBULAE 

Star systems outside our own galaxy. 

EXTRATERRESTRIAL 

From outside the Earth. 

EXTRAVEHICULAR 

Outside the vehicle. 

EYEBALLS DOWN 

Positive g. The acceleration stress that the subject experi- 
ences as acting from above. 

EYEBALLS IN 

Supine g. The acceleration stress experienced in the chest- 
to-back direction. 

EYEBALLS OUT 

Prone g. The acceleration stress experienced in the back- 
to-chest direction. 

EYEBALLS UP 

Negative g. The acceleration stress that the subject experi- 
ences as acting from below. 



33 



F 



F-l ENGINE 

A liquid-propellant rocket engine designed to develop 1-1/2 
million pounds of thrust at sea level. The F-l uses liquid 
oxygen (LOX) and kerosene-base fuel (RP-1) as propellants, 
and will be used in the first stage of the Saturn V and 
Nova launch vehicles. Cognizant center Marshall Space 
Flight Center. 

FABRICATION TOLERANCE 

The maximum variation in the characteristics of a component 
which, when related to the defined variations of the other 
components comprising this equipment, will permit operation 
of the equipment within specified limits. 

FABU 

Fuel Additive Blender Unit. 

FACILITIES 

A physical plant or installation to permit the performance of 
a function (buildings, shelters, roads, utilities, shops, 
etc.). 

See— test facilities 

FACILITY 

See— pyrotechnic test and weight and balance facility 
reaction control facility 
spacecraft operations and checkout facility 

FACTOR 

See— confidence factor 
degradation factor 
human factors 

importance factor or criticalily factor 
load factor 
physiological factors 
safety factor 
yield strength load factor 

FACTOR OF SAFETY 

The ratio of the criterion load or stress to the limit load or 
stress. 

FACTORIAL DESIGN 

In experimental design, the selection for testing of combina- 
tions of values of all independent variables, or factors, 
which are characteristic of the entire allowable variable 
ranges. 

FAE 

Final Approach Equipment. 

FAIL-SAFE DESIGN 

Design considerations to prevent probable equipment failures 
or malfunctions which may injure the operator or the equip- 
ment itself. 



FAILURE 

The inability of a system, subsystem, component, or part 
to perform its required function. 
See—catastrophic failure 

chance failure 

critical failure 

degradation failure 

early failure period 

equipment failure 

fatal failure 

independent failures 

initial failure 

mean cycles to failure 

meantime between failures 

mean time to failure 

mean time to first failure 

part failure 

random failure 

secondary failure 

system chance failures 

test to failure 

wearout failures 



FAILURE MECHANISM 

The physical process which results in a part or equipment 
failure. 

See— failure mode 



FAILURE MODE 

The physical description of the manner in which a failure 
occurs, and the operating condition of the equipment at the 
time of the failure. 

See— failure mechanism 

FAILURE MODE ANALYSIS 

An extensive program to isolate all known failure modes and 
to identify these failure modes with the appropriate materials, 
production processes, production controls, and environments 
or design. 



FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS 

An analysis of possible modes of failure, their cause, ef- 
fects, expected frequency of occurrence and means of 
elimination. 

FAILURE RATE 

Rate at which failures occur as a function of time. If the 
failure rate is constant, it is frequently expressed as the 
reciprocal of mean time between failure (MTBF). 
See— equipment failure rate 

part failure rate 

system failure rate 



34 



FIRING CHAMBER 



FAILURE REPORTING AND 
CORRECTIVE ACTION 

A systematic and comprehensive method of reporting all 
failures and a plan for implementing corrective action as a 
result of these failures. 

FALLAWAY SECTION 

A section of a rocket vehicle that separates from the vehicle 
during flight, especially such a section that falls back to 
Earth. 

FAMU 

Fuel Additive Mixture Unit. 

FATAL FAILURE 

A failure which results in the loss of human life. 

FATIGUE 

A weakening or deterioration of metal or other material, or 
of amember occurring under load, especially under repeated, 
cyclic, or continued loading. 

FATIGUE LOADS 

Loads applied to a structure which by their repetitive nature 
produce a fatigue failure of the structure. 



FAULT 

An attribute which adversely affects the reliability of 
a device. 

FEASIBILITY STUDY 

The phase during which studies are made of a proposed 
item or technique to determine the degree to which it is 
practicable, advisable, and adaptable for the intended 
purpose. 

FEATURE 

Distinctive characteristic of one or more surfaces of a part 
such as a rabbet, hole, screw thread, etc. 

FEED HORN 

A device that radiates or collects energy from a parabolic 
antenna. 

FEED-BACK INSTRUMENTS 

Instruments in which part of the output signal is fed back as 
input at proper phases to amplify or decrease strength of the 
signal. 

FIELD 

A region of space at each point of which a given physical 
quantity has some definite value, thus a gravitational field, 
electric field, magnetic field, etc. 
See— data field 

depth of field 

flow fields 

geomagnetic field 

FIELD CHANGE ORDER 

Instructions issued by field service division to field per- 
sonnel for making desired changes to items of equipment 
in field use. 



FIELD MAINTENANCE 

Maintenance authorized and performed by designated main- 
tenance activities in direct support of a using organization. 

w 

FILM COOLING 

The cooling of a body or surface, such as the inner surface 
of a rocket combustion chamber, by maintaining a thin fluid 
layer over the affected area. 

FILTER/SEPARATOR 

A device designed to remove foreign material and condensa- 
tion from fluids such as RP-1 fuel. 

FINAL APPROACH EQUIPMENT (SUBSYSTEM) FAE 

This subsystem involves the combined usage of the Apollo 
guidance and navigation equipment subsystems, radar, 
radio altimeter etc., required in effecting a safe approach 
and landing on the Moon or upon return to Earth. 



FINAL CALIBRATION CURVE 

Output characteristics of a measuring device or component 
obtained from a calibration test. 

FINAL ENGINEERING TEST 

The phase which provides the final ordnance corps indepen- 
dent evaluation of a system, major combination, or end item. 
It includes the issuance of the test directive by the assistant 
chief of ordnance, the submission of a test plan by the test 
agency, the procurement of items to be tested, the conduct 
of the test in conformance with the plan, and concludes with 
the evaluation of the test results. 



FINAL MEASUREMENT 

The last actural measurement of mass properties made by a 
contractor prior to delivery to the procuring activity. 



FINAL TRIM 

The final adjustment of a ballistic missile to insure exact 
direction as programmed for its flight (normally accomplished 
by vernier engines). 

FINISH 

Any surface treatment to protect equipment or enhance 
appearances. 

FINS 

See—stub fins 

FIRE 

Flight investigation reentry environment. 

FIRING (TYPES OF) 

See— flight readiness firings 

full duration static test firing 
static firing 

FIRING CHAMBER 

Chamber in a rocket engine in which the fuel and oxidizer 
are ignited, and in which pressures of gases are built up to 
provide an exhaust velocity sufficient to attain thrust. 



35 



FIRING ROOM 



FIRING ROOM 

A room in the launch control center of complex 39 which will 
contain the necessary electrical panels to monitor and initi- 
ate the operation of each facility operation and controlled 
from the pad terminal connection room. 

FIRST MOTION 

First indication of motion of a missile from its launcher. 
Synonymous with takeoff for vertically launched missiles. 

FISSION 

The release of nuclear energy through splitting of atoms. 

FISSION FRAGMENT CONVERTER 

A device that utilizes charged fission fragments from fission 
plates to produce electrical power. 

FISSION FRAGMENT PHYSICS 

The study of the behavior of the high energy particles re- 
sulting from a nuclear fission reaction. 

FISSURING 

An undesired cracking or splitting of solid propellants. Re- 
sults in increased burning areas and increased rate of gas 
evolution. 



FLEXIBILITY 

Design features to permit rapid change from primary to 

secondary capability. 

■ 

FLIGHT 

The phase of operations beginning with lift-off and ending 
when the command module lands upon the earth. 
See— coasting flight 
direct flight 

FLIGHT ACCEPTANCE TEST 

A test conducted to prove that the actual operational hard- 
ware intended for flight use has been fabricated in accord- 
ance with specifications. Tests are conducted under con- 
ditions expected to be encountered in actual operations. 



FLIGHT CREW 

The Apollo flight crew consists of three men who are cross 
trained to be capable of manning any of the command module 
(CM) duty stations. The three crewmen are designated 
commander, navigator, and systems manager. The CM 
commander is also the lunar excursion module (LEM) 
commander. 



FIT 

General term used to signify the range of tightness which 
may result from the application of a specific combination of 
allowances and tolerances in the design of mating parts. 
See— actual fit 

clearance fit 

interference fit 

transition fit 

FIXED SATELLITE 

An Earth satellite that orbits from west to east at such a 
speed as to remain constantly over a given place on the 
Earth's equator. 

FLAME BUCKET 

Opening built into launch pads to collect hot gases during 
rocket thrust buildup. 

FLAME-RESISTANT MATERIAL 

A material which will not support combustion. 



FLAMMABLE 

Capable of being easily ignited, preferred to the older 
equivalent inflammable. 



FLARE (SUN) 

A bright eruption from the Sun's chromosphere. 
See— solar flare 

FLASHBACK 

A reversal of flame propagation in a system (counter to the 
usual flow of the combustible mixture). 

FLASHLIGHT 

Geodetic triangulation survey technique using space flares. 



FLIGHT MISSION 

Within a project, the specific technical or scientific objec- 
tive to be accomplished by a given launching of a space 
vehicle or launch vehicle. 



FLIGHT PROFILE 

A graphic portrayal or plot of a vehicle's flight path in the 
vertical plane. 

FLIGHT READINESS FIRINGS FRF 

Missile system tests, of short duration, conducted with the 
propulsion system operating while the missile is secured to 
the launcher. 

FLIGHT RELIABILITY 

The probability that a flight will be successfully completed 
based on successful completion of countdown. 

FLIGHT RESEARCH CENTER (NASA) FRC 

A unique and highly specialized facility, emphasizing re- 
search on manned flight in extreme-performance aircraft and 
spacecraft. It is located at Edwards, Calif., adjacent to 
Edwards Air Force Base. 

FLIGHT SEQUENCER 

A component that receives voltages from the programmer or 
GSE and in turn supplies an output voltage to other com- 
ponents in the vehicle system. 

FLIGHT SIMULATOR 

Synthetic flight trainer capable of simulating a complete 
flight of a specified space vehicle. 

FLIGHT STAGE 

The complete space vehicle at any given point in the flight 
trajectory. 



36 



FUEL 



FLIGHT TEST 

Tests involving rocket powered flight in an upward trajectory 
from the Earth's surface. May include sub-orbital, orbital, or 
translunar flights. 

See— simulated flight test 

FLIGHT TESTING 

Program of complete vehicle launches (including combina- 
tions of nonpropulsive and live stages) utilizing the full 
capability of the range to proviae space position information 
and to record and store the telemetry signals. 

FLOW 

See— hypersonic flow 
laminar flow 
weight flow rate 

FLOW FIELDS 

The total condition of a fluid or gas flowing around a body 

including speed, pressure, density, and heat. 

FLUID BED REACTOR 

A nuclear reactor with fuel in a fluid state. 

FLUTTER 

The unstable self-excited oscillation of an airfoil and its 
associated structure in flight, caused by a combination of 
the aerodynamic, inertial, and elastic characteristics of 
the components themselves, and not by an externally applied 
vibratory excitations. 

See— coupled servo flutter 

FLY-AWAY DISCONNECTS 

Umbilical connections or other connections to the stages of 
the space vehicle which disconnect from the space vehicle 
at lift-off, either mechanically or by the actual rising of the 
vehicle off the launch pad. 

FLY-WHEEL TYPE RESONANCE 

Resonance between a once-per-revolution forcing function, 
either mechanical or aerodynamic, and a natural mode of rotor 
vibration in the direction of the rotor plane. 

FM/CW 

Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave. 

FORCE 

See— brute force method 
centrifugal force 
centripetal force 
coriolis force 
inertial force 
pound force 

FORCE-BREAK MACH NUMBER 

Speed at which a radical change occurs in the aerodynamic 
characteristics of an aircraft resulting in increasing values 
of the drag coefficient. 

FORM DIMENSION 

One which cannot be properly defined by dimensions of size 
or location. The angle of the frustrum of a cone, the involute 
of a gear tooth, the angle of a thread, etc. 



FORM DRAWING 

Contains established information pertinent to an item, part, 
or component preprinted on a drawing form. 

FORMATION OF LOTS 

Each lot shall, as far as is practicable, consist of units of 
product of a single type, grade, class, size, or composition 
manufactured under essentially the same conditions. 

FP 

Freezing Point. 

FPS 

Feet Per Second. 

FRANGIBLE TUBE LOAD ALLEVIATOR 

System which consists of tubes attached to the landing 
vehicle and to a die attached to a landing skid or foot. The 
tube presses over the die during impact and fails in 
fragments. 

FRC 

Flight Research Center. 

FREE FALL 

The motion of any unpowered body in a gravitational field. 

FREE-FLIGHT TRAJECTORY 

A ballistic missile's trajectory that begins with thrust cut- 
off and ends at reentry. 



FREEZE-OUT METHOD 

A method for controlling the composition of gases or liquids 
by freezing and separating frozen matter from the remaining 
liquids or fluids. 



FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION 

The derivation of the cumulative distribution function. 
See— cumulative distribution junction 



FREQUENCY MODULATED 

CONTINUOUS WAVE FM/CW 

A radio or radar signal whose frequency is continuously 
varied. 

FRF 

Flight Readiness Firings. 

FROST 

Food Reserves On Space Trips. 
See— ice frost 

FUEL 

See— chemical fuel 
cyrogenic fuel 
exotic fuel 
hydrocarbon fuel 
hypergolic fuel 
nuclear fuel 
RP-1 fuel system complex 



37 



FUEL CELL 



FUEL CELL 

A continuously fed battery which converts chemical energy 
directly into electrical energy by mixing a fuel and an oxi- 
dizer in a cell. Because it is continuously fed, it produces 
electricity over a longer period of time than a storage 
battery. 

FUEL PAD 

An area which contains all the equipment necessary to 
store, filter and transfer fuel from the fuel pad storage tanks 
through transfer lines to the space vehicle fuel tanks. The 
fuel pad is considered part of a fuel system complex. 

FULL DURATION STATIC TEST FIRING 

The testing of a vehicle component, engine or stage, in a 
stationary or hold-down position for its full rated time. 

FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS 
(FOR MAINTAINABILITY) 

The investigation of alternative man and machine capabili- 
ties which may be used to satisfy established system require- 
ments. The analytical basis for allocating activities to 
personnel and equipment so as to achieve optimum system 
performance. 

FUNCTIONAL RELIABILITY 

The probability that a system will successfully complete 
the final checkout preparatory to launching, given that it 
was ready at demand. 

FUNCTIONAL SURFACE 

The surface of apart or an assembly which controls the posi- 
tioning of the parts in the assembly. 



FUNCTIONAL TEST 

A test performed to demonstrate that the item operates as 
specified (required). 



FUNCTIONING ITEM 

Any assembly, component, or part which affects the opera- 
tion of the end article and which is replaceable in the field 
by organizational, field, or depot teams. 



FUNGAL SPORE 

A reproductive form of a fungus which can survive environ- 
mental extremes. 



FUSION 

The release of nuclear energy through uniting of atoms. 



FUSION ROCKET 

A conceptual nuclear rocket utilizing the nuclear fusion pro- 
cess for the energy sources, as distinguished from the 
fission process. 



FUSION WELD 

A weld made by melting material, usually a filler material, 
by electric arc or gas flame. Pressure is not used and base 
metal is melted in the process. 

FY 

Fiscal Year. 



38 



G 



G OR G-FORCE 

The measure or value of the gravitational pull of the earth 
as modified by the earth's rotation, equal to the acceleration 
of a freely moving body at the rate of 32.16 feet per second. 
See— negative g 

positive g 

supine g 

G&N 

Guidance And Navigation. 

G-SUIT 

A device that exerts pressure on the abdomen and lower 
parts of the body to prevent or retard the collection of blood 
below the chest, under positive acceleration. 



G-TOLERANCE 

The tolerance in c person, animal or equipment to an accel- 
eration of a particular value. 



GAGE DIMENSION 

The term gage is applied to a working dimension with a zero 
tolerance. 



GAS CONVERTER BUILDING 

A building or facility which contains equipment necessary 
to pressurize and vaporize liquid fluids such as nitrogen 
and helium. 

GAS GENERATOR 

A combustion chamber used to provide hot gases for a tur- 
bine or motor to drive the propellant pumps of a rocket 
engine, or to provide a source of gas at some predetermined 
pressure program. Gas generators are usually operated fuel- 
rich to maintain the container temperature at reduced values. 

GAS STORAGE BATTERY 

A system of high pressure gas storage cylinders, including 
a manifold of associated valves, regulators and pipings 
capable of storing high-pressure gaseous nitrogen and hel- 
ium (part of the high-pressure gas storage facility). 



GAS VORTEX SYSTEM 

A cavity reactor in which the nuclear fuel is separated from 
the propellant by centrifugal force. 

GASEOUS CORE REACTOR 

A nuclear reactor with fuel in a gaseous rather than solid 
state. 



GALACTIC ASTRONOMY 

The study of the galaxies and their components. 

GALACTIC COSMIC RAYS 

Cosmic rays that do not originate in the sun are referred to 
as galactic cosmic rays and are those of the greatest energy. 

GAMMA RADIATION 

Electromagnetic radiation, similar to x-rays, originating from 
the nucleus of an atom and having a high degree of 
penetration. 

GAMMA RAY 

An electromagnetic radiation or wave form emitted by a 
radioactive nucleus and similar to x-rays but of higher 
energy and shorter wavelength. 

GANTRY 

A crane-type structure, with platforms on different levels, 
used to erect, assemble, and service large rockets or 
missiles. 

GARBAGE (COLLOQUIAL) 

Miscellaneous objects in orbit, usually material ejected or 
broken away from a launch vehicle or satellite. 

GAS CAP 

See— incandescent gas cap 



GCTS 

Ground Communications Tracking Systems. 

GEGENSCHEIN 

Faint light area of the sky always opposite the position of 
the Sun on the celestial sphere. Believed to be the reflec- 
tion of sunlight from particles moving beyond the Earth's 
orbit. 

GEMINI 

A project to develop space rendezvous and docking tech- 
niques in orbit, using a two-man capsule. 

GENERATION 

Technical or technological development stage or period that 
is marked by features of performance nonexistent in a pre- 
vious period of development or production. 

GENERATION BREAKDOWN 

An outline of a missile or a missile system, listing major 
combinations, major items, principal items and secondary 
items in descending order, including drawing numbers. 

GENERATOR 

See— thrust generator 

GEO 

A prefix meaning Earth. 



39 



GEOCENTRIC 



GEOCENTRIC 

Relating to or measured from the Earth's center. 

GEODESY 

Science which treats the shape and size of the Earth through 
applied mathematics. 

GEODETIC 

Pertaining to or determined by geodesy. 

GEOHYDROMAGNETICS 

The study of the upper atmosphere and radiation belts that 
surround the Earth, and their interactions with charged par- 
ticles streaming from the Sun's and the Earth's magnetic 
field. 

GEOMAGNETIC FIELD 

The magnetic field of force surrounding the Earth. 

GEOMAGNETISM 

The magnetic phenomena, collectively considered, exhibited 
by the Earth and its atmosphere. The magnetic phenomena 
in interplanetary space. 



GEOPHYSICS 

The physics of Earth and its environment. 



GEOPOTENTIAL 

The potential energy of a unit mass relative to sea level, 
numerically equal to the work that would be done in lifting 
the unit mass from sea level to the height at which the mass 
is located. Commonly expressed in terms of dynamic height 
or geopotential height. 



GEOPROBE 

A non recoverable scientific probe to obtain vertical pro- 
files of the atmospheric and ionospheric structures and 
composition. 

GEOSTATIONARY ORBIT 

The path of a satellite that completes a full trip around 
the Earth in the exact time period in which the earth rotates 
once on its axis. A geostationary orbit permits a satellite 
to be seen directly overhead, continuously, at only one 
point in the Earth's surface, and is also called a 24-hour 
orbit or asynchronous orbit. 

GETTERING PUMP 

The final stage pump system used in extremely high vacuum 
systems where several different kinds of pumps are employed 
in series to remove gas from the system. 

GETS 

Ground Equipment Test Set. 

GFE 

Government Furnished Equipment. 

GFP 

Government Furnished Property. 



GIMBAL 

(1) A device with two mutually perpendicular and intersect- 
ing axes of rotation. Provides a free angular movement in 
two directions, on which an engine or other object may be » 
mounted. 

(2) In a gyro, a support which provides the spin axis with 
a degree-of -freedom. 

See— inner gimbal axis 

inter gimbal subassembly 
outer gimbal axis 

GIMBALLED 

Swivelled on two perpendicular and intersecting axes of ro- 
tation so that the gimballea part may be inclined in either 
axis or on a combination of both. 

GIMBALLED ACTUATOR 

A hydraulically controlled mechanism for vehicle guidance 
which produces the necessary forces to move vehicle engines 
in any direction around the centerhne of a suspension device 
holding the engine. 

GIMBALLED MOTOR 

A rocket motor mounted on a gimbal to correct pitching and 
yawing. 

GNOTOBIOTICS 

The study of germ-free animals. 

GO, NO-GO 

A term used to indicate a condition of a part, component, 
system, etc., which can have only two parameters. Go 
(functioning properly) or no-go (not functioning properly). 

GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER GSFC 

NASA'S Goddard Space Flight Center is responsible for 
development of unmanned sounding and Earth orbiting space- 
craft experiments in basic and applied fields. Goddard also 
carries prime responsibility for an extensive tracking, data 
acquisition, and data reduction network. It is located at 
Greenbelt, Maryland. 



GOLDSTONE TRACKING FACILITY 

Radio telescope operated for NASA by Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory (JPL), located at Camp Irwin, Barstow, Calif. 

GOSS 

Ground Operational Support System. 

GOVERNMENT FURNISHED EQUIPMENT GFE 

Government furnished property procured and furnished directly 
to the contractors for inclusion in the system. 

GOVERNMENT FURNISHED PROPERTY GFP 

Property in the possession of, or acquired directly by the 
Government, and delivered or otherwise made available to 
the contractor. 

GOVERNMENT INSPECTION 

Inspection performed, witnessed or participated in, by the 
Government inspector. 



40 



GOVERNMENT STANDARD 

A standard developed by or for a Government activity. 

GOX 

Gaseous oxygen. 

GRADIENTS 

See— gravity gradients 

GRAIN 

Extruded length into which solid propellants are formed. 

GRAVIRECEPTORS 

Specialized nerve endings and organs in skeletal muscles, 
tendons, joints, and in the inner ear, furnishing information 
to the brain on body position, equilibrium, and direction of 
gravitational forces. 

GRAVISPHERE 

Spherical extent in which the force of a given celestial 
body's gravity is predominant in relation to that of other 
celestial bodies. 



GRAVITATION 

Force of mutual attraction between all matter in the universe. 
Varies directly as a proauct ol the bodies' masses and in- 
versely as the square of the distance between them. 



GRAVITOMETER 

As a part of the scientific instrumentation subsystem, this 
instrument will provide the capacility of determining the 
direction and magnitude of tiie Moon's gravitational field. 

GRAVITY 

Force of gravitation which tends to pull objects toward the 
center of mass, giving them weight. 
See—anti gravity 

artificial gravity 

center of gravity 

specific gravity 

zero gravity 

zero gravity effect 

GRAVITY GRADIENTS 

The variation in the force of attraction between two bodies 
expressed as a function of the separation distance. 

GRAVITY WELL 

Analogy in which the gravitational field is considered as a 
deep pit out of which a space vehicle has to climb to escape 
from a planetary body. 

GROSS DESCENT 

Initial departure from the equi-penod orbit to the point of 
the hover and translation maneuver. 

GROUND COMPUTER COMPLEX 

An integral part of the integrated mission control center 
which will be used to support flight simulations and real 
time flight control of manned space flight programs. 



GUIDANCE 

GROUND ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL SYSTEM 

A system which furnishes air or gaseous nitrogen (GN-2) 
etc., at the required humidity and temperature to the space 
vehicle while on the ground to satisfy space vehicle air, 
conditioning and vent gas purging requirements. 

GROUND EQUIPMENT TEST SET GETS 

Test equipment used to verify the operational readiness of 
certain electrical items of GSE prior to mating with the 
vehicle. 

GROUND OPERATIONAL SUPPORT SYSTEM GOSS 

Those equipments, excluding the launch vehicle, space- 
craft, and launch complex, required to be in operation for 
direct support of the mission being accomplished. These 
equipments shall include those used to provide or support 
mission control, guidance and navigation, tracking, tele- 
metry, communications, logistics and recovery operations. 

GROUND SERVICING EQUIPMENT 

This includes tow bars, chocks, cradles, dollies, hoists, 
jacks, ladders, scaffolas, stands, supports, and similar 
items. 

GROUND START 

A propulsion starting sequence through ignition to main 
stage which is initiated and cycled to completion on the 
ground. This is in contrast to an in-flight or air start where 
the starting sequence and power buildup occur in flight at 
sometime after launch. In large rocket vehicles this ground 
start is commonly effected from pressurized propellant tanks 
external to the missile, permitting the vehicle to take off 
with its internal propellant load intact. 

GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT GSE 

The equipment on the ground, including all implements, 
tools, and devices (mobile or fixed), required to inspect, 
test, adjust, calibrate appraise, gauge, measure, repair, 
overhaul, assemble, disassemble, transport, safeguard, re- 
cord, store, or otherwise function in support of a missile 
or vehicle, either in the research and development phase 
or in an operational phase, or in support of the guidance 
system used with the vehicle. 

GSE 

Ground Support Equipment. 

GSE CALIBRATION EQUIPMENT 

Equipment which is required to calibrate the ground support 
equipment. Consists of general purpose laboratory and 
calibration instruments such as oscilloscopes, meters, 
counters, oscillators, gages, etc. 

GSFC 

Goddard Space Flight Center. 

GUIDANCE 

The process of directing the movements of an aeronautical 
vehicle or space vehicle, with particular reference to the 
selection of a flight path or trajectory. 
See— celestial guidance 

homing guidance 

inertial guidance 



41 



GUIDANCE AND CONTROL SYSTEM 

GUIDANCE AND CONTROL SYSTEM 

Comprised of the guidance and navigation system and the 
stabilization control system. 

GUIDANCE AND NAVIGATION SYSTEM 

An inertial quidance system in the Apollo spacecraft which 
provides boost monitoring capability during Earth launch 
and Earth parking orbit and guidance during all other phases 
of spacecraft operation. Separate systems are located in the 
command module (CM) and the lunar excursion module (LEM). 
Major guidance and navigation system components located 
in the CM are: 

(1) Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) 

(2) Sextant (SXT) 

(3) Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) 

(4) Scanning Telescope (SCT) 

(5) Display and Controls (D&C) 

(6) Power and Servo Assembly (PSA) 

(7) Coupling Display Units (CDU) 



GUIDANCE SYSTEM 

One of the systems in a space vehicle designed to put the 
vehicle on a desired trajectory at a desired velocity prior to 
thrust cutoff, or a system in a vehicle that establishes the . 
desired path from launch to target. 

multiple-mode guidance system 

GYRO DRIFT 

The angular rate of change of the spin axis of the gyro as 
it deviates from ideal performance. 

GYROSCOPE 

A device which utilizes the angular momentum of a spinning 
rotor to sense angular motion of its base about one or two 
axes at right angles to the spin axis. Also called 
gyroscope. 

See— cryogenic gyro 

electrostatic gyro 

inertial reference integrating gyro 



42 



H 



H-l ENGINE 

A liquid-propellant rocket engine designed to develop 
188,000 pounds of thrust at sea level. The H-l uses liquid 
oxygen (LOX) and kerosene-base fuel (RP-1) as propellants 
and is used in the first stage of the Saturn launch vehicle. 

HALF-STAGE 

A booster unit in a stage-and-a-half rocket. One or more 
separate rocket engines that utilize the same fuel supply 
as the main engine. The booster engines are jettisoned at 
a predetermined point and the main engines use up the re- 
maining fuel. 

HANDLING EQUIPMENT 

That equipment utilized for handling vehicle stages and 
their subassemblies. This includes hoisting and transport- 
ing equipment. 

HANDLING RING 

A metal ring which can be affixed to the stage external 
structure. The ring provides an attachment point for hoist- 
ing and a support point for the stage in the transporter or 
other horizontal supporting device. 

HANGFIRE 

The delayed ignition of the propellant or the igniter. 

HARD LANDING 

The deliberate destructive impact of a space vehicle on a 
predetermined celestial target. The vehicle is destroyed 
upon impact, hence "hard landing". The object of such a 
space shot is to test propulsion and guidance to prepare the 
way for a soft landing. 

HARD MOCK-UP 

A full-size replica of a spacecraft vehicle or engine incorpo- 
rating all hardware, such as instrumentation, for demonstra- 
tion, training, and testing. 



HARD VACUUM 

A vacuum which approximates the vacuum of space. 



HARDWARE HDW 

The physical objects, as distinguished from their capability 
or function. 

HARDWARE UTILIZATION LIST 

A listing on the quantity of end item hardware used for test 
purposes. 

HARDWIRE LINK 

Direct connection of the vehicle measuring system to the 
recording system through wire. 



HARNESS ASSEMBLY (ELECTRICAL) 

Consists of two or more conductors laced or jacketed to- 
gether and assembled with connectors. 

HDW 

Hardware. 

HEAT EXCHANGER 

A device for transferring heat from one substance to another, 
as by regenerative cooling. 

HEAT SINK 

A relatively cool area in a system which contains or dissi- 
pates heat. 

HEATING 

See— aerodynamic heating 
convective beating 

HEAVISIDE LAYER 

Region of the ionosphere that reflects radio waves back to 
earth. Also called kennelly-heaviside layer. 



HEAVY COSMIC RAY PRIMARIES 

Positively charged nuclei of elements heavier than hydrogen 
and helium up to, but not including, atomic nuclei of iron. 
Comprising about one percent of the total cosmic ray 
particles. 



HELIOCENTRIC 

Measured from the center of the Sun. Related to, or having 
the Sun as a center. 

HELIUM PRESSURIZATION SPHERE 

Spherical pressure vessels used for the storage of helium 
gas. Used in the propellant tanks, helium is released under 
pressure to provide proper ullage in the propellant tanks. 

HEMISPHERICAL EMITTANCE 

Emittance radiating in all directions from the surface. 

HERMETIC SEALING 

Made perfectly airtight by, or as by, fusion so that no gas 
or liquid can enter or escape. 

HETEROGENEITY 

A state or quality. Not originating within the body. 

HETEROSPHERE 

That part of the upper atmosphere wherein the relative pro- 
portions of oxygen, nitrogen, and other gases are unfixed 
and wherein radiation particles and micrometeoroids are 
mixed with air particles. 



43 



HIG 



HIG 

Hermetically-sealed, Integrating Gyros. 

HIGH VACUUM 

The condition in a gas filled space defined as a pressure, 
less than some upper limit, such as one millimeter of 
mercury. 



HORIZONTAL PRE-FLIGHT 
CHECKOUT SYSTEM 

Check-out is accomplished with the vehicle in a horizontal 
position, thereby reducing the requirements for gantries, » 
cranes, and similar items. Upon completion of checkout, 
vehicle is erected into vertical firing position. This system 
is generally usable with smaller vehicles and spacecraft. 



HIGH-ENERGY RADIATION 

Penetrating particle or electromagnetic radiation of more 
than a few thousand electron volts, including electrons, 
neutrons, protons, mesons x-rays and gamma rays. 

HIGH-MASS FRACTION 

High value of the ratio of propellant weight to total motor 
weight. Values of 0.9 and greater characterize high-mass 
fraction motors. 

HIGHWATER 

Study program of ionospheric effects of ice cloud created 
from water ejected from Saturn boosters. 

HINGE MOMENT 

A measure of the tendency of aerodynamic forces acting on 
control surfaces to produce motion about the hinge axis of 
the surface. 

HOHMANN ORBIT 

Proposed minimum energy paths of flight from earth's orbit 
to orbits of other planets. 

HOLD 

Scheduled or unscheduled delay or pause in the launching 
sequence or countdown of a missile or space vehicle. 

HOLDDOWN TEST 

Testing of a system or subsystem in a missile or other ve- 
hicle while the vehicle is restrained in a stand. 

HOLDING FIXTURE 

A device or equipment used to support and position the upper 
launch vehicle stages and the spacecraft modules during 
test, checkout, and handling operations. 



HOLDING POND 

A man made basin into which spilled propellants, deluge 
water, and washdown water are drained from the launch pad, 
launcher area and launcher platform. The pond is so con- 
structed that the water can be drained and the propellants, 
such as RP-1 fuel, can be skimmed for disposal. The hold- 
ing pond is also known as a skimming basin. 



HOMING GUIDANCE 

The guidance of a missile or other vehicle by using an 
internal receiver that is sensitive to infrared or electronic 
emissions at the objective. 

HOMOSPHERE 

That part of the atmosphere made up of atoms and molecules 
found near the Earth's surface and retaining the same rela- 
tive portions of oxygen, nitrogen, and other gases. 



HOT TEST 

A propulsion system test conducted by actually firing the 
propellants. 

HOUSING 

Covering or structures used to enclose space vehicle assem- 
blies and operations. 

HOVER 

A flight condition in which the craft remains in a relatively 
fixed position in flight with respect to some object. 

HOVER AND TRANSLATION MANEUVER 

Manipulation of the lunar excursion module, during the lunar 
descent phase, to remain at a stationary altitude with re- 
spect to the lunar surface and to move in a lateral direction 
above the landing area. 

HP 

Horsepower. 

HUMAN ENGINEERING 

The application of scientific knowledge concerning human 
limitations and performance capabilities to the establishment 
of requirements for the accomplishment of the mission. The 
purpose is to minimize demands upon human skill, training 
and manpower resources, and to maximize the effectiveness 
of man-equipment combinations. 



HUMAN ERROR 

Inaccuracy, mistake, or inconsistency due to the inherent 
characteristics of man. 

HUMAN FACTORS 

Used in a broad sense to cover all biomedical and psycho- 
social considerations pertaining to man in the system. It 
includes principles and applications in the areas of human 
engineering, personnel selection training, life support 
requirements, job performance aids and human performance 
evaluation. 

HYBRID COMPUTER 

A computer of heterogeneous composition, e.g., an analog to 
digital computer as opposed to straight analog or straight 
digital computers. 

HYBRID MOTOR 

A rocket-propulsion unit that burns a combination of propel- 
lants of different composition and characteristics (a liquid 
oxidizer and a solid fuel) to produce a propulsive force. 

HYDRAZINE-BORANE 

Propellant ingredients derived from borane compounds and 
hydrazine. 



44 



HYDRODYNAMIC 

The physics of the motion of fluids, especially water. 

HYDROGEN H 

Lightest chemical element, flammable, colorless, tasteless, 
odorless gas in its uncombined state. Used in liquid state 
as a rocket fuel. 

See— liquid hydrogen 

liquid hydrogen (LH-2) system complex 

HYDROGEN-FLUORINE 

High energy liquid propellants for rocket engines. Hydrogen 
is the fuel and fluorine is the oxidizer. 

HYDROSPHERE 

The water envelope of a planet. 

HYDROSTATIC EFFECTS 

The pressures exerted by a column of liquid under normal 
gravitational conditions on the surface of the earth or in a 
gravitational field during an acceleration. 



HYPERACOUSTIC ZONE 

The region in the upper atmosphere where the distance be- 
tween the rarefied air molecules equals the wave length of 
sound, so that sound is transmitted with less volume than 
at lower levels. Above this zone, sound waves cannot be 
propagated. 

HYPERBOLA 

A conic section made by a plane intersecting a cone of 
revolution at an angle smaller than that of a parabola. The 
value of its eccentricity is greater than one. 

HYPERBOLIC REENTRY 

Reentry at speeds above 37,000 feet per second. 



HYPOXIA 

HYPERGOL 

A rocket fuel or propellant that ignites spontaneously upon 
contact with the oxidizer. A propulsion system that utilizes 
such a fuel. 

HYPERGOLIC FUEL 

Rocket fuel that ignites spontaneously upon contact with the 
oxidizer, thereby eliminating the need for an ignition 
system. 

HYPERSONIC 

Velocities of five or more times the speed of sound in the 
surrounding medium. 

HYPERSONIC FLOW 

In aerodynamics, flow of a fluid over a body at speeds much 
greater than the speed of sound and in which the shock 
waves start at a finite distance from the surface of the 
body. 

HYPERVELOCITY GUN 

Test equipment for accelerating particles to velocity range 
attained by meteoroids in space. The equipment is used in 
investigations of meteoroid damage and methods of meteoroid 
protection. 

HYPERVELOCITY NEUTRAL BEAM 

A directed stream of neutrons, moving at extremely high 
speed. 

HYPOXIA 

Oxygen deficiency in the blood cells or tissues of the body 
in such degree as to cause psychological and physiological 
disturbances. Hypoxia may result from scarcity of oxygen 
in the air being breathed. Or from inability of the body tis- 
sues to absorb oxygen under conditions of low barometric 
pressure. Compare with anoxia. 



45 



I 



1A 

Input axis of the IRIG or the PIP. The axis which is per- 
pendicular to the output axis and at 90 decrees from the 
IRIG spin reference axis or the PIP pendulous reference 
axis. Movement along this axis results in a displacement 
of the signal generator which indicates, respectively, 
angular motion in the IRIG'S reference plane or acceleration 
in the PIPA'S reference plane. 

IA FREEDOM 

The angle of rotation from null position permitted by 
mechanical stops in the IRIG and the PIP. 

IC 

Inertial Component. 

ICE FROST 

Ice on the outside of a rocket vehicle over surfaces super- 
cooled by liquid oxygen. 



IMP 

Inflatable Micrometeoroid Paraqlider. 
Interplanetary Monitoring Probe. 

IMPLEMENTATION 

The process of putting into effect and accomplishing a 
program plan. 

IMPORTANCE FACTOR OR 
CRITICALITY FACTOR 

The relative importance of the particular system to the total 
mission effectiveness. The ratio of the number of mission 
failures due to the equipment failing to the total number of 
failures of the equipment. 

IMPULSE 

A sudden unidirectional force of non-repeated form or 
character. 

See— specific impulse 



ICTE 

Inertial Component Test Equipment. 



IMU 

Inertial Measurement Unit. 



IFTS 

In-Flight Test System. 

IGA 

Inner Gimbal Axis. 

IGNITION 

The initiation of combustion of a rocket engine. 



IGNITION LAG 

The time interval measured from the instant that electrical 
contact is made to the first perceptible rise of pressure or 
thrust (whichever occurs first). 



IGS 

Inter Gimbal Subassembly. 

IGY 

International Geophysical Year. 

ILCCS 

Integrated Launch Control and Checkout System. 

IMCC 

Integrated Mission Control Center. 



IMU GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT IMUGSE 

Proposed module of equipment which could be used to 
operate the IMU during development, manufacturing, and 
test phases. 

IMUGSE 

IMU Ground Support Equipment. 

IN-FLIGHT TEST SYSTEM IFTS 

A test system in the command module (CM) for providing 
the flight crew with a rapid check on the status of the space- 
craft systems and for isolating a malfunction. The system 
provides a centralized panel with a qo-no-qo test point 
readout and a coded readout, showinq which system or sub- 
system failed. A means for manual testing and maintenance 
instructions is provided. 

INCIDENT RADIATION 

Radiant energy impinging on a surface per-unit-time and 
per-unit-area. Also called irradiation or flux density. 

INCLINATION 

An angle between two lines or two planes such as the angle 
between the plane of an orbit and a reference plane. 

INDEPENDENT FAILURES 

Those failures which occur or can occur without being 
related to the malfunctioning of associated items. 



IMMEDIATE ENVIRONMENT 

The environmental conditions local and surrounding each 
individual part under the conditions of specified end use. 



INDEPENDENT VARIABLE 

Arbitrary variable which the designer has some freedom to 
establish. Once selected, the variable influences such sys- 



46 



INITIATOR 



tern characteristics as performance and weight at the design 
point. 

INDICATORS 

Instruments which interpret and present information pertain- 
ing to conditions or situation at a distant or inconvenient 
place. 

See— multiple-legend indicator lights 

INDIVIDUAL OPERATIONAL TEST 

A test performed on all equipments to insure operation for 
major characteristics only. This type of test usually pre- 
cedes an individual reliability test. 

INDIVIDUAL RELIABILITY TEST 

This is usually a burn-in of all equipment for a specified 
time. During the course of the test changes in major char- 
acteristics, as established in the individual operational 
tests, are studied and corrective action taken. 

INDUCED ENVIRONMENT 

The state or conditions which exist due to the interaction of 
the natural environment and the test subject. 

INDUSTRY STANDARD 

A standard developed and promulgated by a technical society, 
trade association, or federation. 

INERTIA WHEEL 

A rotating mass used to absorb minor torques created during 
the stabilization and control of a spacecraft. 

INERTIAL COMPONENT IC 

The inertial reference intergrating gyros (IRIG) and the 
pulsed intergrating pendulum (PIP) that establish the iner- 
tial reference plane or sense accelerations. These com- 
ponents are located in the inertial measurement unit (IMU). 

INERTIAL COMPONENT TEST EQUIPMENT ICTE 

The complex of units designed to perform all acceptance, 
performance surveillance and preassembly tests of the iner- 
tial components of the inertial measurement unit (IMU). 

INERTIAL FORCE 

The force produced by the reaction of a body to an accelera- 
ting force, equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to 
the accelerating force. Inertial force endures only as long 
as the accelerating force endures. 



INERTIAL GUIDANCE 

A type of guidance for a missile or space vehicle effected 
by means of mechanisms that automatically adjust the vehicle 
after launching to follow a given flight path. The mechan- 
isms measure inertial forces during periods of acceleration, 
integrate the data obtained with already-known position and 
velocity and signal the controls to effect the desired direc- 
tion, altitude, etc. 

INERTIAL MEASUREMENT UNIT IMU 

A three-gimbal stabilized platform which consists of pulsed 
integrating pendulum accelerometers (PIPA), inertial refer- 
ence integrating gyros (IRIG) and resolver output. 



INERTIAL PLATFORM 

A gyro-stabilized reference platform, 
system. 



Part of a guidance 



INERTIAL REFERENCE INTEGRATING GYRO IRIG 

A single-degree-of-freedom gyro. It contains a gyro wheel, 
a floated gimbal in which the wheel is mounted, a torque 
generator, and a signal generator. Three IRIG's mounted on 
the stable member maintain a reference for the nonrotating 
space-oriented axes of the IMU. 

INFANT MORTALITY 

Premature destructive failure occurring at a rate substan- 
tially greater than observed during subsequent life prior to 
wearout. Infant mortality may be reduced by stringent qual- 
ity control and eliminated by appropriate screening. 

INFLAMMABLE 

Capable of bursting into flame when a spark or open flame 
is passed sufficiently near, as with fumes and vapors from 
hot oils or volatile combustible liquids and with finely 
powdered combustible solids. 
See— flammable 

INFLATABLE MICROMETEOROID 

PARAGLIDER IMP 

Recoverable system for measuring meteoroid flux in near 
space. 

INFRARED 

Electromagnetic radiation in the wavelength interval from 
the red end of the visible spectrum on the lower limit to 
microwaves used in radar on the upper limit. 



INFRARED LIGHT 

Light in which the rays lie just below the red end of the 
visible spectrum. 



INGRESS 

The act of, or the mechanism for, entrance to an enclosure. 
In spacecraft this can relate to the act of a crew member 
entering the space vehicle or it can describe the entrance 
chamber, pressure lock and hatchways. 



INHERENT RELIABILITY 

The reliability potential in the design as determined prior 
to manufacturing, handling, transportation, maintenance, 
storage and use. 

INHIBITOR 

A substance bonded, taped or dip-dried, onto a solid propel- 
lant to restrict the burning surface and to give direction to 
the burning. 

INITIAL FAILURE 

The first failure to occur in use. 

INITIATOR 

A unit which receives electrical or detonation energy and 
produces a chemical deflagration reaction. 



47 



INJECTION 



INJECTION 

The process of putting an artificial satellite into orbit. 
Also the time oi such action. 
See— Ion injection 

lunar trajectory injection vehicle 

INJECTION ALTITUDE 

Height at which the vehicle is turned from its launch tra- 
jectory into an orbital trajectory. 

INJECTION VEHICLE 

The launch vehicle system which provides for the injection 
of the spacecraft into a lunar transfer orbit. 
See— lunar trajectory injection vehicle 

INJECTION WEIGHT 

The weight of the vehicle at the termination of one phase of 
a mission that is continued in the succeeding phase. 

INLET 

An entrance or orifice for the admission of fluids or gases. 
See— variable geometry inlet 

INNER GIMBAL AXIS IGA 

The axis of rotational freedom between the stable member 
and the middle gimbal of the IMU. 



INSEPARABLE ASSEMBLY DRAWING 

Depicts items permanently joined to form an integral unit. 



INSP 

Inspection. 

INSPECTION INSP 

The process of measuring, examining, testing, gaging, or 
otherwise comparing the unit of product with the applicable 
requirements. 

See— acceptance inspection 

average total inspection 

comparison inspection 

destination inspection 

development engineering inspection 

mock-up inspection 

normal inspection 

one hundred percent inspection 

INSPECTION BY ATTRIBUTES 

Inspection wherein the unit of product is classified simply 
as defective or non-defective with respect to g given require- 
ment or set of requirements. 

INSPECTION BY VARIABLES 

Inspection wherein a specified quality characteristic of a 
unit or product is measured on a continuous scale and 
recorded. 

INSPECTION LEVEL 

Used to indicate the relative number of sample units for a 
given amount of product. All other things being equal, a 
higher inspection level entails a lower risk of acceptance 
of a lot of inferior quality. 



INSPECTION LOT 

A collection of units of product manufactured or processed 
under substantially the same conditions and offered for in- 
spection at one time or during a fixed period of time. » 
See— moving inspection lot 

INSTALLATION 

A system of machinery or apparatus placed in functional 
position for use. 

INSTALLATION DRAWING 

Shows general configurations, attaching hardware, and infor- 
mation to locate, position, ana mount an item relative to 
fixed points and to other items. 

INSTRUMENT UNIT IU 

In the Saturn series, an adapter section or module between 
the launch vehicle and spacecraft. It houses the guidance 
systems, telemetry equipment, power sunply, RF systems 
and in-flight instrument-unit air conditioning equipment. 

INSTRUMENTATION 

The installation and use of electronic, gyroscopic, and other 
instruments and sensors for the purpose of aetecting, measur- 
ing, recording, telemetering, processing, or analyzing differ- 
ent values or quantities as encountered in the flight of a 
missile or spacecraft. Instrumentation applies to both 
flight-borne and ground-based equipment. 
See— red-line instrumentation 

INSTRUMENTATION SYSTEM 

Combined measuring and telemetering systems. 

INTEG 

Integration. 

INTEGRAL TANK 

A fuel or oxidizer tank built within the normal contours of 
the aircraft or missile ana using the skin of the vehicle as 
part of the walls of the tank. 

INTEGRATED MISSION CONTROL CENTER IMCC 

The IMCC, located at Clear Lake, near Houston, will have 
the capability of monitoring the spacecraft and directing the 
support elements for all phases of the Apollo missions, in- 
cluding unmanned and manned Earth-orbital and lunar flights. 
The IMCC utilizes the services provided to it by the Launch 
Control Center, the Global Tracking and Communication 
Networks, the computer complex at Houston, the recovery 
control centers and forces, and the data reduction facilities. 

INTEGRATION INTEG 

The process of assuring that the major elements of a pro- 
gram be conceived, designed, assembled, tested, operated, 
and documented in such a manner as to be compatible with 
each other and to satisfy the program objectives. 

INTEGRATION, TRANSPORT AND 
LAUNCH CONCEPT 

A concept where space vehicle assembly, payload integra- 
tion, and complete checkout are performed in an area remote 
from the launch pad and the entirely assembled space ve- 
hicle system is transported to the launch pad to be fueled. 



48 



ION JET 



INTER GIMBAL SUBASSEMBLY IGS 

The subassembly by whicn the gimbal case, gimbals, and 
stable member are attached to each otnei. 

INTERACTION EFFECT 

Those effects which various components, subsystems, and 
systems demonstrate when combiner into higher level 
assemblies. 

INTERCHANGEABILITY 

A condition of design ensuring that all mating parts will 
assemble and function properly without the need for any 
selecting, machining or fitting at assembly. 
See—complete interchangeahility 
selected interchangeahility 

INTERCHANGEABLE ITEM 

When two or more items have the same functional and physi- 
cal characteristics as to be equivalent in performance and 
durability and are capable of Deing exchanged one for the 
other. 

INTERCONNECTING CABLE 

An assembly of one or more insulated, parallel, or twisted 
electrical conductors having both ends terminated with fit- 
tings for connections to con.ponents, subsystems, and 
systems. 

INTERCONNECTION DIAGRAM 

A diagrammatic drawing that shows the external connections 
between assemblies or systems. 



INTERDEPENDENT ASSEMBLY OR 
UNIT OF EQUIPMENT 

Dependent upon one or more other parts of the design item 
in order to perform its intended function. 

INTERFACE 

The point or area where a relationship exists between two 
or more parts, systems, programs, persons, or procedures 
wherein physical and functional compatibility is required. 

INTERFACE DRAWING 

The engineering drawing which graphically or discriptively 
displays the conditions of the interface which exist between 
assemblies. 

INTERFACE PROBLEMS 

Problems which pertain to a boundary common to two or 
more components or functions. 

INTERFERENCE FIT 

One having limits of size so prescribed that an interference 

INTERFEROMETER 

An apparatus used to produce and measure interference from 
two or more coherent wave trains from the same source. 

INTERIOR BALLISTICS 

The branch of ballistics concerned with the behavior, motion, 
appearance, or modification of a missile when acted upon by 
the ignition and burning of a propellant. 



INTERNATIONAL QUIET SUN YEAR IQSY 

In 1965, solar flares and disturbances will be at a periodic 
low level, during which, scientists throughout the world will 
cooperatively engage in the study o! the . : jun. * 

INTERPLANETARY 

Between planets. 

INTERPLANETARY MONITORING PROBE IMP 

Designed to provide detailed .measurement of the radiation 
environment between Earth and Moon. Characteristics of 
particle fluxes from the Sun, tne interplanetary magnetic 
field, and solar-teirestnal relationship will be studied. 

INTERQUARTILE RANGE 

The distance between the upper and lower quartiles. 

INTERSTAGE 

Between stages. 

INTERSTELLAR 

Between stars. 

INVERTER 

An electrical or electronic device for the conversion of 
electrical power from DC to AC. 



IOC 



Initial Operational Capability. 



ION 



An electrically charged atom or group of atoms. A positively 
charged ion is an atom or group of atoms with a deficiency 
of electrons. A negatively charged ion is an atom or group 
of atoms with an addea electron. 



ION BEAM NEUTRALIZATION 

The supplying of negatively charged electrons to a positively 
charged high velocity stream of ions in order to provide a 
neutral or uncharged stream that will not be slowed down or 
held by the electrostatic field in an ion jet. 

ION CHAMBER 

An instrument used to determine the presence of charged 
particles. 

ION ENGINE 

Projected type of engine in which the thrust to propel the 
missile or spacecraft is obtainea from a stream of ionized 
atomic particles, generatea by atomic fusion, fission, or 
solar energy. 

ION INJECTION 

The introduction of ions into the interelectrode area of a 
thermionic generator to enhance tne flow of electrons through 
neutralization of the space charge. 

ION JET 

An electric rocket system in which positively charged parti- 
cles are generated and subsequently accelerated and ejected 
by the use of a negatively charged electric field. 



49 



ION SOURCES 

ION SOURCES 

The component of an ion jet that removes electrons from 
the propellant to produce positively charged ions. 

IONIZATION 

Being ionized or being dissociated into ions. 
See— contact ionization 
surface ionization 

IONIZE 

Change into ions, become electrically charged, as a gas 
under the influence of heat, electron bombardment, and 
nuclear radiation. 

IONIZED LAYERS 

Layers of increased ionization within the ionosphere. Re- 
sponsible for absorption and reflection of radio waves and 
important in connection with communication and the tracking 
of satellites and other space vehicles. 



IONIZED PLASMA SHEATH 

A layer of ionized particles closely surrounding an elec- 
trode. Especially such a layer around a spacecraft during 
reentry when it may interrupt or interfere with ground space- 
craft communications. 

IONOSPHERE 

An outer belt, of the Earth's atmosphere in which radiations 
from the Sun ionize, or excite electrically, the atoms and 
molecules of the atmospheric gases. 



IQSY 

International Quiet Sun Year. 

IRIG 

Irvertial Reference Integrating Gyro. 
Inter-Range Instrumentation Group (NASA). 

IRIS 

A solid-propellant upper atmosphere sounding rocket. 

IRRESOLVABLE COMPONENTS 

Those components which cannot be separated into com- 
ponent parts or whose internal configuration or operation is 
withheld from the user by a proprietory information agreement. 

ISOSTATIC 

Under equal pressure from every side. 

ISOTHERMAL REGION 

The stratosphere considered as a region of uniform 
temperature. 

ISOTROPIC 

In general, pertaining to a state in which a quantity or spatial 
derivitives thereof are independent of direction. 

IU 

Instrument Unit. 

IVORY TOWER 

Colloquial term for vertical test stand. 



50 



J 



J-2 ENGINE 

A liquid-propellant rocket engine which supplies about 
200,000 pounds of thrust at altitude. 

JERK 

A vector that specifies the time rate of change of an acceler- 
ation. The third derivative of displacement with respect 
to time. 

JET 

See— control jet 
plasma jet 

JET EDUCT0R 

A device used in conjunction with a fuel transfer pump to 
drain the fuel transfer line. Part of the RP-1 fuel system 
complex. 

JET PROPULSION LABORATORY JPL 

Operated for NASA, under contract, by the California Insti- 
tute of Technology. Its prime mission is the development 
of spacecraft for unmanned lunar and planetary space ex- 
ploration and for operation of a world-wide-deep-space 
tracking and control network. The main laboratories and 
offices are in Pasadena, Calif. A test station is located at 
Edwards, Calif, and the Goldstone Tracking Station, operated 
by JPL, is on the Camp Irwin Military Reservation about 
thirty miles north of Barstow, Calif, in the Mojave Desert. 

JET STEERING 

The use of fixed or movable gas jets on a missile to steer 
it along a desired trajectory during propelled and coasting 
flight. 



JET STREAM 

The stream of gas or fluid expelled by any reaction device. 
Also, a narrow band of high velocity wind, especially near 
the base of the stratosphere. 



JETAVATOR 

A control surface that may be moved into or against a rock- 
et's jet stream to change direction of the jet flow for thrust 
vector control. 



JOB TRAINING STANDARD JTS 

A standard of proficiency to be attained and maintained by 
members of a unit, established to assure accomplishment of 
the mission. 



J0DRELL BANK 

Site of a large radio telescope with a paraboloidal receiver 
(250 feet in length, sixty feet deep) used to track space 
probes. Located near Manchester, England. 



JPL 

Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

JTS 

Job Training Standard. 

JUNO II 

4-stage launch vehicle using Jupiter and Sergeant engines. 



51 



K 



K-BAND 

Frequencies m the region of 30,000 megacycles per second. 



KEPLER'S LAWS 

Three empirical laws describing the motions of planets in 
their orbits. 

(1) The orbits of the planets are ellipses, v/ith the Sun at a 
common focus. 

(2) As a planet moves in its orbit, the line joining the planet 
and Sun sweeps over equal areas in equal intervals of time. 
Also called laws of equal areas. 

(3) The squares of the periods of revolution of any two plan- 
ets are proportional to the cubes of their mean distances 
from the Sun. 



KEPLERIAN TRAJECTORY 

Elliptical orbits described by celestial bodies according to 
Kepler's first law of celestial motion. 



KINETICS 

The science that deals with the motion of masses in relation 
to the forces acting on them. 



KIT 

. See— modification kit 

transportation handling kit 

KIT DRAWING 

Depicts a packaged unit, item, or group of items, instruc- 
tions, photographs, and drav/ings, used in modification, 
installation, or survival, but which in themselves do not 
necessarily constitute a complete functioning engineering 
assembly. A kit drawing usually includes a listing of all 
item numbers, commercial products, and hardware to com- 
plete a modification or installation. 

KIWI 

Series of developmental studies by the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission with goal of developing nuclear reactors useful in 
high-thrust rocket engines. 

KNOT 

A nautical mile. 

KURTOSIS 

The relative steepness of ascent in the vicinity of the mode 
in a frequency distribution, peakedness as opposed to 
flatness. 



52 



L 



LABORATORY CALIBRATION TEST 

Tests to determine if the measuring devices or component 
is within specifications. 

LAMINAR FLOW 

A nonturbulent air flow made up of thin parallel layers over 
and about a nosecone or other surface. 

LANDING 

See— Earth landing system 
hard landing 
power landing 
soft landing 

LANGLEY RESEARCH CENTER LRC 

One of NASA'S field installations. The mission of the 
Langley Research Center is research on a broad scale into 
vehicle configurations, materials and structures for space 
and aeronautics. It is located at Langley Field, Hampton, 
Virginia. 



LANGMUIR THEORY 

The assumption that the extra-nuclear electrons in an atom 
are arranged in shells corresponding to the periods of the 
periodic system. 



LASER 

Light amplification through stimulated electromagnetic 
radiation. An advanced amplification device using precise 
crystal cores at very low temperatures. 



LATERAL-DIRECTIONAL CROSS-COUPLING 

Interaction of two modes of motion of a space vehicle which 
results in change of the attitude of the vehicle. 

LAUNCH 

Initial motion in transition from static repose to dynamic 
flight. The moment when the vehicle is no longer supported 
by the launcher. 

See—vertical launch 

LAUNCH AZIMUTH 

The angle of the launch plane as measured clockwise from 
true north. 

LAUNCH COMPLEX 34 |_C 34 

A single launch pad configuration used to support the 
launches of the Saturn I, Block I vehicles. The general 
launch complex area is composed of the following facilities; 
Launch pad, launch pedestal, launch deflector, umbilical 
tower, automatic ground control station (AGGS), service 
structure, launch control center (LCC), operations support 



building, RP-1 system, liquid oxygen system, and a high 
pressure gas system. 

LAUNCH COMPLEX 37 LC 37 

A launch site situated approximately 3800-feet North of 
Launch Complex 34. The complex consists of two launch 
pads and is used to support ana launcn Saturn I, Block II 
operational vehicles. A significant feature of the complex 
is the advance design and configuration which permits the 
accomplishment of an accelerated launch schedule in sup- 
port of the preliminary requirements of the Saturn V. 

LAUNCH COMPLEX 39 LC 39 

This complex, to be erected at the Uerntt Island Launch 
Area (MILA), will provide the facilities and equipment re- 
quired to receive, assemble, checkout, and launch Saturn V 
vehicles with pay loads. It incorporates the mobile concept 
of launch operations which employs the following basic 
features; 

(1) Vertical assembly of the entire launch vehicle in a 
specially equipped building away from the launch pad. 

(2) Transfer to launch pad is accomplished with the vehicle 
assembled in a vertical position on the launcher. 

(3) Automatic checkout of components and systems will be 
provided with the capability of continuous checkout. 

LAUNCH CONTROL CENTER LCC 

Centralized over-all control point for all phases of pre- 
launch and launch operations at tne launch facility on a 
specific program. Handover of control to mission control 
center occurs at separation of the space vehicle from all 
hard ground connections. 

LAUNCH ESCAPE PROPULSION SYSTEM LEPS 

A cluster of solid propellant motors mounted atop the com- 
mand module. The motors generate sufficient thrust to remove 
the command module from the booster in event of booster 
failure. 

LAUNCH ESCAPE SYSTEM LES 

A tower-like structure mounted on top of the command 
module. Propulsion is provided by a solid-fuel motor with 
step or regressive burning characteristics. The LES pro- 
vides an abort capability, until after it is jettisonned follow- 
ing second-stage ignition, by removing the command module 
(CM) to a safe distance from the launch vehicle in the event 
of a booster failure or imminent failure. 

LAUNCH ESCAPE SYSTEM SIMULATOR 

An auxiliary item of equipment used to facilitate spacecraft 
systems checkout, through simulation of actual launch es- 
cape system functions. When connected to the command 
module (CM), the simulator receives and measures electrical 
signals, determines from signal characteristics if the signals 
would reliably operate the launch escape systems, and 



53 



LAUNCH OPERATION CENTER 



transmits results of measurement and analysis to the CM 
system test group. Specific launch escape system functions 
to be simulated include; yaw, engine start, thrust-chamber 
nozzle start, and jettison-motor start. 

LAUNCH OPERATION CENTER LOC 

Responsible for the over-all planning and supervision of the 
integration, test, checkout, and launch of space vehicle sys- 
tems at the Atlantic Missile Range. 

LAUNCH PAD 

The load-bearing base or platform from which a rocket ve- 
hicle is launched. Usually called pad. 

LAUNCH PEDESTAL 

A reinforced concrete or steel structure which is capable of 
supporting and retaining space and launch vehicles in a 
launch attitude. The launch pedestal is sometimes called 
launch pad or considered part of the launch pad. 

LAUNCH RING 

The metal ring on the launch pad on which a missile stands 
before launch. 

LAUNCH SUPPORT AND HOLDDOVKN ARM 

Equipment which provides direct support for a portion of the 
dead weight of the space vehicle and retains the vehicle 
on the launch pad or platform during the thrust buildup 
period. It is part of the launch support and holddown arm 
system and is usually located and anchored at the top of 
the launch pedestal or platform. 



LAUNCH SUPPORT ARM 

Part of the launch support and holddown arm system. 

LAUNCH UMBILICAL TOWER LUT 

A deep truss frame platform upon which a steel tower-like 
structure, which is used to support and service the umbilical 
arms, is located. The tower also supports and houses equip- 
ment required to perform certain service and checkout func- 
tions on the space vehicle prior to launch. 



LAUNCH WINDOW 

The mission conditions which impose launch time limitations 
on the launch vehicle for any given trajectory such as rela- 
tive position of Earth and moon or planets, mid-course pro- 
pulsion capabilities, guidance limits, etc. 

LAUNCHER 

A device for holding the space vehicle in its intended launch- 
ing attitude and for imparting control and thrust (catapult) 
during its initial phase of movement until it becomes 
airborne. 

See— transporter/ launcher 

LAUNCHER DEFLECTOR 

Device composed of steel or reinforced concrete, or a com- 
bination of both, which deflects the booster engine flame 
into controlled directions. 

LAUNCHER-TRANSPORTER 

Mobile steel frame (crawler-type) vehicle which transports 
the arming tower between pads, and launcher/umbilical 
towers and space vehicles between the vertical assembly 
building and pads. 
LAYER 

See— boundary layer 
heaviside layer 
ionized layers 

LCC 

Launch Control Center. 

LEAKAGE SYSTEM 

See— controlled leakage system 

LEM 

Lunar excursion module. 

LEM PROPULSION SYSTEM 

A propulsion system in the lunar excursion module (LEM) 
designed to provide velocity increments in the LEM for 
descent, touchdown, ascent, and rendezvous. 



LAUNCH VEHICLE LV 

The part of the space vehicle which furnishes the propulsion 
and guidance during the initial part of the trajectory to pro- 
vide the prescribed velocity, position, and attitude required 
for injection into the desired trajectory. Launch vehicles 
are commonly called boosters and consist of two or more 
propulsive stages. 

See— operational launch vehicle 

LAUNCH VEHICLE SIMULATOR 

Equipment that presents to the service and command module 
(CSM) an interface which is electrically similar to the 
launch vehicle. It accepts control signals from the CSM 
and produces system responses to facilitate a complete 
functional checkout and test of the command and service 
module functions. 

LAUNCH VEHICLE SYSTEM 

The launch vehicle (flight hardware) and all equipment 
associated with flight preparation. 



LEM TRUCK 

The unmanned version of the lunar excursion module capable 
of delivering 4,000 to 7,000 pounds payload to the lunar 
surface. 

LENGTH OF LIFE 

The term "length of life" and "time to failure" shall be used 
interchangeably and shall denote the length of time it takes 
for a unit of product to fail after being placed on life test. 

LENGTHY TARRYING CAPABILITY 

The ability to remain in the vicinity of a planetary body for 
a considerable period of time, as in orbit. 

LENTICULAR SHAPES 

Reentry configurations having the general shape of a convex 
lens. 

LEO 

Librating Equidistant Observer (satellite concept). 



54 



LIQUID OXYGEN SYSTEM COMPLEX 



LEPS 

Launch Escape Propulsion System. 

LES 

Launch Escape System. 



LEVEL 

See— acceptable quality level 

acceptable reliability level 
inspection level 
significance level 
sound plane level 



LEVELED THRUST 

A rocket power plant equipped with a programmer or engine- 
control unit that maintains the output at a relatively con- 
stant thrust. 

LEWIS RESEARCH CENTER LRC 

Initiates and conducts basic and applied research in pro- 
pulsion and space flight, located at Cleveland, Ohio. 

LIBRATION 

A real or apparent oscillatory motion, particularly the ap- 
parent oscillation of the Moon. 

LIFE SCIENCE 

Generally used to describe the science of adapting the 
physiological and psychological requirements of man to 
spacecraft and space flight. 

LIFE SUPPORT 

The term encompasses the entire areas of biological, physio- 
logical, and medical sciences which provide the basic data 
to define and establish the physiological criteria required to 
insure maximum pilot safety. 



LIMIT 

See— confidence limits 

nominal stress limits 
nonstressed limits 
probability limits 
sigma limits 
stressed limits 
minimum material limit 

LIMIT DIMENSIONING SYSTEM 

Indicates the largest and smallest permissible dimensions. 

LIMIT LOAD 

The maximum load calculated to be experienced by the 
structure under specified conditions of operation. 

LIMIT PRESSURE 

The maximum operating pressure or operating pressure in- 
cluding the effect of system environment, such as vehicle 
acceleration, etc. For hydraulic and pneumatic equipment, 
limit pressure will exclude the effect of surge. 

LIMITED LIFE ITEMS 

Items that because of their nature have a life which exceeds 
the ground checkout time plus the mission time, but which 
normally would require replacement or refurbishing before 
the next mission. 

See— critical and limited life 
item refurbishment 

LIMITED SUBSTITUTE 

An item that can replace or be replaced by another item 
under certain conditions or in some particular applications. 



LIMITS OF A DIMENSION 

The maximum and minimum values acceptable for that 
dimension. 



LIFE TEST 

Those tests conducted to verify and qualify hardware from 
an endurance or life standpoint. Life test shall be conducted 
at design levels for the required operational cycles. 

LIFE-TEST MODEL 

Prototype equipment operated until it fails to determine its 
life expectancy. 

LIFT DRAG RATIO 

The ratio of the lifting force to the drag force for either an 
isolated wing or a complete aircraft. This ratio is used in 
determining the rate of descent of a space vehicle in the 
atmosphere. 

LIFTOFF 

The initial motion of a space vehicle or ballistic missile 
as it rises from the launch stand. The takeoff. 

LIGHT FILTER TRANSMITTANCE 

The ratio of transmitter light to incident light, uncorrected 
for surface reflection losses. 



LINE OF POSITION 

In navigation, a line representing all possible locations of 
a craft at a given instant. 



LIQUID HYDROGEN 

Supercooled hydrogen gas, usually used as a rocket fuel. 

LIQUID HYDROGEN SYSTEM COMPLEX 

Refers to all the facilities and facility equipments used for 
receiving, handling, storing, pressurizing, conditioning, 
controlling, and monitoring the liquid hydrogen (LH-2) from 
time of receipt at the pad to the loading of the vehicle tanks. 

LIQUID OXYGEN LOX 

Supercooled oxygen used as the oxidizer in many liquid fuel 
engines. 

LIQUID OXYGEN (LOX) SYSTEM COMPLEX 

Refers to all the facilities and facility equipments used for 
receiving, handling, storing, pressurizing, conditioning, 
controlling, and monitoring the LOX from time of receipt at 
the LOX pad to the loading of the vehicle tanks. 



55 



LIQUID PROPELLANT 



LIQUID PROPELLANT 

A liquid ingredient used in the combustion chamber of a 
rocket engine. 

LIQUID-AIR CYCLE ENGINE 

An advanced engine cycle which uses liquid hydrogen fuel 
to condense air entering an inlet. Liquid oxygen is sepa- 
rated from the condensed air and pumped to the combustion 
chamber where it is burned with the hydrogen to produce 
thrust. 

LITTLE JOE 

Mercury test launch vehicle. 

LITTLE JOE II 

Apollo test launch vehicle. 

LIVE 

Lunar Impact Vehicle. 



LOCKUP 

The differential between output pressure with zero flow 
and output pressure with rated flow. 
See— dynamic lockup 

LOGIC DIAGRAM 

A diagrammatic drawing that employs logic symbols with 
interconnecting lines to illustrate system operation. 

LOGISTIC REQUIREMENTS 

Material requirements established as necessary to maintain 
or restore a system to an operational status. 

LONGITUDINAL AXIS 

The fore-and-aft line through the center of gravity of a 
craft. 

LOR 

Lunar Orbit Rendezvous. 



LLS 

Lunar Logistics System. 



LORAN 

Long Range Navigation. 



LLV 

Lunar Logistics Vehicle. 



LOAD 

See— dynamic load 
fatigue loads 
limit load 
thermal load 
yield strength load factor 



LOAD ALLEVIATOR 

See— frangible tube load alleviator 

multiable air bag load alleviator 



LOAD FACTOR 

The factor by which the steady-state loads are multiplied to 
obtain the equivalent static effect of dynamic loads. 
See— yield strength load factor 



LOT 

Consists of units of product manufactured to the same re- 
quirements of contract, drawings, and specifications under 
the same manufacturing methods. Maximum and minimum 
lot sizes shall be to specific instructions. 
See— inspection lot 



LOT QUALITY 

The ratio of the number of units defective to the total 
number of units. 



LOT SIZE 

A specific quantity of similar material, collection, or similar 
units from a common source. In inspection work, the quantity 
offered for inspection and acceptance at any one time. It 
may be a collection of raw material, parts, or subassemblies, 
inspected during production or a consignment of finished 
product to be sent out for service. 



LOC 

Launch Operations Center. 



LOW EARTH ORBIT 

An orbit which is not high enough for the spacecraft to stay 
in space for an infinite length of time. A decaying orbit. 



LOCAL VERTICAL 

The direction in which the force of gravity acts at a partial- LOX 

lar point. Liquid Oxygen. 



LOCALIZATION 

The procedure for determining the failed component in a 
system or equipment. 



LRC 

Langley Research Center. 
Lewis Research Center. 



LOCATION DIMENSION 

Specifies the position or distance relationship of one 
feature of an object with respect to another. 



LUNAR 

Of or pertaining to the Moon. 



56 



LUNAR ATMOSPHERE ANALYZER 

As a part of the scientific instrumentation subsystem, this 
instrument provides the capability of determining the quan- 
tative and qualitative composition of the lunar atmosphere. 
It may also be used as a backup component for determining 
the cabin atmosphere partial pressure in the LEM. 

LUNAR EXCURSION MODULE LEM 

One module of the three-module Apollo spacecraft. It will 
effect the landing on the Moon. The two-man module will 
detach from the Apollo spacecraft command and service 
modules while in lunar orbit, descend to the lunar surface, 
and then return the two men to the command and service 
modules. 



LYMAN-ALPHA SCANNER 

LUNAR ROVING VEHICLE 

A vehicle designed to facilitate exploration of the lunar 
surface and to operate as a cargo transporter. 



LUT 

Launch umbilical tower. 



LUNAR IMPACT VEHICLE 

A study of hard landing on the Moon. 



LIVE 



LUNAR ORBIT RENDEZVOUS LOR 

A mode involving rendezvous and coupling, fueling, or 
transfer in a lunar parking orbit. 



LV 

Launch vehicle. 



LVOD 

Launch Vehicles Operations Division. 

LYMAN-ALPHA SCANNER 

An instrument used to detect and measure a prominent red 
line in the spectrum of hydrogen present in the sun's 
atmosphere. 



57 



M 



M-l ENGINE 

A liquid-propellant rocket engine. The M-l engine uses 
liquid oxygen (LOX) and liquid hydrogen (LH-2) as 
propelkmts. 

MACH 

A unit of speed measurement for a moving object equal to 
the speed of sound in the medium in which the object trav- 
els. Mach I, under standard conditions at sea level, is 
about 759 miles per hour. It decreases with altitude. 



develops the greatest amount of thrust. In a stage and a 
half rocket, it is the sustainer engine. 

MAINT 

Maintenance. 

MAINTAINABILITY 

The quality of the combined features of item design and 
installation which facilitates the accomplishment of inspec- 
tion, test, servicing, repair and overhaul with minimum time, 
skill, and resources. 



MACH NUMBER 

The ratio of a velocity to the speed of sound at ambient 
conditions. 

See— force-break mach number 



MAINTAINABILITY INDEX 

A quantitative figure of merit which relates the maintain- 
ability of a system or equipment to a standard reference. 



MAGNETIC LATCHING 

A particular type of relay operation wherein one pulse is 
required for energizing and a second pulse is required for 
deenergizing (one pulse for setting and a second pulse for 
reversing the mated contacts). 



MAGNETIC MERIDIAN 

A great circle of the Earth passing through the magnetic 
poles. 



MAINTAINABILITY PARAMETERS 

A group of factors or environmental, human and design 
features which affect the performance of maintenance on an 
equipment. 



MAINTAINABILITY REQUIREMENT 

A comprehensive statement of required characteristics, ex- 
pressed in quantitative terms, to be incorporated in system, 
subsystem, and component design. 



MAGNETIC STORM 

A worldwide disturbance of the Earth's magnetic field. 

MAGNETOGRAM 

See—solar magnetrogram 

MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS MHD 

Flow physics of a partially ionized gas that is accelerated 
by the interaction of electric and magnetic field forces. 

MAGNETOMETER 

As a part of the scientific instrumentation subsystem, this 
instrument will provide the capability for determining the 
direction and magnitude of the lunar magnetic field. 

MAGNETOSPHERE 

The Earth's magnetic field in space. 

MAGNITUDE 

Relative brightness of a celestial body. The smaller the 
magnitude number, the brighter the body. 

MAIN STAGE 

In a single stage rocket, it is the period when full thrust 
is attained. In a multistage rocket, it is the stage that 



MAINTENANCE MAINT 

The function of retaining material in or restoring it to a 
serviceable condition. 
See— field maintenance 

organizational maintenance 

precautionary maintenance 

preventive maintenance 

MAINTENANCE ANALYSIS 

The process of identifying required maintenance functions 
and determining the most effective means of accomplishing 
these functions. 

MAINTENANCE COST 

The overall expenditure incurred in the support of a system 
or equipment. 

MAINTENANCE ELEMENT 

A discrete portion of a maintenance task which can be de- 
scribed and measured. 

MAINTENANCE PROFICIENCY 

A maintenance technician's ability to use and apply the 
skills, concepts, and principles necessary for equipment 
maintenance. 



58 



MAST CONNECTION SYSTEM 



MAINTENANCE TASK 

Any action or actions required to preclude the occurrence 
of a malfunction or restore an equipment to satisfactory 
operating condition. 

MAJOR ASSEMBLY 

A combination of detail parts and subassemblies. Issued 
as an element of an installation, it performs a major function 
necessary to the operation of the installation and is con- 
structionally relatively complex. 

MAJOR DEFECT 

A defect, other than critical, that could result in failure or 
materially reduce the useability of the product for its in- 
tended purpose. 

MAJOR MEASUREMENT 

Actual measurement of the mass properties of a complete 
vehicle stage or module. 

MALFUNCTION 

Failure of a product to give satisfactory performance. 

MAN RATED SPACE VEHICLE 

Space vehicles for manned flight which have achieved the 
standards of performance and reliability previously estab- 
lished as reasonably acceptable for its class of equipment. 

MANEUVER 

See— hover and translation maneuver 
midcourse maneuver 

MANEUVERABILITY 

That structural or aerodynamic quality in an air vehicle 
which determines the rate at which its attitude and direction 
of flight can be changed. Commonly expressed in G's or 
(gee load). 

MANIFOLD 

A pipe fitting with several lateral outlets or inlets for 
connecting one pipe with others. 

MANNED SPACE FLIGHT SYSTEM 

An instrument of space exploration consisting of a com- 
posite of equipment, skills, and techniques having a manned 
space vehicle as its major element. 

MANNED SPACECRAFT CENTER MSC 

This center is responsible for development and operation 
of the manned spacecraft and its associated ground support 
equipment. It is located at Houston, Texas. A portion of 
the center's staff and major facilities, such as a checkout 
hangar, altitude test tank, procedures trainer and Mercury 
Control Center, are located at Cape Canaveral, Florida. 



MANOMETER 

An instrument for measuring pressure of gases and vapors, 
both above and below atmospheric pressure. 

MANUAL DOCKING 

Manual control of the spacecraft during the docking 
maneuver. 



MANUFACTURING PROCESS 

The equipment, tooling and methods that the manufacturer 
intends to use in production. 

MARGIN OF SAFETY 

The percentage by which the criterion load or stress exceeds 
the design load or stress. E.g., criterion stress can mean 
the material yield stress, the material ultimate stress, etc. 

MARGINAL TESTING 

A procedure for system checking which indicates that some 
portion of the system has deteriorated to the point where 
there is a high probability of a resultant system failure dur- 
ing the next operating period. 

MARINER 

Program for deep space probe research of Venus and Mars. 

MARS 

Manned Astronautical Research Station. 

MARSHALL SPACE FLIGHT CENTER MSFC 

The Marshall Space Flight Center is charged with develop- 
ment of major launch vehicles to meet NASA's space mission 
requirements. Major projects conducted by Marshall are the 
Saturn Class, Centaur, and Nova. The Marshall Space Flight 
Center is located at Huntsville, Alabama. 

MASER 

Microwave amplification through stimulated electromagnetic 
radiation. 

MASS 

The measure of the amount of matter in a body, thus its 
inertia . 

See— takeoff mass 

MASS PROPERTIES 

Physical properties which describe the mass characteristics 
of space vehicles and their systems, subsystems, and com- 
ponents. These properties include, but are not limited to 
weight, mass, center of gravity location, moments of inertia 
and products of inertia. 



MASS PROPERTIES DETERMINATION EQUIPMENT 

Equipment used to weigh a completely assembled dry stage 
of a space vehicle and to determine its longitudinal center 
of gravity. This equipment is also known as weight and 
balance kit. 

MASS RATIO 

The ratio of the mass of the propellant charge to the total 
mass of the total mass of the rocket charged with the 
propellant. 

See— propellant mass ratio 

MAST CONNECTION SYSTEM 

Masts which provide support for the pneumatic, electrical, 
fuel, LOX, other service lines and umbilicals which connect 
to the first stage of and the launch vehicle. Links the 
launch vehicle to the ground system. The mast connection 
system is used only with the Saturn I block vehicles. 



59 



MASTER PLAN DRAWING 



MASTER PLAN DRAWING 

A drawing that shows sufficient features of an architectural 
topographical or construction site, so that it may be used 
as a guide in the long range development of the site. 

MATCH LINES 

The operating points where the inlet system air flow capaci- 
ties and the jet engine air flow requirements are identical. 

MATCHED PARTS DRAWING 

Depicts special application parts which are machine matched 
or otherwise mated and for which replacement as a matched 
set or pair is essential. 

MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS 

Used to establish the engineering requirements for the pro- 
curement, inspection, and test of purchasable materials. 

MATERIAL PROCESS 

Any procedure used in the production of any material which 
significantly modifies its properties. 

MATHEMATICAL MODEL 

All the mathematical statements which are required to 
describe a given process in all significant details under the 
influence of the full permissible range of variation of all 
the independent variables. 



MEAN TIME BETWEEN FAILURES MTBF 

The total measured operating time of a population of equip- 
ments divided by the total number of failures. 

MEAN TIME TO FAILURE 

The measured operating time of an equipment divided by the 
total number of failures. 

MEAN TIME TO FIRST FAILURE 

The average time to the first failure based on several 
equipments. 

MEAN TIME TO REPAIR 

A parameter of the maintainability function and can be used 
as an index of maintainability in a manner analogous to the 
use of mean-time-between-failures (MTBF) as an index of 
reliability. 

MEASURING SYSTEM 

The system which converts any physical quantity, phenome- 
non, or action to proper form for recording or transmitting 
via telemetering link. 



MECHANICAL BORDER 

That layer in the atmosphere where air resistance and fric- 
tion become negligible. 



MATS 

Military Air Transport Service. 

MAXIMUM MATERIAL CONDITION 

A condition wherein a feature of a finished part contains 
the maximum amount of material permitted by the toleranced 
size dimensions specified for that feature. 

MAXIMUM RELIEF VALVE PRESSURE 

The pressure at which the relief valve, or vent valve, is 
fully open. 

MAXIMUM THRUST 

The highest thrust recorded on the thrust-time trace. 

MAXIMUM TOLERANCE 

A specified allowance which, when added to a basic dimen- 
sion, defines the largest acceptable dimension. 

MCC 

Mercury Control Center. 
Mission Control Center. 

MEAN CYCLES TO FAILURE 

The total number of cycles divided by the number of failures 
(the reciprocal of the failure rate per cycle). 

MEAN FREE PATH 

The average distance that a particle travels between suc- 
cessive collisions with the other particles of an ensemble. 

MEAN LIFE 

The average time between random failures which cause the 
loss of at least one of the essential functions of the system 
or equipment. 



MECHANORECEPTOR 

A nerve ending that reacts to mechanical stimuli as touch, 

tension, and acceleration. 



MEDIUM PAYLOADS 

Payloads on the order of 300 to 8,500 lbs. 

MEMBER 

Constituent part of any complete whole. An essential in- 
tegral part of a unit. 

MEMORY 

The component of a computer, control system, guidance 
system, instrumented satellite, etc., designed to provide 
ready access to data or instructions previously recorded. 

MERIDIAN 

Ste— magnetic meridian 

MESOSPHERE 

In the nomenclature of Chapman, a stratum of atmosphere 
that lies between the stratosphere and the ionosphere, some- 
times called the chemosphere. In the nomenclature of 
Wares, a stratum that extends approximately from 250 to 
600 miles, lying between the ionosphere and the exosphere. 

METAGALAXY 

The entire system of galaxies. 

METEOR 

A transient celestial body that enters the Earth's atmosphere 
with great velocity, incandescent with heat generated by the 
resistance of the air. 



60 



MINOR ASSEMBLY 



METEOR SAFE WALL 

A protective blanket of atmosphere through which meteors 
rarely penetrate. Meteors are burned up and vaporized in 
this area due to friction with air molecules. 

METEORIC 

Of or pertaining to meteors, or meteoroids. 

METEORITE 

A meteoroid which has reached the surface of the Earth with- 
out being completely vaporized. 

METEOROID 

A small solid body traveling through outer space. When a 
meteoroid enters the Earth's atmosphere it becomes a 
meteor. 

METHOD 

See— brute force method 
freeze-out method 
relaxation method 

METHOD OF ATTRIBUTES 

Measurement of quality determined by noting the presence 
or absence of some characteristic in each of the units in the 
group. 

MHD 

Magnetohydrodynami cs . 

MICHOUD PLANT 

A manufacturing activity, under the direction of Marshall 
Space Flight Center, responsible for the manufacture of 
boosters and other large stages for use on the manned lunar 
landing program. Plant operation is conducted by companies 
under contract with NASA. 



MICROMETEOROID 

Meteoroids less than l/250th of an inch in diameter. 



MICROMETEORITE 

A very small meteorite or meteontic particle with a diam- 
eter less than a millimeter. 



MIDCOURSE 

For lunar and planetary missions, this is the period between 
escape from the originating point and before commitment to 
entry or orbit at the destination. 

MIDCOURSE MANEUVER 

Changes introduced in the spacecraft flight path during the 
midcourse period to maintain the desired trajectory. 

MIDCOURSE MEASUREMENT 

Measurements made by taking visual sightings of Earth, 
Moon, and Stars to determine vehicle position. 

MIDCOURSE MEASUREMENT CORRECTION MMC 

The navigation and velocity corrections which are the prin- 
cipal operations during the coasting phases in cislunar space. 



MIDCOURSE MODE 

The mode of operating the Apollo guidance and navigation 
equipment (AGE) during the translunar and transearth phase 
of the flight. Visual sightings are made of the Earth, «Moon, 
and Stars to provide the primary navigation information. 

MILA 

Merritt Island Launch Area. 

MILESTONE 

Significant point within the research, development, test, 
evaluation, production, and in-service life of a system, 
equipment, or effort. Milestone possesses a distinct objec- 
tively identifiable terminal point which can be used as a 
means of evaluating progress in terms of an estimated time 
schedule. 

MILK STOOL 

The physical arrangement of the three storable propellant 
rocket engines located below the main pressure vessel of 
the lunar excursion module. 

MINIATURIZE 

To construct a functioning minature of a part or instrument 
where room is at apremium, also minaturized. 

MINIMUM ACCEPTABILITY 

Level of effective reliability that must be demonstrated at 
the close of the research and development phase of a 
program. 

MINIMUM ACCEPTABLE RELIABILITY 

Reliability which must be achieved before approval of the 
first articles with operational configuration. 

MINIMUM MATERIAL LIMIT 

The minimum limit of size of an internal dimension. 

MINIMUM MATERIAL SIZE 

The limit at which a part contains the minimum amount of 
material. The minimum external limit and the maximum in- 
ternal limit. 

MINIMUM TOLERANCE 

A specified allowance which, when subtracted from a basic 
dimension, defines the smallest acceptable dimension. 

MINITRACK 

The tracking network originally established for Vanguard 
tracking and data acquisition during the international geo- 
physical year (1959-60). Now the basic network for tracking 
small scientific Earth satellites. 

MINITRACK RADIO 

A radio receiving set that tracks an object equipped with 
a miniature transmitter emitting telemeter-type signals. 
Used in tracking Earth satellites. 

MINOR ASSEMBLY 

A combination of detail parts and subassemblies issued as 
an element of an installation. It performs a minor function 
necessary to the operation of the installation and is con- 
structionally relatively simple. 



61 



MINOR DEFECT 



MINOR DEFECT 

A defect that does not materially reduce the usability of 
the unit of product for its intended purpose, or is a departure 
from established standards having no significant bearing on 
the effective use or operation of the unit. 

MISSILRY 

The art or science of designing, developing, building, 
launching, directing, and sometimes guiding a missile. 

MISSION 

The objective, task, or purpose which clearly indicates the 
action to be taken. 

See— alternate mission 
flight mission 

MISSION ANALYSIS 

A comprehensive evaluation of all the parameters which 
affect the events of a mission. 



MISSION AVAILABILITY 

The expected availability for a given mission period. De- 
rived from the general model by computing the average value 
of time for the mission period. 



MISSION CONTROL CENTER MCC 

Centralized over-all control point for all phases of the flight 
mission. 

MISSION OPERATIONS CONTROL ROOM MOCR 

The MOCR contains a group of specialized functional 
locations (called stations) where specific information will 
be available that contributes directly to the decision of the 
Operations Directorate to continue, modify or abort the 
mission. 

MISSION PROFILE 

A graphic or tabular presentation of the flight plan of a 
spacecraft showing all pertinent events scheduled to occur. 

MISSION RELIABILITY 

The product of readiness, functional and flight reliability. 

MISSION SUCCESS 

The attainment of all or a major part of the scientific 
objectives of the flight with no crew injury or loss of life. 
It has sometimes been alternately defined as the safe return 
of all three astronauts from a completed lunar landing 



MISSION SUITABILITY 

The ability of the manned space flight system to perform 
the mission for which it was primarily designed. 

MISSION TASK 

The specified purpose for which a device must perform. 

MISSION VERSATILITY 

The ability of the manned space flight system to perform 
missions other than those for which it was primarily 
designed. 



MISSISSIPPI TEST FACILITY MTF 

NASA will use this facility for the static test site for Saturn 
and Nova-class launch vehicles. The site is located in 
southwest Mississippi, approximately fifty miles east of * 
New Orleans, Louisiana. 

MLLP 

Manned Lunar Landinq Program. 

MMC 

Midcourse Measurement Correction. 

MOCR 

Mission Operations Control Room. 

MOCK-UP 

A full-sized replica or dummy. 

MOCK-UP INSPECTION 

An inspection of a mock-up to determine the operational 
suitability of the configuration and general arrangement of 
the operational article represented. 

MOD 

Modification. 

MODE 

(1) In statistics, the value or number in any large grouping, 
which appears most frequently. 

(2) In structural dynamics, trie characteristic shape taken 

by a beam or structure when vibrated at a resonant frequency 
(usually the first 3 or 4 bending modes are the most 
important). 

(3) A descriptive term applied to a particular methodology 

or sequence of performing one task of several possible tasks. 
See—abort mode 

close aboard mode 
midcourse mode 

MODEL 

See— development model 
engineering model 
experimental model 
life-test model 
production model 
proof-test model 

MODIFICATION MOD 

Any alteration that changes capabilities or characteristics 
of equipments. 

MODIFICATION KIT 

An item composed of a group of articles which is issued as 
a unit for accomplishing an alteration to an equipment. 

MODIFIED DRAWING 

Made for commercial and patented articles that are altered 
or selected for special fits, tolerances, and performance. 

MODULAR TECHNIQUES 

Techniques which encourage multiple usage or buildup of 
assemblies or subassemblies by standardizing configuration 
and functional characteristics. 



62 



MULTIPROPELLANT 



MODULE 

A combination of components, contained in one package 
or common to one mounting, which provide a complete func- 
tion to subsystems and systems in which they operate. 
S ee— command and service module 

lunar excursion module 

service module 

MOISTURE-RESISTANT MATERIAL 

A material which will not absorb moisture when subjected to 
conditions of high humidity for extended periods of time. 

MOLECULE 

An aggregate of two or more atoms of a substance that 
exists as a unit. 

MOMENTS 

In statistics, the mean value of a power of a variate. A 
moment about a particular fixed value, such as the mean, is 
the mean value of a power of the deviations of the variates 
from that fixed value. 
See— binge moment 

MONITOR PANEL 

Panel for indicating operating conditions of a component or 
system but with no means of control. 

MONO-DETAIL DRAWING 

A one item drawing. 

MONOCHROMATIC EMISSIVE POWER 

Emissive power emitted at a single wavelength for a given 
tempera tuie. 

MONOCHROMATIC EMITTANCE 

Emittance radiating at a particular wavelength. 

MONOPROPELLANT 

A rocket propellant in which the fuel and oxidizer are pre- 
mixed ready for immediate use. 

MOOSE 

Man Out Of Space Easiest (emergency space escape system). 

MORTALITY 

See— in/ant mortality 

MOTION 

See— dislocation motion 
first motion 
posigrade motion 
retrograde motion 

MOTOR SKILL 

The ability to achieve adjustments of parts of the body in 
an integrated smoothly flowing sequence, resulting in the 
performance of some act. 

MOVING INSPECTION LOT 

A collection of units of product offered for inspection during 
a fixed period of time. All of the units of product are pre- 
sented to the inspector in the period during which the sample 
is being drawn. 



MSC 

Manned Spacecraft Center (NASA, Houston, Texas). 

MSFC 

Marshall Space Flight Center. 

MSL 

Mean Sea Level. 

MTBF 

Mean Time Between Failures. 

MTF 

Mississippi Test Facility. 

MULTI-DETAIL DRAWING 

A several item drawing. 

MULTIPLE AIR BAG LOAD ALLEVIATOR 

An arrangement of gas-filled bags which are attached to the 
vehicle. The bags collapse on impact, thus alleviating the 
load. 

MULTIPLE SAMPLING 

Sampling inspection in which, after each sample the deci- 
sion may be to accept, to reject, or to take another sample. 
Usually a prescribed maximum number is provided. After 
this number of samples has been taken a decision to accept 
or reject must be reached. Note, multiple sampling as de- 
fined here is sometimes called sequential sampling or group 
sequential sampling. The term multiple sample is 
preferred. 

MULTIPLE SAMPLING PLAN 

Under a multiple sampling plan, results of the inspection of 
one or more successive samples from an inspection lot may 
be required to determine its acceptability. A multiple sam- 
pling plan consists of three or more sample sizes with as- 
sociated acceptance and rejection criteria. 



MULTIPLE-LEGEND INDICATOR LIGHTS 

A display which contains two or more legend plates. 



MULTIPLE-MODE GUIDANCE SYSTEM 

A system utilizing more than one method of scanning to de- 
termine position to generate direction changes to arrive at a 
desired position. 



MULTIPLEXER 

A mechanical or electrical device for sharing of a circuit by 
two or more coincident signals. 



MULTIPLEXING 

The simultaneous transmission of two or more signals 
within a single channel. 

MULTIPROPELLANT 

A rocket propellant consisting of two or more substances fed 
separately to the combustion chamber. 



63 



MULTISTAGE IGNITION 

MULTISTAGE IGNITION MULTISTAGE ROCKET 

An Ignition system in a ramjet in which a portion of the fuel One in back of it has exhausted its propellant. Normally, 

is ignited and these products are used to ignite the remainder each unit or stage is jettisoned after completing its firing, 

of the mixture. Also called a multiple-stage rocket. 



64 



N 



NAMTC 

Naval Air Missile Test Center (Point Mugu). 

NASA 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 

NASC 

National Aeronautics and Space Council. 

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND 

SPACE ADMINISTRATION NASA 

Civilian agency with research and development jurisdiction 
in aeronautical and space activities, except those activities 
peculiar to and primarily associated with the development of 
weapons systems and military operations. 



NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND 

SPACE COUNCIL NASC 

Statutory Advisory Council to the President, consisting of 
Secretary of Defense, Administrator of NASA, Chairman of 
AEC, Secretary of State, and other members selected by the 
President. 



NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 

The state or conditions which would exist in the absence of 
the test subject. 



NAUTICAL MILE NM 

A measure of distance equal to 6,076. 103 ft. or approximately 
1.15 miles. 



NAVIGATOR 

The second member of the Apollo flight crew. The naviga- 
tor's primary responsibilities are the operation and main- 
tenance of guidance and navigation equipment. He occupies 
the center couch during launch and reentry, and provides 
back-up for the commander in monitoring key systems per- 
formance during critical mission phases. 



NAVIGATION 

The science of guiding ships, aircraft, etc. through the use 
of calculations as to position and direction etc. involving 
geometrical calculations, reference to celestial bodies, 
reference to landmarks, radio aids, etc. 
See— celestial navigation 

NEBULA 

Any celestial structure outside the solar system that occu- 
pies a perceptible extent in the sky and is not resolvable 
into stars by a large telescope. 



NEGATIVE G 

Eyeballs up. The acceleration stress that a subject experi- 
ences as acting from below (feet to head direction). 

NERV 

Nuclear Emulsion Recovery Vehicle (to obtain data on 
Van Allen belt). 

NERVA 

Nuclear Engine For Rocket Vehicle Application. 

NET POSITIVE SUCTION HEAD NPSH 

A parameter used in liquid rocket engines to describe the 
effective inlet pressure conditions to the propellant pumps. 
The pressure head available at the pump suction flange is 
provided by tank pressure head, elevation, and acceleration 
forces (and is reduced by line friction and vapor pressure). 
NPSH is the head available to prevent pump cavitation. 

NEUTRON 

A subatomic particle with no electric charge having a mass 
slightly more than the mass of the proton. 

NEWTON'S LAWS OF MOTION 

A set of three fundamental postulates forming the basis of 
the mechanics of rigid bodies, formulated by Newton in 
1687. 

NM 

Nautical Mile. 

NOCTILLUCENT CLOUD 

High-altitude cloud lying at an altitude of 50 miles, appear- 
ing only after sunset or before sunrise when contrasted 
against a dark sky. May consist of volcanic dust or inter- 
planetary matter trapped by temperature incersion. 

NOISE 

Any unwanted disturbance or sound within a useful frequency 
band, such as undesired electric waves in a transmission 
channel or device. When caused by natural electrical dis- 
charges in the atmosphere, noise may be called static. 
See— acoustical noise 

electronic noise interference 

solar noise 

white noise 

NOMINAL SIZE 

A dimension of length, diameter, etc. often used to desig- 
nate a standard or commercial size which approximates the 
actual size. 

NOMINAL STRESS LIMITS 

The limits within which the crew's environment shall be 
maintained during normal operations. 



65 



NON-STANDARD PART 



NON-STANDARD PART 

One for which no published standard or specification exists. 

NONDEPENDENT ASSEMBLY OR 
UNIT OF EQUIPMENT 

Not dependent upon any other part of the design item in 
order to perform its intended function. 

NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING 

Testing of a nature which does not impair the usability of 
the item. 



NOZZLE 

The part of a rocket thrust chamber assembly in which the 
gases produced in the chamber are accelerated to high 
velocities. 

See— exhaust nozzle 

NPG 

Naval Proving Grounds (Dahlgren, Va.). 

NPSH 

Net positive suction head. 



NONSTRESSED LIMITS 

The environmental limits to which the crew may be subjected 
for extended periods of time such as orbit, lunar transit, etc. 

NORMAL DISTRIBUTION 

The fundamental frequency distribution of statistical analy- 
sis. The principal characteristics of the normal law are— 

(1) It is symmetrical. Negative and positive deviations 
of equal magnitude are equally likely to occur. 

(2) It is a continuous function rather than a discrete 
function. It assigns a definite probability to every devia- 
tion. There are no excluded cases. 

(3) There is just one most probable result, and this is 
identical with the first expectation of the variable. 

NORMAL INSPECTION 

Inspection which is used when there is no significant evi- 
dence that the quality of product being submitted is better 
than or poorer than specified requirements. 

NORMAL OPERATING PERIOD 

That period of equipment life during which the equipment 
failure rate remains essentially constant. 

NORMAL SHOCK WAVE 

A shock wave perpendicular to the direction of flow in a 
supersonic flow field. Sometimes shortened to normal 
shock. 

NOSECONE 

The cone-shaped leading end of a rocket vehicle consisting 
of a chamber or chambers in which a satellite, instruments, 
animals, plants, or auxiliary equipment may be carried, or of 
an outer surface built to withstand high temperatures 
generated by aerodynamic heating. 

NOTATION 

See— binary notation 

NOTS 

Naval Ordnance Test Station (China Lake, Calif.). 

NOVA 

Post-Saturn launch vehicle for space missions of 1970 and 
beyond. 



NRDS 

Nuclear Rocket Development Station. 



NRX 

The designation of the experimental reactors for the Nerva 
engine system. 

NSA 

National Security Agency. 

NUCLEAR FUEL 

Fissionable material of reasonably long life, used or usable 
in producing energy in a nuclear reactor. 

NUCLEAR RADIATION 

The emission of neutrons and other particles from an atomic 
nucleus as supporting chain reaction. 

NUCLEAR REACTOR 

An apparatus in which nuclear fission may be sustained in a 
self-supporting chain reaction. Commonly called reactor. 

NUCLEAR ROCKET 

Rocket in which the energy for the exhaust stream is derived 
from nuclear fission or fusion. 

NUCLEAR ROCKET DEVELOPMENT STATION NRDS 

NASA-AEC facility concerned with performing research and 
development work on nuclear powered rocket engines, such 
as the Kiwi series to be used for upper-stage space flight 
propulsion. The test site is located at Jackass Flats, ap- 
proximately 60 miles northeast of Las Vegas, Nevada. 

NUCLEUS 

The positively charged core of an atom. 

NULL CIRCLE 

Theoretical point in space where the gravitational attraction 
of one planet balances that of another. 

NULL HYPOTHESIS 

An assumed proposition used for the purpose of statistical 
test. 



66 



o 



O&C BLDG 

Operations and Control Building. 

0A0 

Orbiting Astronomical Observatory. 

OASM 

Office of Aerospace Medicine (NASA/OMSF). 

oc 

Operating characteristic. 

OCCULATION 

The disappearance of a body behind another body of larger 
apparent size. 

OCTAVE 

An interval between two frequencies having a ratio of 2 to 1 . 
Also, any group of eight is an octave of elements. 

OCULOGRAVIC ILLUSION 

A mixed sensory illusion of flight involving the eyes and 
propriceptors (nerve-endings which receive stimuli from 
within one's own body). 

OCULOGYRAL ILLUSION 

A mixed sensory illusion of flight involving the eyes and 
the semicircular canals of the ear, e.g., graveyard spin, 
Corioles reaction, and rotation illusion. 

OFF LIMIT TEST 

Test at stress levels higher than design level, conducted 
for the purpose of determining a safety factor or margin. 



OFFICIAL DRAWING 

Any drawing which bears a title, a drawing number, and the 
dated signature of the maker and the issue date. 



OG 

Outer Gimbal. 

OGA 

Outer Gimbal Axis. 

0G0 

Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (series of geophysical 
research satellites, includes EGO and POGO). 

OICO 

Office of Integration and Checkout (NASA/OMSF). 

0L0 

Orbital Launch Operation. 



OLVP 

Office of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion (NASA/OMSF). 

OMNI-ANTENNA 

An antenna having an essentially non-directional pattern in 
azimuth and a directional pattern in elevation. 

OMSF 

Office of Manned Space Flight (NASA). 

ON-LINE COMPUTING 

Computation made without significant delay, and in so close 
a relation to the source of input data as to make possible 
the immediate and direct use of results for process control 
and other simultaneous monitoring purposes. 

ONE HUNDRED PERCENT INSPECTION 

Inspection of every unit of product. Each unit of product is 
accepted or rejected individually for the characteristic 
concerned. 

ONR 

Office of Naval Research. 

OPERATING CYCLE 

A complete sequence of operations required for normal func- 
tions of an item of equipment, or for limited test purposes. 



OPERATING PRESSURE 

The nominal pressure to which the components are subjected 
under steady state conditions in service operations. 



OPERATING TIME 

The time period between turn-on and turn-off of a system, 
subsystem, component or part during which time operation 
is as specified. Total operating time is the summation of 
all operating timer periods. 



OPERATION 

See— automatic operation 
bleed-cycle operation 



OPERATIONAL 

Equipment for which all research and development has been 
completed with achievement of performance objectives. 

OPERATIONAL CYCLE 

The required life of the equipment including all end-item 
test time, transportation and handling where appropriate, all 
check-out time prior to flight in addition to the actual flight 
mission phase. 



67 



OPERATIONAL FLIGHT CONTROL 



OPERATIONAL FLIGHT CONTROL 

The spacecraft in-flight control after launch. This is ac- 
complished by adaptive control before launch vehicle sepa- 
ration and by the onboard crew after launch vehicle 
separation. 

OPERATIONAL GROUND EQUIPMENT 

A functional part of a system which operates with the aero- 
space vehicle or end item as an essential operating element 
thereof. 

See— aerospace ground equipment 

OPERATIONAL LAUNCH VEHICLE 

Launch vehicles employed after R and D has been com- 
pleted, man rating achieved, and a predetermined number of 
complete operational missions performed. 

OPERATIONAL PHASE 

The period from acceptance by the user of the first operating 
unit until disposition of the system equipment. The opera- 
tional phase overlaps the acquisition phase. 

OPERATIONAL READINESS 

The probability that a system or equipment when used under 
stated conditions and in an actual supply environment will 
operate satisfactorily during any given period of time. Some- 
times defined as operational availability. 

OPERATIONAL SPACE VEHICLE 

Space vehicles which meet the requirements specified sepa- 
rately for the operational launch vehicle and the operational 
spacecraft. 

OPERATIONAL SPACECRAFT 

Spacecraft employed after all R and D has been completed, 
man rating achieved and a predetermined number of complete 
operational missions performed. 

OPERATIONS DIRECTORATE STATION 

A station in the Mission Operations Control Room which 
directs overall mission conduct from prelaunch through 
recovery. 

OPRM 

Office of Program Review and Resources Management 
(NASA/OMSF). 

ORB 

A spherical body, especially a celestial sphere, a planet, 
or a man-made satellite of that shape. 

ORBIT 

The path in which one body revolves about another under the 
gravitational attraction of the latter, as a planet or comet 
around the Sun, or a satellite around a planet. 
See—circular orbit 

Earth orbit rendezvous 

eccentric orbit 

equatorial orbit 

equi-period transfer orbit 

geostationary orbit 

hobmann orbit 

low Earth orbit 



lunar orbit rendezvous 

parking orbit 

polar orbit 

stationary orbit ' 

synchronous orbit 

transfer orbit 

ORBIT NODES 

Points in an orbit where the orbit crosses a reference plane, 
such as the ecliptic or the equatorial plane. 

ORBITAL BOMBER 

A vehicle with the capability of orbiting speeds to allow 
circling the Earth one or more times at very high altitudes 
and then gliding home to Earth. 

ORBITAL ELEMENTS 

A set of 7 parameters defining the orbit of a satellite. 

ORBITAL LAUNCH OPERATION 0L0 

A concept involving the techniques of rendezvous, docking, 
assembly in orbit, launch from orbit, in-space maintenance, 
repair refueling, and permanently orbiting space station. 

ORBITAL PERIOD 

The period of time taken by an orbiting body to make a com- 
plete orbit. 

ORBITAL VELOCITY 

Velocity required to establish and maintain a satellite in 
orbit. The term refers to average velocity, since the veloc- 
ity is greater at the perigee than at the apogee. 

ORBITING ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY 0A0 

A series of scientific satellites to obtain precision tele- 
scopic observation of emission and absorption characteris- 
tics of the Sun, stars, planets, and nebulae in the ultraviolet, 
infrared, and X-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. 

ORBITING SOLAR OBSERVATORY 0S0 

A solar-stabilized scientific satellite carrying solar-oriented 
experiments, comparing radiation from the sun to that in 
other portions of the sky. First launch was in 1962. 

ORDNANCE INSTALLATIONS 

Those components of ordnance systems which are hazardous 
components, including squibbs, explosive devices, hyper- 
golic igniters, and solid propellant motors. 

ORDNANCE TOWER 

A specific structure employed in the Apollo program at the 
launch facility. The ordnance items are installed, checked 
out, and connected in a relatively remote area and under 
closely controlled safety and test conditions. 

ORIFICE 

A fixed restriction in a fluid passage which establishes the 
rate of fluid flow. It usually consists of a thin circular 
diaphragm with an accurately machined concentric hole. 

ORGANIZATIONAL MAINTENANCE 

That maintenance authorized for, performed by, and the re- 
sponsibility of a using organization on its own equipment. 



68 



OZONOSPHERE 



ORIENTATION CONTROL 

The control of the direction of the axes of a vehicle, the 
pointing of vehicle or parts thereof toward a desired point. 



OSFM 

Office of Spacecraft and Flight Missions (NASA/OMSF). 



0S0 

Orbiting Solar Observatory. 



OTOLITH 

A small calcareous concretion located in the inner ear which 
plays a part in the mechanism of orientation. 

OUTER GIMBAL AXIS OGA 

The axis about which the inertial measurement unit's (IMU's) 
outer gimbal rotates. 



OUTGASSING 

The evolution of gas from a solid in a vacuum. 

OXIDIZER 

A substance that supports the combustion reaction of a fuel 
or propellant. 

OXYGEN 

See— liquid oxygen 

liquid oxygen (LOX) system complex 

OXYGEN-HYDROCARBON ENGINE 

A rocket engine that operates on propellant of liquid oxygen 
as oxidizer and a hydro-carbon fuel, such as the propellant 
derivatives. 

OZONOSPHERE 

A stratum in the upper atmosphere having a relatively high 
concentration of ozone, important for absorption of ultraviolet 
solar radiation. 



69 



p 



PACE/LV 

Pre-flight Acceptance Checkout Equipment-Launch Vehicle. 

PACE/SC 

Pre-Flight Acceptance Checkout Equipment-Spacecraft. 

PACIFIC MISSILE RANGE PMR 

A national instrumented missile test range with down range 
tracking facilities, located on the west coast of the United 
States at Point Arguello, California. 

PAD 

See— fuel pad 
launch pad 

PAD ABORT 

Stopping the mission of a space vehicle still on the launch 
pad because of malfunction, change in plans, or other 
problems. 



PAD TERMINAL CONNECTION ROOM PTCR 

A room that will be located in the launcher area of com- 
plex 39 launch pad and will contain equipment to connect the 
launch control center with the launch/umbilical tower, as 
well as all the electrical equipment necessary to operate, 
checkout and monitor all environmental control system equip- 
ment, propellant and high pressure gas storage facilities. 



PANEL 

The front plate of an assembly upon which operational con- 
trols and indicating devices are normally mounted. 
See— monitor panel 
patch panels 



PANIC BARS 

Levers or control actuating devices which are easily acces- 
sible and operable in the event of an emergency. 

PARABOLA 

A conic section made by an intersecting plane parallel to the 
side of the cone. 

PARABOLIC REENTRY 

Reentry at speeds of less than 36,500 feet per second. 

PARACHUTE 

See— drogue parachute 

PARAGLIDER 

An inflatable device, combining attributes of both the para- 
chute and the winged glider, being evaluated for use in the 
Gemini and Apollo landing systems. 



PARALLAX 

The apparent displacement of an object, or the apparent dif- 
ference in its direction of motion, if viewed from two differ- 
ent points. 

PARALLEL OPERATION OF ENGINES 

The operation of two or more engines in a system to provide 
more thrust than from a single engine without having thrust 
misalignment or interference of one engine with another. 
This refers chiefly to electric engines. 

PARAMETER 

One edge of the frame of reference. A term indicating the 
limits of the goals, or a factor arbitrarily fixed to define the 
goals which must be met in order that a mission succeed. 
See— maintainability parameters 
physiological parameters 

PARKING ORBIT 

An intermediate orbit around a celestial body where the 
spacecraft can await development of trajectory conditions 
required for the next phase of the mission. 



PARSEC 

Astronomical unit of distance equal to 19,150,000,000,000 
miles, indicating the distance at which the mean radius of 
Earth's orbit would subtend an angle of one second of arc. 

PART PT 

One piece, or two or more pieces joined together, which are 
not normally subject to disassembly without destruction of 
design use. 

See— approved part 

detail part 

non-standard part 

qualified part 

standard part 

PART FAILURE 

A failure which usually involves a non-repairable breakdown 
and immediate end of life for a part which is subsequently 
permanently replaced. 

PART FAILURE RATE 

That rate at which a part fails to perform its intended 
function. 

PARTICLE 

See— energetic particle 
subatomic particle 

PARTS LIST 

A list of parts or items for a product, unit, equipment, or any 
portion thereof. 



70 



PHOTON ENGINE 



PASSIVE CIRCUIT 

A circuit which has no components capable of power gain. 

PASSIVE SATELLITE 

A communication satellite that simply reflects radio energy 
transmitted from one ground terminal to another without 
amplification or retransmission. A radio mirror. 

PATCH PANELS 

An electrical panel or board used for inter-connecting instru- 
mentation and control circuits to provide for multiple use of 
instrumentation and circuitry, plus flexibility in its 
application. 

PATHFINDER 

An instrument installed in a spacecraft used for navigating 
or homing. 

PAYLOAD 

That which an aircraft, rocket, or the like carries over and 
above what is necessary for the operation of the vehicle dur- 
ing its flight. 

See— medium payioads 

PCM 

Pulse Code Modulation. 

PDA 

Pump Drive Assembly. 

PDM 

Pulse Duration Modulation. 

PENDULUM 

See— pulsed integrating pendulum 

pulsed integrating pendulum accelerometer 

PEP 

Physiological Evaluation of Primates (primate orbital study 
program). 

Princeton Experimental Package (telescope and spectro- 
meter package for orbiting astronomical observatory (0A0). 



PERCENTAGE DEFECTIVE 

That proportion of a lot which is defective. This is the 
figure of merit in the population domain which characterizes 
quality control measurements and differentiates it from 
reliability. 



PERCENTILE 

A point score assigned to any given raw score in a distribu- 
tion to indicate the percent of measures in the whole distri- 
bution which fall below the given score. Percentile rank or 
percentile score. 

PERCENTILE RANGE 

The interval between two given percentiles. 

PERFORMANCE CAPABILITY 

The functional ability of the equipment in terms of engineer- 
ing specifications (accuracy, range, speed, capacity, etc.). 



Performance requirements serve to tie operational availa- 
bility to the mission and may vary or be fixed for different or 
all mission. 

PERI 

A prefix meaning near. 

PERICYNTHION 

The point in an elliptical orbit about the Moon at which an 
orbiting vehicle is closest to the Moon. 

PERIGEE 

That orbital point nearest the Earth when the Earth is the 
center of attraction. 

PERIHELION 

That point on an elliptical orbit around the Sun which is 
nearest to the Sun. 

PERIOD 

See— anomalistic period 
early failure period 
normal operating period 
orbital period 

PERISELENE 

Lowest point in a lunar orbit. 

PERMANENTLY FASTENED 
ASSEMBLY DRAWING 

Depicts two or more parts that are permanently fastened 
together by welding, brazing, riveting, etc., so as to form a 
unit which is removable from a higher level assembly but 
cannot be readily disassembled. 

PERT 

Program Evaluation and Review Technique. 

PERTURBATION 

Effect of the gravitational attraction of one body on the orbit 
of another. 

PFRT 

Preliminary Flight Rating Test. 



PHASE 

See— conceptual phase 
operational phase 

PHOEBUS REACTOR 

A conceptual reactor design with a higher power-to-weight 
ratio than kiwi. 

PHONOCARDIOGRAM 

The measurement and recording of the audible heart beat. 

PHOTOMETRY 

The measurement of the intensity of light. 

PHOTON ENGINE 

A projected type of reaction engine in which thrust would be 
obtained from a stream of electro-magnetic radiation. 



71 



PHOTOSPHERE 



PHOTOSPHERE 

The outermost luminous layer of the Sun's gaseous body. 

PHOTOSYNTHETIC GAS EXCHANGER 

A device which utilizes plants and light energy to convert 
back into oxygen the carbon dioxide generated by man or 
animals through breathing oxygen. 

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT 

Those conditions usually caused by nature. 

PHYSICAL-CHEMICAL SYSTEM 

A system for removing contaminants from the cabin atmos- 
phere and supplying a breathable atmosphere by means of 
chemical and mechanical techniques. 

PHYSICS 

See— fission fragment physics 

PHYSIOLOGICAL ACCELERATION 

The acceleration experienced by a human or an animal test 
subject in an accelerating vehicle. 



PIP DUCOSYN EXCITATION 

Voltage applied to the ducosyns to provide magnetic 
suspension. 

PIP SIGNAL GENERATOR EXCITATION 

The reference voltage for the signal generator. 

PIPA 

Pulsed Integrating Pendulum Accel erometer. 

PIRD 

Program Instrumentation Requirements Document. 

PITCH 

The movement about an axis that is perpendicular to the 
vehicle's longitudinal axis and horizontal with respect to a 
primary body. 

PITCHOVER 

The programed turn from the vertical that a rocket takes as 
it describes an arc and points in a direction other than 
vertical. 



PHYSIOLOGICAL FACTORS 

Factors which effect a crew's health and ability to function. 

PHYSIOLOGICAL PARAMETERS 

Arbitrary mathematical expressions of the functions of living 
organisms and their parts. 

PICKET SHIP 

One of the ocean-going ships used on a missile range to pro- 
vide added instrumentation for tracking or recovering the 
missiles. 

PICKOFF 

A sensing device that responds to angular movement to 
create a signal or to effect some type of control. 

PICKUP 

A device that converts a sound, view, or other form of intel- 
ligence into corresponding electric signals. 

PIGGY BACK EXPERIMENT 

An experiment which rides along with the primary experiment 
on a space-available basis, without interfering with the mis- 
sion of the primary experiment. 

PILGRIM 

Lunar colonization project. 

PILOT PRODUCTION OR PILOT MODEL 

The initial post-tooling production of a model to prove the 
capability of the tooling and production line. 

PIONEER 

Series of space probes. 

PIP 

Signal indication on the scope of an electronic instrument, 
produced by a short sharply pecked pulse of voltage. Also 
called blip. 
Pulsed Integrating Pendulum. 



PLAGES 

Clouds of calcium or hydrogen vapor that show up as bright 
patches on the visible surface of the sun. 



PLAN 

See— sampling plan 

PLAN DRAWING 

This drawing indicates materials of construction, shows ar- 
rangement of structural framing, floor or desk spaces, the 
location of equipment or furniture as appropriate. Also may 
depict individual layouts for heating, plumbing, air condi- 
tioning, electrical, or other utility systems. 
See— master plan drawing 

plot plan drawing 

vicinity plan drawing 

PLANET 

A celestial body of the solar system revolving around the 
sun in a nearly circular orbit, or a similar body revolving 
around a star. 

PLANETOID 

One of the numerous small planets nearly all of whose orbits 
lie between Mars and Jupiter. Also called asteroid and 
minor planet. 

PLANETOLOGY 

The study of planets and satellites. 

PLASMA 

An electrically conductive gas comprised of neutral parti- 
cles, ionized particles, and free electrons. As a whole, 
electrically neutral. 

PLASMA ENGINE 

A reaction engine using magnetically accelerated plasma as 
a propellant. 



72 



POWER LANDING 



PLASMA JET 

A magnetohydrodynamic rocket engine in which the ejection 
of plasma generates thrust. 

PLASMA SHEATH 

An envelope of ionized gas that surrounds a body moving 
through an atmosphere at hypersonic velocities. 
See— ionized plasma sheath 

PLASTIC BEHAVIOR 

Ability of a material to flow under stress, and the yielding 
under stress without brittle fracture. 

PLOT PLAN DRAWING 

Represents areas on which structures are clearly indicated 
with detailed information regarding their relationship to 
other structures, to existing and proposed utilities, topog- 
raphy, boundary lines, roads, walks, fences, etc. 

PLPS 

Propellant Loading & Pressurization System. 

PLS 

Propellant Loading System. 

PLUM BROOK RESEARCH STATION 

This station conducts research pertinent to nuclear rocket 
systems, chemical rockets, and power generation systems. 
It is operated by the Lewis Research Center located at 
Sandusky, Ohio. 

PMR 

Pacific Missile Range. 

PNEUMATIC CONTROL SYSTEM 

A system of equipments and facilities which supplies 
gaseous nitrogen and helium from the high pressure GN-2 
and helium storage facility. 



POD 

Pre-flight Operations Division— (Cape Canaveral). 



POGO 

Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. 



POINT 

See— exposed test point 
saddle point 
stationary point 
test point 

POLAR ORBIT 

The orbit of an Earth satellite that passes over or near the 
Earth's poles. 

POLAR ORBITING 

GEOPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY POGO 

A scientific satellite to be launched into a polar orbit to ob- 
tain information on the properties of the upper atmosphere 
and ionosphere with special emphasis on the polar regions. 



POLARIZATION 

A state of electromagnetic radiation in which transverse 
vibrations take place in some regular manner, e.g., all in 
one plane, in a circle, in an ellipse, or in some other defi- 
nite curve. 

POND 

See— bum pond 

deluge collection pond 
holding pond 

POPULATION 

The total collection of units from a common source. The 
conceptual total collection of units from a process, such as 
a production process. Also used in the sense of a universal 
(or population) of observation. 



POSIGRADE MOTION 

Orbital motion in the same direction as that normal to 
spatial bodies in a given system or in the same direction as 
a reference direction. 

POSIGRADE ROCKET 

A small vernier rocket on a spacecraft used to control its 
attitude during space flight, the thrust of which is in the 
same direction as the movement of the spacecraft. 

POSITIVE G 

Eyeballs down. Acceleration experienced in the downward 
(head-to-feet) direction, expressed in units of gravity. 

POST-FLIGHT 

The phase of space vehicle operations beginning with the 
landing of the command module upon the earth and ending 
when the final flight test report is completed. 

POST-LAUNCH 

The period following separation of hard ground connections 
from the space vehicle at launch. 



POST-STATIC TEST 

System or subsystem tests to detect possible damage or con- 
ditions incurred during static test, plus test of additional 
components or systems not used during the test. E.g., only 
vehicle booster is static tested, then upper stages are 
checked with booster. 



POUND FORCE 

The force equal to the weight of a standard pound mass 
under conditions of standard gravitational acceleration. The 
basic engineering unit of force. 



POUND THRUST 

A measurement unit of the reaction force generated in a jet 
or rocket engine and available for propulsion. 

POWER LANDING 

The landing of a spacecraft on a body in space in which the 
thrust of its motors is used as a brake. 



73 



PPM TELEMETRY 



PPM TELEMETRY 

In pulse position modulation telemetry the information trans- 
mitted is contained in the presence or absence of a pulse 
within a known block of pulses. 



PRE-FIRING GROUND 
PRESSURIZATION EQUIPMENT 

Equipment used to provide pressurization of stage propel- 
lant tanks prior to static firing and launch. 



PRE-STATIC TEST 

System or subsystem tests to insure proper operation of a 
vehicle which is to be static fired. 



PRECAUTIONARY MAINTENANCE 

A procedure of reconditioning a product before failure in 
order to prevent failures in service. 

PRECESSION 

The change in the direction of the axis of rotation of a 
spinning body or of the plane of the orbit of an orbiting body 
when acted upon by an outside force. 

PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES 

The concial motion of the Earth's axis about the vertical to 
the plane of the ecliptic, caused by the attractive force of 
the Sun, Moon, and other planets of the equatorial protuber- 
ance of the Earth. 

PREDICTIVE TEST 

A test employing non-destructive measurement techniques to 
identify units which will exhibit submarginal performance in 
service. 

PRELAUNCH 

The phase of operations, beginning with the arrival of space 
vehicle elements at the launch site, and ending with the 
start of the launch countdown. 

PRELAUNCH TEST 

Test of missile and ground equipment to determine readiness 
to launch. May include a countdown and a flight readiness 
firing with all launch complex equipment operating, but not 
including actual launching of the vehicle. 

PREPRODUCTION TEST 

Test performed on first production equipment using factory 
tooling and methods to insure that processes and methods 
are capable of producing satisfactory product. 

PREPROTOTYPE HARDWARE 

Hardware built for the purpose of development testing prior 
to the manufacture of prototype or qualification hardware. 

PRESSURE 

See— design burst pressure 
dynamic pressure 
limit pressure 



74 



maximum relief valve pressure 
operating pressure 
working pressure 

PRESSURE SUIT 

A garment designed to provide the human body an environ- 
ment above ambient pressure so that respiratory and circula- 
tory functions may continue normally, or nearly so, under 
low-pressure conditions that occur at high altitudes or in 
space without benefit of a pressurized cabin. 

PRESSURIZED CABIN 

A cabin in an aircraft or spacecraft designed to provide an 
adequate internal air pressure to permit normal respiratory 
and circulatory functions. 

PREVALVE 

A valve in the stage propellant feed systems which is used 
to keep the propellants from free-flowing out of the stage 
propellant tanks into engine propellant feed system. 

PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE 

The systematic care, servicing, and inspection of equipment 
for the purpose of maintaining it in servicable condition and 
detecting and correcting incipient failure. 

PRIMARY BODY 

The spatial body about which a satellite or other body 
orbits, or from which it is escaping, or towards which it is 
falling. 

PRIMARY COSMIC RAYS 

High-energy particles originating outside the earth's 
atmosphere. 



PRIME CONTRACTOR 

A contractor with total system responsibility for the execu- 
tion of work on contract to a government aqency. This in- 
cludes all functional and administrative responsibilities 
necessary to satisfy contract requirements. Major programs 
can be established with separate prime contractors for es- 
sentially independent systems, but each will perform as a 
contractual entity with respect to the contracting agency. 



PRIME FOCUS FEED 

A feed located at the focal point of a reflecting parabola, 
contrast, cassegrain feed is located away from the focal 
point. 



In 



PRINCIPAL CONTRACTOR 

A term developed for application to the Apollo spacecraft 
contract. The principal contractor has responsibility for a 
defined system with specific (sub) system exclusions. The 
principal contractor retains functional responsibility for 
technical integration but has no responsibility for adminis- 
trative or contractual matters of the excluded (sub) system 
these latter are retained by the contracting agency. 

PROBABILITY 

The ratio of chances favoring an event to the total number 
of possibilities for and against it. 



PROGRAMMED ROLL 



PROBABILITY LIMITS 

Upper and lower limits assigned to estimated value to indi- 
cate the range within which the true value is supposed to lie 
according to some statement of a probabilistic character. 

PROBABILITY OF ACCEPTANCE 

Probability that a lot or process will be accepted. 

PROBABILITY OF SURVIVAL 

A numerical expression of reliability indicating the proba- 
bility of an equipment, showing a given period of operating 
time without a failure. 

PROBE 

Any device inserted in an environment for the purpose of 
obtaining information about the environment. Specifically an 
instrumented vehicle moving through the upper atmosphere or 
space, or landing upon another celestial body in order to ob- 
tain information about the specific environment. 
See— interplanetary monitoring probe 
space probe 

PROCEDURES 

A particular course or mode of action for conducting a 
business or the formal instructions carrying management ap- 
proval, governing and prescribing the means by which per- 
sonnel are to operate to accomplish an objective. 

PROCESS 

See— controlled process 

manufacturing process 

PROCESS DRAWING 

Depicts parts in an intermediate stage of manufacturing. 

PROCUREMENT LEAD TIME 

The period between the study date for each item of supply 
until receipt of the first item inspected and accepted by the 
procuring department. The sum of administrative and pro- 
duction lead time. 

PROCURING ACTIVITY 

The element of a Government agency or department which 
maintains cognizance, control, and administration of a con- 
tract entered into by the Government agency or department. 

PROD 

Production. 

PRODUCIBILITY 

Those inherent design characteristics of an item which de- 
termine the factors of production, both kind and quantity, 
necessary to produce it. 

PRODUCT 

See— end product 

qualified product 

PRODUCTION PROD 

The process of collecting raw materials and converting them 
by fabrication into required components and end items. It 
includes production functions of scheduling, inspection, in- 
ventory control, etc. 



PRODUCTION CAPACITY 

The sum of all the factors of production in a defined situa- 
tion, such as the national capacity. 

PRODUCTION DRAWING 

Engineering drawings to which parts are fabricated. 

PRODUCTION MODEL 

The first completed object to be turned out by a particular 
method of production which serves as an example of the ob- 
jects which will follow. 

PRODUCTION SAMPLE TEST (VERIFICATION) 

Test performed on samples of production equipment at peri- 
odic intervals during production to insure that it complies 
with standards. 

PROFICIENCY 

An individual's level of skill in performing a particular task 
at any given moment. It is a function of such factors as 
aptitude, amount of training, and degree of motivation. 
See— maintenance proficiency 

PROFICIENCY TEST 

A test which measures an individual's level of development 
in the performance of a given task in order to determine how 
well he can do it at the moment. The test may involve a 
sample performance of actual elements of the job, or written 
questions about the job. 

PROFILE 

See— flight profile 
mission profile 
temperature profile 

PROG 

Program. 

PROGRAM PROG 

A related series of undertakings designed to accomplish a 
broad scientific or technical goal. Attainment of such long 
range goals may be accomplished by implementation of 
specific projects. 

PROGRAM CONTROL 

That system to be used to adequately measure and control a 
given program. 

PROGRAM EVALUATION AND 

REVIEW TECHNIQUE PERT 

Method of charting events and obtaining predicted perform- 
ance in accordance with a schedule. 



PROGRAM PLAN 

The contractor's detailed plan for implementing a specific 
program. The plan shall contain specifics such as sched- 
uling, organizations, and testing and method to be used to 
accomplish same. 

PROGRAMMED ROLL 

An automatically controlled maneuver of a ballistic missile 
or satellite to rotate the vehicle about the longitudinal axis. 



75 



PROGRAMMER 



PROGRAMMER 

Also referred to as program device. An assembly that 
originates signals to other assemblies and/or vehicle/stage 
systems that are time referenced to a known time. 

PROGRESSIVE BASE LINE DIMENSIONING 

A special application of base line dimensioning which may 
be used to conserve space in certain circumstances. Dimen- 
sions are established in a straight line from a common datum 
line using a series of dimensions and single arrow heads, 
each of which indicates the distance from the datum line or 
surface. 

PROJ 

Project. 

PROJECT PROJ 

A scheduled undertaking, within a program, which may in- 
volve the research and development, design, construction 
and operation of system and associated hardware, or hard- 
ware only, to accomplish a scientific or technical objective. 
See—space flight project 

PRONE-G 

Eyeballs out. Acceleration experienced in a back-to-chest 
direction, expressed in units of gravity. 

PROOF-TEST MODEL 

A complete flight type and flight weight spacecraft used for 
testing. 



PROPAGATION 

Describes the manner in which an electromagnetic wave such 
as a radar signal, timing signal, or ray of light, travels from 
one point to another. 



PROPELLANT UTILIZATION 

The precise control over the mixture ratio of fuel to oxidizer 
during operation of a liquid rocket. 

w 

PROPORTIONALITY 

The frequency of a class divided by the total frequency of 
the distribution. 

PROPRIETARY ITEM 

An item in which the owner has a proprietary right or interest 
enabling him to exclude others from its use or to authorize 
use thereof, subject to such restrictions as he may appro- 
priately impose. 

PROPULSION 

See— electric propulsion 
rocket propulsion 

PROSPECTOR 

Unmanned lunar roving vehicle. 

PROTON 

A positively charged subatomic particle of a positive charge 
equal to the negative charge of the electron but of 1837 
times the mass. A constituent of all atomic nuclei. 
See— solar protons 

PROTOTYPE 

An original or model after which a system is copied. A 
pattern. 

PROTOTYPE HARDWARE 

Developmental hardware which is representative of the con- 
figuration, performance, and functional characteristics of the 
end item. 



PSBLS 

Permanent Space Based Logistics System. 



PROPELLANT 

A liquid or solid substance or substances which either 
separately or mixed can be changed into a large volume of 
hot gases at a rate which is suitable for propelling projec- 
tiles or air vehicles. 

See— auto-igniting propellant 

composite propellant 

cryogenic propellant 

liquid propellant 

solid propellant 

star-grain propellant 

PROPELLANT MASS RATIO 

The ratio of the effective propellant mass in the propulsion 
system to the gross mass. 

PROPELLANT STRATIFICATION 

The phenomenon of uneven temperature, density, and pres- 
sure distribution in a propellant. Propellant stratification 
increases tank pressure which necessitates extra venting or 
releasing of gaseous propellant. (Since stratification im- 
plies layering, this popularly accepted term is a misnomer.) 



PSI 

Pounds Per Square Inch. 

PSIA 

Pounds Per Square Inch Absolute. 

PSIG 

Pounds Per Square Inch Gage. 

PT 

Part. 

PTCR 

Pad Terminal Connection Room. 

PULSE CODE MODULATION (TELEMETRY) PCM 

The information which is transmitted is contained in the 
prime position of the pulse in relation to a known reference 
point. 



76 



PULSE DURATION MODULATION PDM 

Regulation of the length of time of pulses according to a 
code for the purpose of transmitting messages, which can be 
received audibly on an oscilloscope or on tape. 

PULSE TIMER 

See—flight sequencer 

PULSED INTEGRATING PENDULUM PIP 

A single-degree-of-freedom pendulum. The PIP is the ac- 
celeration sensing unit of the PIPA. 

PULSED INTEGRATING 

PENDULUM ACCELEROMETER PIPA 

An acceleration measuring system with velocity output 
quantized to discrete values of velocity and capable of 
synchronization with a digital computer. 

PUMP 

See—gettering pump 



WEIGHT AND BALANCE FACILITY 

PURGE 

To rid a line or tank of residual fluid, especially of fuel or 
oxygen in the tanks or lines of a rocket after a test firing or 
simulated test firing. » 

PURGING SYSTEM 

The system which introduces a noncombustible gas, such as 
carbon dioxide, into the space above propellants to sweep 
out any toxic or combustible propellants when draining pro- 
pellant tanks. 

PYROTECHNIC TEST AND 
WEIGHT AND BALANCE FACILITY 

An isolated area that is used for building-up the pyrotechnic 
components associated with the spacecraft and used for the 
determination of weights and center of gravity of the space- 
craft with the assembled pyrotechnic items. 



77 



o 



QA 

Quality Assurance. 

QC 

Quality Control. 

QUAL 

Quality. 

QUALIFICATION-CONDITIONAL 

Conditional qualification is interpreted as that stage of the 
overall qualification program in which authorization is 
granted for initiation of fabrication of deliverable items 
which may be incorporated into and tested in higher levels 
of assemblies. 

QUALIFICATION TEST 

A test of parts, components, subassemblies, and higher 
levels of assembly which is performed to demonstrate 
that the design is inherently capable of meeting the estab- 
lished requirements. Tests are designed to locate significant 
failure modes and to determine the effects of varied stress 
levels, combinations of tolerances, and drift of design para- 
meters, and combinations and sequences of environments. 
Destructive tests and inspection of disassembled articles 
are included. 

QUALIFIED PART 

A part suited for procurement as revealed by designated test. 

QUALIFIED PARTS LIST 

A listing of all qualified parts used in the contractors 
equipment, including method of qualification and stage of 
qualification. (Conditional qualification vs. complete 
qualification). 

QUALIFIED PRODUCT 

An item which has successfully passed the required tests as 
specified in applicable specification. 



QUALITY QUAL 

A measure of the degree to which it conforms to specifica- 
tion and workmanship standards. Its numerical rating is ob- 
tained by measuring the percentage defective of a lot or 
population at a given time. 

See— acceptable quality level 
average outgoing quality 
lot quality 

QUALITY ASSURANCE QA 

A planned and systematic pattern of all actions necessary 
to provide adequate confidence that the end items will per- 
form satisfactorily in actual operations. 



QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS 

Those properties of an item or process in the population 
domain which can be measured, reviewed or observed, and 
which are identified in the drawings, specifications or con- 
tractural requirements. 

QUALITY CONTROL QC 

A factory-oriented operation for causing a process to manu- 
facture a uniform product within specified limits of percent 
defective in accordance with the design requirements. 
See— statistical quality control 
total quality control 

QUALITY ENGINEERING 

A factory oriented operation for establishing quality tests 
and interpreting quality data. 

QUALITY OF CONFORMANCE 

The adherence of a product to the design as it comes off the 
production line. 

QUANTIZATION 

The process of converting from continuous values of infor- 
mation to a finite number of discrete values. 



78 



R 



R AND D 

Research and Development. 

RADAR 

See—doppler radar 

RADAR ASTRONOMY 

The study of celestial bodies within the solar system by 
means of radiation originating on Earth but reflected from the 
body under observation. 
See— radio astronomy 

RADIAL VELOCITY 

Speed of approach or recession of a body from the point of 
observation along a line connecting the two. It can be de- 
termined by using doppler shift methods. 



RADIANT ENERGY 

Energy traveling in the form of electromagnetic waves, such 
as light, infrared, radio, and radar. It is measured in units 
of energy known as ergs, joules, calories, or kilowatts. The 
term radiation is generally a synonym, although in nucleonics 
the term radiation includes energy carried by particles as 
well as electromagnetic waves. 



RADIO INTERFERENCE 

Any undesirable radio-frequency signal which causes a mal- 
function or degradation of operation of any system or 
subsystem. 

RADIO METEOR 

A meteor detected by the reflection of a radio signal from the 
meteor trail of relatively high ion density (ion column). 

RADIO TELESCOPE 

A device for receiving, amplifmg, and measuring the inten- 
sity of radio waves orginating outside the Earth's 
atmosphere. 

RADIOMETER 

An instrument that detects and measures the intensity of 
thermal radiation, especially infrared radiation. 

RADIOSONDE 

A balloon-borne instrument for the simultaneous measure- 
ment and transmission of meteorological data. 

RAMJET 

A compressorless jet-propulsion device which depends for 
its operation on the air compression accomplished by the 
forward motion of the unit. 



RADIATION 

The emission and propagation of energy or matter. Energy 
traveling as a wave motion. The energy of electromagnetic 
waves. Radiant particles such as aplha rays or beta rays. 
See— electromagnetic radiation 

gamma radiation 

high-energy radiation 

incident radiation 

nuclear radiation 

soft radiation 

solar radiation 

solar radiation streams 

ultraviolet radiation 

visible radiation 



RANDOM ERRORS 

Chance variables that are individually unpredictable. 
errors may be described only in statistical terms. 



Such 



RANDOM FAILURE 

Any failure which occurs by chance, in an accidental, 
casual, or haphazard manner. Random failures may or may 
not be related to known failure modes. 



RANDOM MASS PHENOMENA 

The behavior of a system with many subsystems that divide 
themselves into groups bound together by some common 
characteristics or act with others of the same type. These 
aggregates are change in size, movement, effect, etc. 



RADIATION BELT 

A layer of trapped charged particles that surrounds a spatial 
body. 

RADIATION SHIELD 

A device used to prevent radiation from biasing the measure- 
ment of a quantity and to protect bodies from the harmful ef- 
fects of nuclear radiation, cosmic radiation, or the like. 

RADIO ASTRONOMY 

The study of celestial objects through observation of radio 
waves emitted or reflected by these objects. 



RANDOM SAMPLE 

One in which each item in the lot has an equal chance of 
being selected in the sample. 

RANDOM VARIABLE 

A variable, either discrete or continuous, which may assume 
any one of a number of values, each of which has a fixed 
probability of occurrence. 

RANDOMNESS 

An equal chance for any of the possible outcomes. 



79 



RANGE 



RANGE 

The difference between the greatest and the least of a set of 
variate values. 

See— environmental range 
interquartile range 
percentile range 

RANGER 

Rough-landing lunar program. Ranger will take high resolu- 
tion TV surface pictures during approach to the Moon and 
will make seismograph studies of the Moon after impact and 
also investigate charged particles between the Earth and the 
Moon. 

RANGING 

A term used to refer to various techniques for determining 
the distance of a satellite or a spacecraft from a ground 
based tracking station. 

RAREFIED GAS DYNAMICS 

The study of the phenomena related to the molecular or non- 
continuum nature of gas flow at low densities. 

RATE 

See— equipment failure rate 
failure rate 
part failure rate 
repair rate 
system failure rate 
vaporization rate 
weight flow rate 



REACTION ENGINE 

An engine that develops thrust by its reaction to ejection of 
a substance from it. Specifically, such an engine that ejects 
a jet or stream of gases created by the burning of fuel within* 
the engine. 

REACTION NOZZLE 

Nozzles of an attitude control system. 

REACTOR 

See— cavity reactor 
dust bed reactor 
fluid bed reactor 
gaseous core reactor 
nuclear reactor 
phoebus reactor 

READINESS 

See— flight readiness firings 
operational readiness 

READINESS RELIABILITY 

The probability that a mission system will be in operating 
condition when an operational demand is made on it. 

READINESS TIME 

The time required to obtain a stabilized system, ready to 
perform its intended function. The time is measured from the 
point when the system is unassembled or uninstalled to such 
time as it can be expected to perform accurately. Mainte- 
nance activity time is excluded from readiness time. 



RATIO 

See— by-pass ratio 
control ratio 
lift drag ratio 
mass ratio 
slenderness ratio 
thrust to weight ratio 
thrust-weight ratio 

RAYS 

See— cosmic rays 
gamma ray 



READOUT 

The action of transmitting data, either instantaneously with 
the acquisition of the data or by play of a magnetic tape 
upon which the data has been recorded. 



READOUT STATION 

A recording or receiving radio station where data is re- 
ceived from a transmitter in a probe, satellite, or other 
spacecraft. 

READY TIME 

That period of time during which the system is available for 
operation. 



RCS 

Reaction Control System. 



REAL TIME 

Time in which reporting on events or recording of events is 
simultaneous with the events. 



REACTION CONTROL FACILITY 

A building constructed to provide for testing of a full size 
space capsule and to withstand any explosions that may be 
encountered during the test operations performed on the re- 
action control system. 

REACTION CONTROL SYSTEM RCS 

System of small, low thrust vernier engines to provide 3-axis 
control of the spacecraft in the absence of aerodynamic 
forces. 



REAL TIME COMPUTER 

A computer that will provide data read-out simultaneously 
with acceptance of input data. 

REBOUND 

Network of passive communication reflectors, follow-on to 
Echo. 

RECOMBINATION 

The process by which a positive and a negative ion join to 
form a neutral molecule or other neutral particle. 



80 



RELIABILITY ASSESSMENT 



RECOVERY 

The location and retrieval of the astronauts, scientific 
samples and data, and spacecraft at the termination of the 
mission. 

RECTANGULAR DIMENSIONING 

A method for indicating distances, locations and sizes by 
means of linear dimensions measured parallel to reference 
lines or planes which are perpendicular to each other. 

RECYCLE 

To stop the count and to return to an earlier point in the 
countdown. 

RED-LINE INSTRUMENTATION 

Instrumentation to indicate emergency or abnormal operating 
conditions. 

RED-SHIFT 

In astronomy, the displacement of observed spectral lines 
toward the longer wavelengths at the red end of the spectrum. 

REDUNDANCY 

The existence of more than one means for accomplishing a 
given task. Parallel redundancy applied to systems where 
both means are working at the same time to accomplish the 
task, and either of the systems is capable of handling the 
job itself in case of failure of the other system. Standby 
redundancy applies to a system where there is an alternate 
means of accomplishing the task that is switched in by a 
malfunction sensing device when the primary system fails. 



REENTRY 

The return of a vehicle into the atmosphere after a flight 
above the sensible atmosphere. 
See— hyperbolic reentry 
parabolic reentry 

REENTRY CORRIDOR 

That region of the altitude-velocity plane where continuous 
flight is possible because the dynamic pressure is great 
enough to support lifting flight and yet the heating rates are 
low enough to allow economic surface cooling. 



REENTRY VEHICLE RV 

A space vehicle designed to return with its payload to earth 
through the sensible atmosphere. 

REENTRY WINDOW 

The area at the limits of the earth's atmosphere through 
which a space craft, in a given trajectory, can pass to ac- 
complish a successful reentry. 

REFERENCE 

See— Earth fixed reference 
space-fixed reference 

REFERENCE DATUM 

A plane assumed to be exact for purposes of computation or 
reference, from which the location of vehicle features may 
be established. 



REFERENCE DIMENSION 

A dimension, without tolerance, used for informational pur- 
poses and which does not govern manufacturing and inspec- 
tion operations. » 

REGENERATIVE COOLING 

The cooling of a part of an engine by the propellant. Specif- 
ically, the cooling of a rocket-engine combustion chamber or 
nozzle by circulating the fuel or oxidizer, or both, around the 
part to be cooled. 

REGION 

See— isothermal region 

REJECTION NUMBER 

A number associated with each sample of an attributes sam- 
pling plan. An inspection lot is rejected for an inspection if 
the total number of defectives is equal to or greater than the 
rejection number associated with that sample. 



RELATIVISTIC 

In general, pertaining to material such as a subatomic parti- 
cle moving at speeds which are an appreciable fraction of 
the speed of light. 

RELAXATION METHOD 

Technique similar to the gradient methods for solving optimi- 
zation problems, in which the variables are changed one at a 
time rather than simultaneously, in covering on a solution. 

RELAY 

Active communications satellite for civil use. 

RELIABILITY 

The probability that system, subsystem, component, or part 
will perform its required functions under defined conditions 
at a designated time and for a specified operating period. 
See— acceptable reliability level 

achieved reliability 

component and part reliability 

computed reliability 

design reliability 

design reliability assurance 

design reliability creation 

equipment reliability 

flight reliability 

functional reliability 

individual reliability test 

inherent reliability 

minimum acceptable reliability 

mission reliability 

readiness reliability 

sampling reliability test 

RELIABILITY APPORTIONMENT 

Method of budgeting the overall reliability objective among 
subordinate items. 

RELIABILITY ASSESSMENT 

An analytical determination of numerical reliability of a 
system or portion thereof without actual demonstration 
testing. Such assessments usually employ mathematical 



81 



RELIABILITY CONTROL 



modeling, use of available test results, and some use of 
estimated reliability figures. 

RELIABILITY CONTROL 

The coordination and direction of technical reliability 
activities. 

RELIABILITY GOAL 

That reliability desired of the design. 

RENDEZVOUS 

The event of two or more aerospace vehicles meeting in 
flight at a preconceived time and place. 
See— cooperative rendezvous 

Earth orbit rendezvous 

lunar orbit rendezvous 

REPAIR 

See— essential repair 

mean time to repair 

REPAIR RATE 

The probability of repair in a finite interval of time from the 
initiation of the repair action. 

REPAIR TIME 

Considered to be the total time that a unit is nonoperational, 
extending from the time of failure until the repaired unit is 
checked out and found satisfactory. 

REPAIRABILITY 

The probability that when the actual repair begins the sys- 
tem will be repaired in a given period of time with a given 
manpower expenditure. 

REPLACE 

To substitute an operative item for an inoperative or de- 
fective item. 

REPLACEABILITY 

The characteristics of an item that allows it to substitute 
for another item. 

REPLENISHMENT 

A term associated with the replacing of cyrogenic 
propellants. 

REQUIREMENT 

See— logistic requirements 

maintainability requirement 
station keeping requirement 

RESEARCH 

A continued process of scientific investigation prior to and 
during development. It has for its aim the discovery of new 
scientific facts, techniques, and natural laws. 

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
SPECIFICATIONS 

Specifications formally defining the performance require- 
ments, design criteria, design test requirements, and func- 
tional demonstrations which are necessary to complete a 
research and development program. 



RESPONSE 

See— dynamic response 

RETRO 

In reverse direction, as with a retrorocket for the purpose of 
firing opposite to the velocity vector to slow a vehicle, 
usually for reentry or landing. 

RETRO-FITTING 

Modification of previously delivered hardware. 

RETRO THRUST 

Thrust applied in a backward or opposite direction from the 
direction of motion of the vehicle or spacecraft. Retro- 
thrust is employed to slow a spacecraft from orbital velocity 
to descent velocity. 

RETROGRADE MOTION 

Orbital motion opposite in direction to that normal to spatial 
bodies within a given system or opposite in direction to a 
reference direction. 

RETROGRADE ROCKET 

A small vernier rocket used to slow a spacecraft and prepare 
it for reentry. 

REVOLUTION 

Motion of a celestial body in its orbit. Circular motion about 
an axis, usually external to the body. 

RF 

Radio Frequency. 

RGS 

Radio Guidance System. 

RIFT 

Reactor In-Flight Test. 

RMS 

Root mean square. 

ROCK AND SOIL ANALYSIS EQUIPMENT 

As apart of the scientific instrumentation subsystem, this 
equipment provides for obtaining samples of the lunar sur- 
face material, for obtaining core samples, and for the analy- 
sis of these samples. 

ROCKET 

See— apogee rocket 
booster rocket 
chemical rocket 
control rocket 
dry-fuel rocket 
fusion rocket 
multistage rocket 
nuclear rocket 
posigrade rocket 
retrograde rocket 
sounding rocket 
ullage rocket 
vernier rocket 



82 



RV 



ROCKET ENGINE 

A reaction engine that contains all the substances neces- 
sary for its operation or for the consumption or combustion 
of its fuel. Does not require intake of any outside sub- 
stance and is capable of operation in outer space. Also 
called rocket motor. 

See— atomic rocket engine 



ROCKET PROPULSION 

A type of reaction propulsion in which the propulsive force 
is generated by accelerating and discharging matter con- 
tained in the vehicle. To be distinguished particularily from 
jet propulsion. 



ROTARY HYDRAULIC ACTUATOR 

A radial vane and segmented cylinder assembly used to ro- 
tate the swing-arms horizontally. It is part of the umbilical 
tower swing-arm assembly. * 

ROTATION 

The turning of a body about its axis. 

ROUGH COMBUSTION CUTOFF 

The shut-down or cutoff of an engine due to excessive vibra- 
tion caused by rough combustion. 

RP-1 

A kerosene-type fuel. 



ROCKET SLED 

A sled that runs on a rail or rails and is accelerated to high 
velocities by a rocket engine. This sled is used by the air 
force in determining G tolerances and for developing crash- 
survival techniques. 



RP-1 FUEL SYSTEM COMPLEX 

Refers to all the facilities and facility equipments used for 
receiving, handling, storing, filtering, transferring, condi- 
tioning, controlling, and monitoring the RP-1 fuel. 

RSCS 

Rate Stabilization and Control System. 



ROCKOON 

A rocket research vehicle designed to be carried by a balloon 
to very high altitude before being fired. 

ROLL SIZE DRAWING 

Those which, due to their length, are filed in rolls and 
usually do not have a printed format. 



RUMBLE 

A form of combustion instability, especially in a liquid- 
propellant rocket engine, characterized by a low-pitched, 
low frequency rumbling noise. 

RV 

Reentry Vehicle. 



83 



s 



S-BAND 

Frequencies in the region of 2500 megacyles per second. 

S-l PROPULSION 

The S-I stage is powered by eight Rocketdyne H-l engines 
developing a total nominal sea level thrust of 1,500,000 
pounds. The engines burn LOX and RP-1. Vehicle control 
and stability are achieved by directing the thrust of the four 
outboard engines in response to electrical control signals 
developed in the guidance and control system (housed in the 
instrument unit). 



S-l STAGE 

The first stage of the SATURN I launch vehicle. It is de- 
signed to propel the vehicle, with payload, through the 
initial part of the trajectory. The stage is approximately 
80-feet long, 21-feet in diameter, and weighs over 50 tons 
dry. Fully loaded with propellant, the stage weighs over 
500 tons. 



S-l STRUCTURE 

The structural support for the S-I stage is provided by five 
LOX containers, rigidly support at the forward end by a 
spider assembly, and at the aft end by the engine thrust- 
structure assembly. In this configuration, four equal-diameter 
containers circumvent a single larger diameter container. 
Between the four outer LOX containers there are four RP-1 
fuel containers. The fuel containers are not rigidly attached 
to the spider beam, and therefore do not structurally support 
the stage. The stage structure includes four large fins and 
four stub fins which aid in stabilizing the vehicle in the 
lower atmosphere. In addition, the fins provide the vehicle 
with eight integral support and holddown points while the 
vehicle is on the pad. The fins are attached rigidly to the 
stage outriggers. 



S-IB PROPULSION SYSTEM 

The S-IB stage is powered by eight Rocketdyne H-l engines 
developing a total nominal sea level thrust of 1,500,000 
pounds. The engines burn LOX and RP-1. Vehicle control 
and stability are achieved by directing the thrust of the four 
outboard engines in response to electrical control signals 
developed in the guidance and control system (housed in the 
instrument unit). 

S-IB STAGE 

The first stage of the SATURN IB launch vehicle. It is 
designed to propel the vehicle with payload through the 
initial part of the trajectory. The stage is approximately 
80-feet long, 21-feet in diameter, and weighs over 40 tons 
dry. Fully loaded with propellant, the stage weighs over 
500 tons. 



84 



S-IB STRUCTURE 

The structural support for the S-IB stage is provided by five 
LOX containers rigidly supported at the forward end by a 
spider assembly, and at the aft end by the engine thrust 
structure assembly. In this configuration, four equal-diameter 
containers circumvent a single large diameter container. 
Between the four outer LOX containers there are four RP-1 
fuel containers. The fuel containers are not ridj^ly attached 
to the spider beam, and therefore do not structurally support 
the stage. The stage structure includes eight fins which 
aid in stabilizing the vehicle in the lower atmosphere. In 
addition, the fins provide the vehicle with eight integral 
support and holddown points while the vehicle is on the pad. 
The fins are attached rigidly to the stage outriggers. 

S-IC PROPULSION SYSTEM 

The S-IC stage is powered by five Rocketdyne F-l engines 
developing a total nominal sea level thrust of 7,500,000 
pounds. The engines burn LOX and RP-1. Vehicle control 
and stability are obtained by directing the thrust of the 
four outboard engines in response to electrical control 
signals developed in the control system (housed in the in- 
strument unit). 

S-IC STAGE 

The first stage of the SATURN V launch vehicle. It is de- 
signed to propel the space vehicle for the first 150 seconds 
of the trajectory. The stage is approximately 138-feet long, 
33-feet in diameter, and weighs over 140 tons dry. Fully 
loaded with propellant, the stage weighs over 2300 tons. 

S-IC STRUCTURE 

Propellant for the engines of the S-IC stage is contained in 
two containers connected by an intertank section. The con- 
tainers are cylindrical with ellipsoidal bulkheads supported 
by frames and longitudinal stiffeners. The stage is struc- 
turally designed to have free-standing capability without 
having the propellant containers pressurized. Four fins, 
located outboard of the engines, aid in aerodynamic stabili- 
zation of the vehicle. 

S-ll PROPULSION SYSTEM 

The S-II stage is powered by five Rocketdyne J-2 engines 
developing a total vacuum thrust (nominal) of 1,000,000 
pounds. The engines burn LOX and LH-2. Vehicle control 
and stability are obtained by directing the thrust of the 
engine in response to electrical control signals developed 
in the guidance and control system (housed in the instrument 
unit). 

S-ll STAGE 

The secondary stage of the SATURN V launch vehicle. It 
is designed to propel the space vehicle from an altitude of 
200,000-feet to 600,000-feet. The stage is approximately 
81 -feet long, 33-feet in diameter, and weighs over 36 tons 



SAT 



dry. Fully loaded with propellant, the stage weighs over 
500 tons. 

S-ll STRUCTURE 

As a result of propellant container design, the structure of 
the S-II stage is self-supporting even though unpressurized. 
The propellant containers are integral, with the LH-2 con- 
tainer forward of the LOX. 

S-IV PROPULSION SYSTEM 

The S-IV stage is powered by six Pratt and Whitney RL10 
A-3 engines developing a total-vacuum thrust (nominal) of 
90,000 pounds. The engines burn LOX and LH-2. Vehicle 
control and stability are achieved by directing the thrust of 
all six engines in response to electrical control signals 
developed in the guidance and control system (housed in the 
instrument unit). 

S-IV STAGE 

The second stage of the SATURN I launch vehicle. It is 
designed to propel the payload into a nominal-circular Earth 
orbit. The stage is approximately 41-feet long, 18-feet in 
diameter, and weighs over 12,000 pounds dry. Fully loaded 
with propellant, the stage weighs over 57 tons. 

S-IV STRUCTURE 

As a result of propellant container design, the structure of 
S-IV stage is self-supporting even though unpressurized. 
The propellant containers are integral (supported by a com- 
mon bulkhead) with the LH-2 container forward of the LOX. 
The stage does not require fins for stability. 

S-IVB PROPULSION SYSTEM 

The S-IVB stage is powered by a single Rocketdyne J-2 
engine developing a total vacuum thrust (nominal) of 
200,000 pounds. The engine burns LOX and LH-2. Vehicle 
pitch and yaw control are achieved by directing the thrust 
of the engine. Roll control is provided by an auxiliary pro- 
pulsion system. Control signals originate in the instrument 
unit. There are two auxiliary propulsion modules, one on 
either side of the stage. Each module contains five hyper- 
golic motors used for attitude and ullage control. 

S-IVB STAGE 

The second stage of the SATURN IB launch vehicle and the 
third stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle. It is designed 
to inject the spacecraft into an Earth parking orbit, and to 
then restart to give the velocity required for Earth-lunar 
transit. The stage is approximately 59-feet long, 22-feet in 
diameter, and weighs over 10 tons dry. Fully loaded with 
propellant, the stage weighs over 120 tons. 

S-IVB STRUCTURE 

As a result of propellant container design, the structure of 
the stage is self-supporting even though unpressurized. The 
propellant containers are integral with the LH-2 container 
forward of the LOX container. 

S-l 

Booster for the SA-1 vehicle. 



SA-T1 

Static test booster. 

SA-1 

First Saturn flight vehicle. 

SAC 

Strategic Air Command. 

SADDLE POINT 

Stationary point which is a relative minimum with respect to 
at least one independent variable, and a relative maximum 
with respect to another. 

SAFETY 

See— /actor of safety 
margin of safety 
ultimate safety factor 
yield safety factor 



SAMPLE 

See—average sample number 
censored sample 

production sample tests (verification) 
random sample 

SAMPLE SIZE 

The number of units in a sample. Also used in the sense of 
the number of observations in a sample. 



SAMPLE UNIT 

A unit of product selected without regard to its quality, to 
be part of a sample. 



SAMPLING 

See— acceptance sampling 
double sampling 
multiple sampling 
sequential sampling 
single sampling 



SAMPLING PLAN 

A specific plan which states the sample sizes, and the cri- 
teria for accepting, rejecting or taking another sample to be 
used in inspecting a lot. 

See— acceptance sampling plan 
multiple sampling plan 



SAMPLING RELIABILITY TEST 

Same as the individual reliability test except that it is 
longer in duration, and is done on samples selected at 
random from equipment successfully passing the require- 
ments of the individual reliability tests. 



SA-D1 

Dynamic test vehicle. 



SA 

Saturn. 



85 



SATELLITE 



SATELLITE 

An attendant body that revolves about another body. 
See— active repeater satellite 
artificial Earth satellite 
communications satellite 
earth-stabilized satellite 
Explorer satellite series 
fixed satellite 
passive satellite 
stationary satellite 
synchronous satellite 

SATURN SA 

Previous designation for Saturn I. 



SATURN B 

Previous designation for Saturn IB. 



SATURN C-l 

Previous designation for Saturn I. 



SATURN C-1B 

Previous designation for Saturn IB. 



SATURN C-5 

Previous designation for Saturn V. 

SATURN I BLOCK I 

Launch vehicle used on the Apollo program for flight testing 
and development of the Saturn S-I stage systems. The 
second and third stages are water filled dummy tanks simu- 
lating the weight of propellant filled upper stages. 

SATURN I BLOCK II 

Launch vehicle used for developmental flights of the Saturn 
booster, the launching of Apollo spacecraft into earth orbit, 
and the launching of Apollo spacecraft into lunar return and 
reentry trajectories. 

SATURN I SEPARATION SYSTEM 

The separation of the S-I and S-IV stages is accomplished 
during a short coast period prior to S-IV engine ignition 
using a single plane separation mode. Separation is assisted 
by four ullage motors mounted on the aft skirt of the S-IV 
structure and four retromotors mounted on the spider beam of 
the S-I stage. During the separation, sequence interstage 
blow-out panels are removed to vent LOX from the S-IV 
engine thrust chambers. 

SATURN IB 

Launch vehicle planned in the support of the Apollo program 
by launching Apollo spacecraft modules in Earth orbit. Ad- 
ditional missions may include lunar explorations and lunar 
logistics support. 

SATURN V 

Launch vehicle used in the Apollo program, the primary mis- 
sion of which is to boost the payloads used to perform the 
manned lunar landing and return. 



SATURN l-B SEPARATION SYSTEM 

The separation of the S-IB and S-IVB stages is accomp- 
lished during a short coast period prior to S-IVB engine igni- 
tion, using a single plane separation mode. Separation is » 
assisted by four ullage motors mounted on the aft skirt of 
the S-IVB structure and four retromotors mounted on the 
S-IVB aft interstage. During the separation sequence inter- 
stage blow-out panels are removed to vent LOX from the 
S-IVB engine thrust chambers. 

SATURN V SEPARATION SYSTEM 

Separation of the expended S-IC stage is by a dual plane 
separation mode. This mode consists of severing the 
S-IC/S-II interstage at the J-2 engine exit plane followed by 
separation of the interstage section. Eight retromotors 
located in the S-IC stage engine fairings are used in the 
separation sequence. Separation of the expended S-II stage 
is accomplished during a short coast period prior to ignition 
of the S-IVB engine. Retromotors on the S-IVB after inter- 
stage effect positive separation. 

SATURN ELECTRICAL SYSTEM 

The electrical system for the vehicle supplies electrical 
power properly conditioned to meet the requirements of the 
guidance and control, instrumentation, command destruct, 
ordnance, and propulsion systems. The primary power source 
is composed of zinc silver-oxide batteries with associated 
distributors and inverters. The basic design goal is to have 
no power applied across the stage interlace. This is 
accomplished by including a complete electrical power sup- 
ply in each stage (including the instrument unit). 

SATURN GUIDANCE AND CONTROL SYSTEM 

The all-inertial guidance and control system is contained 
in the instrument unit. Control signals from the system are 
applied to the active stage during powered flight. A pre- 
determined time-tilt trajectory is used during the first stage 
operation with control signals going to the first stage engine 
actuators. For the remaining powered phases, a path adap- 
tive guidance mode is used with control signals to the 
engine actuators to achieve the mission trajectory. 



SATURN INSTRUMENTATION SYSTEM 
Each stage of any Saturn launch vehicle has an independant 
instrumentation system, which consists of the measuring 
and signal conditioning, telemetry, antennas, tracking, and 
range safety systems. The range safety system is interstage 
connected, to insure redundancy. 



SATURN MECHANICAL SYSTEM 

The mechanical system of any Satum configuration includes, 
within each stage, an electron hydraulic system for each 
engine, ullage motors and retromotors for stage separation, 
and equipment for environmental conditioning. 

SC 

Spacecraft. 

SCALE HEIGHT 

A measure of the relationship between density and tempera- 
ture at any point in an atmosphere. 



86 



SCALING EFFECT 

The influence of size on the operation and efficiency of a 
system. 

SCANNER 

See—Lyman-Alpha scanner 

SCATS 

Simulation, Checkout and Training System. 

SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM 

A diagrammatic drawing that shows function symbols with 
interconnections to illustrate circuit operation. It does not 
necessarily identify physical location of components or 
connections between them. 
See— advanced schematic 

SCHMOO PLOT 

A plot which shows the operating margins when the com- 
ponent under test is varied between its upper and lower 
"end of life" limits, while all other components are at the 
worst end of the initial acceptance tolerances. 



SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTATION SUBSYSTEM 

This subsystem is designed primarily for selenologic re- 
search. It includes tools and instruments necessary to per- 
form programmed scientific experiments. Proposed compo- 
nents of this subsystem include; lunar atmosphere analyzer, 
gravitometer, magnetometer, radiation spectrometer, speci- 
men return container, rock and soil analysis eguipment, soil 
and temperature instrument, and seismographic equipment. 

SCOUT 

4-stage solid rocket launch vehicle. 

SCREAMING 

A form of combustion instability, characterized by a high- 
pitched noise, especially in a liguid-propellant rocket 
engine, of relatively high frequency. 

SCREENING TEST 

Test employing nondestructive environmental, electrical, or 
mechanical stresses to identify anomalous items. 

SCRUB 

To cancel a scheduled rocket firing, either before or during 
countdown. 

SCS 

Stabilization and Control System. 

SEALED CABIN 

A cabin sealed against exfiltration or infiltration of any gas, 
liquid, or solid. 

SECONDARY COSMIC RAYS 

Secondary emission in the atmosphere stimulated by primary 
cosmic rays. 

SECONDARY FAILURE 

A cessation of ability of an item to perform its required 
function due to the malfunction of another item. Secondary 



SERVICE MODULE 

failure is one which occurs as a by product of an indepen- 
dent failure. 

SEISMOGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT 

As a part of the scientific instrumentation subsystem, this 
equipment provides the capability for investigating the sub- 
surface structure of the Moon by measurements taken after 
exploding a charge below the lunar surface. 

SELECTED INTERCHANGEABILITY 

Exists when all components manufactured to the same gen- 
eral specification are not interchangeable. The component 
parts axe placed in classes so that there will be complete 
interchangeability in each class. 

SELECTED PART 

A part that has been approved or accepted by a user for one 
or more applications based upon known satisfactory usage 
or test in connection with this or some other program. 



SELENOCENTRIC 

Relating to the center of the Moon, 
a center. 



Referring to the Moon as 



SEMI 

A prefix denoting half. Occurring or coming every half 
period. E.g., a semi monthly event will occur twice a month. 
Compare with bi. 

SENSOR 

The component of an instrument that converts an input signal 
into a quantity which is measured by another part of the in- 
strument. Also called sensing element. 



SEPARATION 

In multistage space vehicles, the action time or place at 
which a burned-out stage is discarded and the remaining 
missile continues on its course. 

SEQUENTIAL SAMPLING 

Sampling inspection where, after each unit is inspected, the 
decision is made to accept, reject, or to inspect another 
unit. 

SEQUENTIAL TEST 

The measurement by statistical hypothesis of a sequence of 
samples where it is decided at each step in the sequence to 
accept the hypothesis, to reject the hypothesis, or to take 
an additional sample. 

SERB 

Study of Enhanced Radiation Belt. 

SERT 

Space Electric Rocket Test (program to test electric pro- 
pulsion systems). 

SERVICE MODULE SM 

The portion of the spacecraft housing the stores and systems 
which do not require maintenance or direct operation by the 
crew and are not required by the command module after 
separation. 



87 



SERVICE MODULE SIMULATOR 



SERVICE MODULE SIMULATOR 

This simulator, when used in conjunction with the space- 
craft adapter simulator and the launch vehicle simulator, 
assists in checkout of the command module (CM) without 
utilizing the service module (SM). The simulator provides, 
to either SM interface, a facsimile of the SM signals, power 
requirements, loads, and other functions. No provisions are 
made for simulation of self contained functions of the SM. 



SERVICE PROPULSION SYSTEM SPS 

The main propulsion system in the service module (SM) 
powered by a liquid-propellant rocket engine, designed to 
provide propulsion for gross translunar and transearth mid- 
course velocity corrections, and for lunar orbit injection 
and transearth injection. During Earth orbit missions, the 
system provides propulsion for Earth orbital transfer and 
correction and orbit injection. It can also provide thrust for 
post-atmospheric abort following jettison of the launch 
escape system. 



SERVICE STRUCTURE 

A steel structure which is used to erect, assemble, check- 
out and service space vehicles. The structure includes work 
platforms, hoisting equipment, personnel and equipment 
elevators. It is usually mobile so that it may be removed 
from the launcher area. Also called a gantry. 



SHADOWGRAPH 

A picture or image in which steep density gradients in the 
flow about a body are made visible, the body itself being 
presented in silhouette. 



SHAKE-TABLE TEST 

A laboratory test in which an instrument component is placed 
in or on a vibrator that simulates one of the conditions dur- 
ing the launch of a missile or other vehicle. 

SHELF LIFE 

Storage or nonoperational time that can be accumulated on 
items before they are placed in operating use or before one 
of the following actions must be taken: visual inspection, 
functional testing, overhauling, scrapping, or rejuvenating. 

SHIELD 

See— radiation shield 

SHIFT 

See—doppler shift 
red shift 

SHIRTSLEEVE ENVIRONMENT 

Environment not requiring the wearing of a pressure suit. 

SHOCK WAVE 

See— normal shock wave 



SERVICE TEST 

A test, under simulated or actual conditions, to determine 
the characteristics, capabilities, and limitations of a given 
piece of equipment or material. Also a test made at any 
point in the development of a piece of equipment or material, 
with the object of predetermining ultimate capability and 
serviceability. 

SERVICEABILITY 

Equipment design, configuration, installation, and operation 
that minimizes maintenance, inspection and servicing. 

SERVO FLUTTER 

See— coupled servo flutter 

SET 

A unit or units and necessary assemblies, subassemblies 
and parts connected or associated together to perform an 
operational function. 

SEXTANT SXT 

An instrument designed for the measurement of angles sub- 
tended at an observer's position by distant objects. 

SFA 

Sunfinder Assembly. 

SFERICS 

Radio static associated with severe electrical storms. 

SFOF 

Space Flight Operations Facility (operations center for JPL 
space programs). 



SHOCK ISOLATION 

The protection of equipment, components, systems and facili- 
ties, etc., from shock-type forces which are associated with 
explosions, impacts, decelerations and accelerations, etc. 

SHOCK STRUTS 

Shock attenuating devices for personnel support, restraint 
couches, and other parts of the CM and LEM. 

SHOCK-WAVE DURATION 

The time required for the value of the instantaneous acceler- 
ation to depart from and return to zero. 



SHOCK-WAVE RISE TIME 

The required time for the value of the instantaneous accel- 
eration to increase from zero to a maximum value. 

SHOT 

Slang for launch. 

SHUTDOWN 

The process of reducing engine thrust to zero. Synonymous 
with cutoff. 

SIGMA LIMITS 

The interval about the mean expressed in units of standard 
deviation. 

SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 

A predetermined expected fraction of all cases of repetition 
of the test in which the hypothesis is rejected under the 
test, even rough it is true. 



88 



SILO ENCLOSURES 

Enclosures which protect the space vehicle on the launch 
pad from adverse wind and weather. The enclosures are part 
of the service structure, integral with the service platforms 
and take the shape of a silo when the split sections are 
mated. 



SIMULATED FLIGHT TEST 

A test in which all vehicle subsystems are operated, in so 
far as possible, through a typical sequence simulating the 
entire flight of the vehicle. This test also provides a com- 
patibility test of the vehicle system. 



SIMULATION 

A set of test conditions designed to duplicate field operat- 
ing and usage environments. 



SIMULATION, CHECKOUT 

AND TRAINING SYSTEM SCATS 

This system contains equipment to simulate telemetry, 
trajectory, and command data as well as voice communica- 
tions, for subsystem tests, open loop simulations, closed 
loop simulations, and ground network checkout. 

SIMULATION CONTROL CENTER 

A facility within the integrated mission control center 
equipped in a manner to allow control and evaluation of the 
operational procedures and actions of ground-based elements 
involved in closed-loop mission simulations. 

SIMULATOR 

A device or equipment used during manufacturing, test, 
checkout and training operations, which produces a signal, 
appearance or environment similar and equivalent to the real 
system, equipment, stage, etc. 
See— command module simulator 

five-degree oj freedom simulator 

flight simulator 

launch escape simulator 

service module simulator 

space simulator 

spacecraft adapter simulator 

stage interface simulator 

SINGLE SAMPLING 

Sampling inspection in which a decision to accept or to re- 
ject is reached after the inspection of a single sample. 

SIO 

Staged In Orbit. 

SIZE 

See— actual size 
basic size 
design size 
lot size 

minimum material size 
nominal size 
sample size 



SNAP-10 

SIZE DIMENSION 

A specified value of a diameter, width, length, or other 
geometrical characteristic directly related to the size of an 
object. , 

SKETCH DRAWING 

Original reproducible drawings prepared by engineering or 
drafting personnel for the purpose of facilitating or expedit- 
ing the fabrication or procurement of parts, test equipment, 
etc., when time does not permit preparation of regulation 
drawings according to approved standard drafting practices. 

SKEWNESS 

Non-symmetry in a frequency distribution. 

SKIN TRACKING 

The tracking of an object by means of radar. 

SKIP-OUT BOUNDARY 

The upper limits of the reentry corridor. 

SKIRT 

See— adapter skirt 

SKY SCREEN 

An element of equipment used by the range safety officer 
that provides indication whenever the missile deviates from 
planned trajectory. 

SKYLARK 

A sounding rocket. 

SLENDERNESS RATIO 

A configuration factor expressing the ratio of a rocket 
vehicle's length to its diameter. 

SLOSHING 

The back-and-forth splashing of a liquid fuel in its tank, 
creating problems of stability and control in the vehicle. 

SLOW-MEMORY LINER 

A covering over the astronauts couch which will improve 
load distribution and absorb shock on landing impact. 

SLUG 

A unit of mass. The mass of a free body which if acted 
upon by a force of 1 pound would experience an acceleration 
of 1 foot per second. 

SLURRY 

A suspension of fine solid particles in a liquid. 

SM 

Service Module. 

SNAP 

System for Nuclear Auxiliary Power. 

SNAP-10 

A nuclear electric power generating system using a liquid 
metal cooled reactor and thermoelectric units for thermal to 
electrical energy conversion. 



89 



SNAP-2 



SNAP-2 

A nuclear electric power generating system incorporating a 
liquid metal cooled nuclear reactor and a rankine cycle 
energy conversion system. Mercury is the energy conversion 
system working fluid that drives tne turbine, which is di- 
rectly connected to an electrical generator. 

SNAP-50 

An advanced turboelectric power generating system intended 
to be in the power range of hundreds of kilowatts. 

SNAP-8 

A program developing nuclear power systems to be carried on 
board spacecraft. 

SNPO 

Space Nuclear Propulsion Office. 

SOFAR NET 

A hydrophone system used to provide impact location on 
Earth of reentry vehicles, by measuring time of arrival of 
sound waves in the ocean and then triangulating. SOFAR is 
an acronym for Sound Fixing And Ranging. 



SOLAR MAGNETOGRAM 

A recording obtained on Earth that measures the magnetic 
activity of sunspots. 

SOLAR NOISE 

Electromagnetic radiation which radiates from the atmosphere 
of the Sun at radio frequencies. 

SOLAR PADDLE 

Paddle-like devices attached to a spacecraft, which contain 
small solar cells used to convert sunlight into storable 
electrical energy. 

SOLAR PROTONS 

Elementary charged particles and nuclei of hydrogen atoms 
accelerated by the Sun and ejected into space with energies 
up to several billion electron volts. 

SOLAR RADIATION 

The total electromagnetic radiation emitted by the Sun. 

SOLAR RADIATION STREAMS 

All forms of radiant energy, including visible light, that 
emanate from the Sun. 



SOFT LANDING 

Landing on a planetary body at a slow speed to avoid de- 
struction to the landing vehicle. 



SOFT RADIATION 

Radiation which is absorbed by an absorber equivalent to 10 
centimeters of lead or less. 

SOIL TEMPERATURE INSTRUMENT 

As a part of the scientific instrumentation subsystem, this 
instrument provides the capability for measuring lunar sur- 
face and lunar subsurface temperature. 

SOLAR ATMOSPHERIC TIDE 

Vertical motion of the atmosphere due to thermal or gravita- 
tional action of the Sun. 

SOLAR CELL 

A photovoltaic device that converts sunlight directly into 
electiical energy. 

SOLAR COLLECTOR 

A parabolic mirror-type device used to collect and concen- 
trate solar energy. 

SOLAR CONCENTRATOR 

A device such as a parabolic mirror used to concentrate 
radiant solar energy to a small area. 

SOLAR CORONA 

Outer atmospheric shell of the Sun. 

SOLAR FLARE 

Solar phenomenon which gives rise to intense ultraviolet and 
corpuscular emission from the associated region of the Sun, 
affecting the structure of the ionsphere which interfers with 
communications. 



SOLAR SAILS 

Devices which can utilize solar pressure to orient or accel- 
erate space vehicles. 

SOLAR TIME 

Time measured by reference to the apparent motion of the 
Sun about the Earth. 

SOLAR WIND 

A stream of protons constantly moving outward from the 
Sun. 

SOLID PROPELLANT 

Specifically, a rocket propellant in solid form, usually con- 
taining both fuel and oxidizer combined or mixed and formed 
into a monolithic (not powdered or granulated) grain. 

SONIC SPEED 

The speed of sound. By extension, the speed of a body 
traveling at mach 1 . 

SOPHISTICATED 

Complex and intricate. Making use of advanced art. Re- 
quiring special skills to operate. 

SOUND PLANE LEVEL 

The pressure generated by a sound wave. The unit of meas- 
ure is the decibel which is usually the unit for measuring the 
relative loudness of sounds. 

SOUNDING ROCKET 

A rocket designed to explore the atmosphere within 4,000 
miles of the Earth's surface. 

SOURCE CONTROL DRAWING 

An engineering drawing defining vendor substantiation test- 
ing. The drawings are applicable to vendor designed parts 
only. 



90 



SPACECRAFT SYSTEM 



SPA 

Servo Power Assembly. 

SPACE 

Specifically, the part of the universe lying outside the 
limits of the Earth's atmosphere. More generally, the volume 
in which all spatial bodies, including the Earth, move. 
See— annular space 

circvmplanetary space 

SPACE EQUIVALENCE 

A state of being in which a condition or conditions within 
the atmosphere are virtually identical with a condition or 
conditions beyond the atmosphere. 

SPACE EXPLORATION 

The effort established, through space programs, to develop 
man's knowledge of the universe. 

SPACE FLIGHT PROJECT 

A task within the realm of space flight which leads to the 
accomplishment of mission objectives. E.g., collection of 
scientific data, transportation of cargo and personnel be- 
tween two terminals, and satisfaction of commercial 
requirements. 

SPACE LAW 

A projected code of international law that would govern the 
use or control of space. 

SPACE MEDICINE 

A branch of aerospace medicine concerned specifically with 
the health of persons who make flights beyond the sensible 
atmosphere. 

SPACE PLATFORM 

Habitable orbiting installation, normally geocentric, used as 
a base for launching vehicles for space research. 

SPACE PROBE 

A research vehicle intended to reach a distant point in 
space. 

SPACE REDDENING 

The observed reddening, or absorption of shorter wave- 
lengths, of the light from distant celestial bodies caused by 
scattering by small particles in interstellar space. 



SPACE SCIENCE 

The specific discipline associated with the development of 
knowledge about the universe. 



SPACE SIMULATOR 

A device which simulates some condition or conditions 
existing in space and is used for testing equipment and 
training programs. 

SPACE SYSTEM 

A system consisting of launch vehicle, spacecraft, ground 
support equipment, and test hardware used in launching, 
operating and maintaining vehicle or craft in space. 



SPACE VEHICLE SV 

The entire spacebome element. It consists of the spacecraft 
and the launch vehicle. 

See— operational space vehicle ' 

man rated space vehicle 

SPACE VEHICLE SIMULATOR 

An assemblage of equipments that simulates the entire 
space vehicle to validate the vehicle integrated checkout 
system. 

SPACE VEHICLE SYSTEM 

The over-all complex of equipments, methods, procedures, 
and personnel requirements needed to fulfill the mission of 
the space vehicle. 

SPACE-FIXED REFERENCE 

An oriented reference system in space, independent of 
Earth phenomena for positioning. 

SPACE-TIME DILEMMA 

According to Einstein's Theory of Relativity, time would 
slow down increasingly for occupants of systems moving at 
velocities approaching the speed of light, relative to the 
Earth. This slowdown would not be apparent to inhabitants 
of the spacecraft until they returned to Earth. 

SPACECRAFT SC 

The vehicle required to perform the mission after injection 
into the mission trajectory and consists of the command 
module, service module and lunar excursion module. 
See— Apollo spacecraft 

operational spacecraft 

test spacecraft 

SPACECRAFT ADAPTER 

A shell of adhesive bonded aluminum honeycomb, reinforced 
with sheet metal, which performs the physical mating of the 
Apollo spacecraft to the Saturn launch vehicle. For the 
lunar landing mission, it houses the lunar excursion module 
(LEM). 

SPACECRAFT ADAPTER SIMULATOR 

This simulator supplies signals and functions that are 
supplied operationally by the adapter to the spacecraft and 
the launch vehicle, and so, facilitates combined-systems 
checkout of these neighbors without an adapter. Primarily, 
the adapter simulator consists of wiring, since only a few 
signals or functions have their origin in the adapter. The 
signals are primarily sensor responses. 

SPACECRAFT OPERATIONS AND 
CHECKOUT FACILITY 

A facility that houses the assembly and checkout for final 
testing of assembled mechanical and electrical components 
in the spacecraft. 



SPACECRAFT SYSTEM 

The spacecraft and all equipment on the ground or in space 
that is associated with flight preparation and required dur- 
ing flight operation. 



91 



SPACESUIT 



SPACESUIT 

Pressure suit designed ior wear in space or at very low- 
pressure altitudes within the atmosphere, designed to permit 
wearer to leave the protection of a pressurized cabin. 

SPARE PARTS 

A component of an item used to maintain or repair the item. 

SPEC 

Specification. 

SPECIFIC GRAVITY 

The ratio of the weight of any volume of a substance to the 
weight of an equal volume of another substance, taken as 
standard, at a constant or stated temperature. Solids and 
liquids are usually compared with water at four degrees 
centigrade. 

SPECIFIC IMPULSE 

A performance parameter of a rocket propellant, expressed in 
seconds, and equal to thrust divided by weight flow rate. 

SPECIFICATION SPEC 

A detailed description of the characteristics of a product and 
of the criteria which must be used to determine whether the 
product is in conformity with the description. 
See— detail specification 

material specifications 

research and development specifications 

SPECIFICATION WEIGHT 

The maximum allowable weight for an item as specified in a 
contract statement of work or a procurement specification. 

SPECIMEN RETURN CONTAINER 

As a part of the scientific instrumentation subsystem, this 
small container will be filled with lunar material. This 
container is sealed so that no material or bacteria can enter 
on the return flight. 

SPECTROMETER 

An instrument which measures some characteristics, such as 
intensity of electromagnetic radiation, as a function of wave- 
length or frequency. 

SPECTRUM 

Any series of energies arranged according to wavelength. 
See— electromagnetic spectrum 

SPHERE 

See— celestial sphere 

SPHYGMOMANOMETER 

An instrument for measuring blood pressure in the arteries. 
There are many forms of the instrument, each named for the 
person who devised it. 

SPIDER 

A piece of handling equipment which resembles a spider in 
appearance. The legs or arms of the spider are attached to 
the equipment to be handled, while the head of the spider, 
which is usually a ring, is supported and maneuvered by 
hoisting equipment. 



SPIN STABILIZATION 

Stabilization of a space craft by gyroscopic forces. 

SPS 

Service Propulsion System. 

SPUTTERING 

Dislocation of surface atoms of a material bombarded by 
high-energy atomic particles. 

SQUIB 

A small pyrotechnic device used to fire the igniter in a 
rocket, or for some similar purpose. Not to be confused with 
a detonator which explodes. 



STABILITY 

The property of a subsystem which causes forces or moments 
to be developed to restore equilibrium whenever that 
equilibrium is disturbed. 
See— dynamic stability 



STABILIZATION 

See— spin stabilization 



STABILIZATION AND CONTROL SYSTEM SCS 

A system in the Apollo spacecraft that controls angular 
orientation and stabilization of the spacecraft about its three 
axes by sensing angular displacement and angular rate. For 
automatic control, engine gimbals and the reaction control 
system (RCS) control valves are actuated. For manual 
operation, information is fed to displays. Separate systems 
are located in the command module (CM) and the lunar ex- 
cursion module (LEM). Basic components are: 

(1) Attitude reference. 

(2) Body rate gyro package. 

(3) Control electronic assembly. 

(4) Manual controls. 

(5) Displays. 

STAGE 

The independent propulsive sections of a launch vehicle 
which are progressively jettisoned during or immediately 
following the powered portions of flight. 
See— dynamic test stage 

flight stage 

main stage 

STAGE CALIBRATION EQUIPMENT 

Mobile cart-mounted equipment required for the calibration of 
stage pressure switches, therrno switches, and pressure- 
operated valves. 

STAGE INTERFACE SIMULATOR 

Those elements of the vehicle integrated checkout system 
that simulate the effects of the remainder of the vehicle on a 
particular stage. 

STAGE LOOSE EQUIPMENT 

Equipment in this category consists of such items as fire 
shrouds, engine skirts, etc. 



92 



STOCHASTIC VARIABLE 



STAGE LOOSE EQUIPMENT HARDWARE 

This hardware consists of suitable containers, covers, 
cables, shoring, blocking shock mounts, and other miscel- 
laneous handling equipments that are required to protect the 
space vehicle stage loose equipment components and 
assemblies during transportation. 

STAGE SUBSTITUTE 

Those elements of the vehicle integrated checkout system 
which take the place of a stage when the particular stage is 
not available for continued space venicle checkout. It is a 
functional substitute for a stage. 



STAGED-IN-ORBIT SIO 

A boost trajectory similar to the restart except that the 
stage burnout and separation occur simultaneously with the 
parking orbit condition. Continuation to other trajectories 
would be accomplished by ignition of another stage. 



STAGNATION AREA 

The area on a body acting in an airstream which is the divi- 
sion area for the lines of airflow on either side of the body. 
The air is practically stationary in this area. 



STATIC FIRING 

The firing of a rocket motor, rocket engine or an entire stage 
in a hold-down position to measure thrust and accomplish 
other tests. » 

STATIC TESTING 

The testing of a device in a stationary or held-down position 
as a means of testing and measuring its dynamic reactions. 

STATION KEEPING REQUIREMENT 

The requirement of a satellite to remain in particular precise 
orbit with a constant velocity. 

STATIONARY ORBIT 

An orbit in which an equatorial satellite revolves about the 
primary at the same angular rate as the primary rotates on its 
axis. The satellite thus appears to be stationary over a 
point on the primary. 

STATIONARY POINT 

Point where the value of a function is not changing with 
respect to any of the independent variables. 

STATIONARY SATELLITES 

Satellites which maintain a nearly constant relationship with 
a fixed point on the Earth's surface. 



STANDARD STD 

Documents that establish uniform engineering and technical 
criteria for items, materials, processes, methods, design, 
and engineering practices. 
See— Government standard 

industry standard 

job training standard 



STANDARD DEVIATION 

A measure of the variability of a group in terms of the dis- 
persion of individual scores around the average or mean 
score. 



STANDARD PART 

A part which has multible use and is recognized by and 
acceptable to the user. 



STATISTICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST 

A procedure designed to determine, with a prescribed ac- 
curacy, whether a characteristic of a product is in conform- 
ity with acceptance criteria set forth for that product. 

STATISTICAL INFORMATION 

An accumulation of numerical or qualitative data. 

STATISTICAL MEASURE 

The representative or estimator of the value of a parameter 
in a probability distribution. 

STATISTICAL QUALITY CONTROL 

A procedure based in part on the central limit theorem and 
the theory of probability. Statistical refers to a method of 
making decisions from mathematical laws concerning process 
control. 

STATISTICS 

Accurate data maintained for control purposes. 



STANDARDIZATION 

A process of establishing by agreement, engineering, cri- 
teria, terms practices, item configuration and processes to 
achieve the greatest practicable uniformity, assure the mini- 
mum variety of such items and practices, and to effect the 
optimum interchangeability of equipment parts and 
components. 

STAR-GRAIN PROPELLANT 

A solid propellant, its cross section shaped like a star. 

STARFISH 

A rocket probe. 



STD 

Standard. 

STEERING 

See— jet steering 

vector steering 

STL 

Space Technology Laboratory. 

STOCHASTIC VARIABLE 

Variable quantities with a definite range of values, each of 
which, when chosen at randon, can be attained with a def- 
inite probability. 



93 



C-x. 



STOICHIOMETRIC 



STOICHIOMETRIC 

Of a combustible mixture, having the exact proportions re- 
quired for complete combustion. 

STREAM 

See— exhaust stream 
jet stream 
solar radiation streams 

STRENGTH 

See— ultimate strength 
yield strength 
yield strength load /actor 

STRESS 

See— allowable yield stress 
combined stress 
component stress 
nominal stress limits 

STRESSED LIMITS 

The environmental limits to which the crew may be subjected 
for limited periods of time such as launch, reentry, and 
landing. 



STUB FINS 

Short-span aerodynamic surfaces, used on some launch ve- 
hicles for control or stabilization purposes. 

STUDY 

See— design study 

exploratory studies 
feasibility study 

STUDY LAYOUT 

Shows configurations, ideas, and methods suggested by 
engineers, designers, etc., for an item. The layout is used 
for further study, stress and weight considerations, and 
comparisions. 

STUDY OF ENHANCED RADIATION BELT SERB 

Program to study the radiation belt created by high altitude 
nuclear explosion. 

SUB-GROUP 

One of a series of groups or observations obtained by sub- 
dividing a larger group. 

SUBASSEMBLY 

A combination of parts comprising a definable entity of a 
component and performing a function essential to the proper 
operation of that component. 

See— inter gimbal subassembly 

SUBATOMIC PARTICLE 

A component of an atom such as an electron, proton, meson, 
etc. 

SUBCONTRACTOR 

Any contractor under contract to another contractor. These 
are usually qualified further as first tier, second tier, etc. 
First tier subcontractors are those under contract to the 



prime, principal or associate contractors, second tier is next 
level removed, etc. 

SUBGRAVITY 

A gravitational effect that is less than one G, e.g., less 
than the normal measure of the Earth's gravity. 

SUBSONIC 

Speeds less than the speed of sound. 

SUBSTITUTE 

See— limited substitute 
stage substitute 

SUBSTITUTE ITEM 

Items which possess such functional and physical charac- 
teristics that permit their being exchanged within the limita- 
tions imposed by the application requirements. 

SUBSYS 

Subsystem. 

SUBSYSTEM SUBSYS 

A major functional subassembly or grouping of items or 
equipment which is essential to operational completeness of 
a system. 

SUDDEN IONOSPHERIC DISTURBANCE 

A complex combination of sudden changes in the condition 
of the ionosphere, and the effects of these changes. 

SUIT 

See—anti-g suit 
G-suit 
pressure suit 

SUNFLOWER 

A solar power system designed to develop 3 kilowatts of 
power. Sunflower is being developed for use as a power 
source for satellites and space probes. 

SUNSPOT 

A relatively dark area on the surface of the Sun, consisting 
of a dark central umbra and a surrounding penumbra that is 
intermediate in brightness between the umbra and the sur- 
rounding photosphere. 

SUNSPOT CYCLE 

A periodic variation in the number and area of sunspots with 
an average length of 11.1 years but varying between 7 and 
17 years. 

SUPERSONIC 

Pertaining to speeds greater than the speed of sound. 

SUPINE G 

Eyeballs in. Acceleration experienced in the chest-to-back 
direction, expressed in units of gravity. 

SUPPLY DOWNTIME 

That time during which work is not done on a system be- 
cause of the unavailability of a needed item from the usual 
supply. 



94 



SYSTEM FAILURE RATE 



SUPPORT COST 

The cost of maintaining system equipment during its opera- 
tional life, including the total impact of all requirements 
such as technical data, test equipment, spare parts, special 
tools, maintenance equipment, maintenance facilities, man- 
power, training and training equipment. 



SYNCHRONOUS SATELLITE 

An equatorial west-to-east satellite orbiting the Earth at an 
altitude of 22,300 statute miles, making one revolution in 
24 hours, and is synchronous with the Earth's rotation. , 
See— advance syncom 



SURFACE 

See— functional surface 

SURFACE IONIZATION 

One method of producing ions by the impingement of a pro- 
pellant on a hot and usually catalytic surface. 

SURVEYOR 

Lunar soft landing program, using Centaur launch vehicle. 



SYNERGIC CURVE 

A curve plotted for the ascent of a rocket or space vehicle 
calculated to give the vehicle an optimum economy in fuel 
with an optimum velocity. 



SYS 

System. 



SUSCEPTIBILITY 

See— threshold susceptibility 



SYSTEM SYS 

Any combination of parts, assemblies and sets joined to- 
gether to perform a specific operational function or 
tu notions. 



SUSTAINER 

A part of the propulsion system of a vehicle which does not 
separate from the vehicle during its powered flight. The 
term is usually applied to rocket propulsion systems when 
used as the principal propulsion system to distinguish them 
from those used as auxiliary engines or boosters. 



SUSTAINER ENGINE 

An engine that maintains the velocity of a missile or rocket 
vehicle, once it has achieved its programed velocity through 
use of a booster engine. 

sv 

Space Vehicle. 

SWEAT COOLING 

Method of controlling the excessive heating of a reentering 
body. Surfaces subjected to excessive heating are made of 
porous material through which liquid of high-heat capacity is 
forced. The evaporation of this coolant completes the 
sweat-cooling process. 

SWEEP 

The motion of the visible dot across the face of a cathode- 
ray tube, as the result of scanning deflection of the electron 
beam. 

SWITCH GEAR 

The composite electrical equipment which is employed for 
the switching and protection of an electrical distribution 
system. 



See— basic hole system 
basic shaft system 
biopower system 
control system 
cooling system 
Earth landing system 
ecological system 
exhaust system 
gas vortex system 

ground communications and tracking system 
ground operational support system 
guidance and control system 
guidance and navigation system 
horizontal pre-flight checkout system 
instrumentation system 
launch escape propulsion system 
launch vehicle system 
limit dimensioning system 
liquid hydrogen (LH-2) system complex 
liquid oxygen system (LOX) complex 
manned space flight system 
mast connection system 
measuring system 
multiple-mode guidance system 
physical-chemical system 
purging system 
RP-1 fuel system complex 
space vehicle system 
telemetering system 
unilateral tolerance system 
vertical alignment system 



SXT 

Sextant. 

SYNCHRONOUS ORBIT 

An orbit with a period of 24 sidereal hours (the same period 
as that of Earth revolving about its axis). The satellite 
rotational speed and the Earth's speed of rotation are in 
synchronism. 



SYSTEM CHANCE FAILURES 

Chance failures in the system which cause the system to 
malfunction or to stop operating. 



SYSTEM FAILURE RATE 

The rate at which a system fails to perform its intended 
function. 



95 



SYSTEM INTEGRATION 



SYSTEM INTEGRATION 

The management process by which the systems of a project 
are made compatible to achieve the purpose of the project. 

SYSTEMS ENGINEERING 

The process of applying science and technology to the study 
and planning of a system so that the relationships of various 
parts of the system and the utilization of various subsys- 
tems are fully established before designs are committed. 



SYSTEMS MANAGER 

The third member of the Apollo flight crew. The system 
manager occupies the right-hand couch during all flight 
phases, except portions of the lunar parking orbit. His " 
primary responsibilities are to operate the in-flight test 
system, and monitor and maintain all systems other than 
guidance and navigation. During critical mission phases, 
he monitors certain critical parameters of the spacecraft and 
propulsion system. 



96 



T 



T-TIME 

Any specific time, minus or plus, as referenced to zero, or 
launch time. 

TABULATED DRAWING 

Depicts similar items with differences in characteristics, 
dimensions, material, finish, and other requirements. These 
differences are tabulated on the drawing and the fixed 
characteristics depicted once. 

TAKEOFF MASS 

The mass of a rocket vehicle and its payload at the time of 
takeoff. 



TEAR DOWN INSPECTION 

An inspection in which a component, subassembly or as- 
sembly is disassembled down to its parts, so that each part 
may be nondestructively inspected to determine if it is made 
according to its applicable documentation, or to determine 
the effect of environmental or other tests upon each part. 

TECHNICAL MANUAL TM 

A technical publication which contains information designed 
to meet the needs of personnel engaged or being trained in 
the safety, operation, maintenance, service, overhaul, in- 
stallation and inspection of specific items of equipment and 
materials. 



TAKEOFF WEIGHT 

Weight of a rocket vehicle ready for takeoff, including the 
vehicle, fuel, and payload. 

TANGENTIAL ELLIPSE 

The transfer ellipse from Earth orbit to orbits of other 
planets, designed to use a minimum of fuel. Also known as 
a hohmann orbit. 



TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM 

In the spacecraft, this system provides means of two-way 
voice communication among crew members, the command 
module (CM), the lunar excursion module (LEM), and ground 
operational support system (GOSS). It also provides tele- 
metry and television transmission from the CM or LEM to 
GOSS, as well as receiving and retransmittal of tracking 
signals from GOSS. 



TANK DESICCANT SYSTEM 

A system of dessicant canisters and hoses installed in the 
stage propellant tanks during periods of shipment or storage 
to keep the tanks clean and dry and to permit the tanks to 
breathe. 



TAPER 

A difference in diameter, width or thickness per unit of 
length, measured at right angles to the length. Generally ex- 
pressed as inches per foot, sometimes expressed as a ratio. 



TASK 

See— maintenance task 
mission task 

TASK ANALYSIS 

An analytical process employed to determine on a time base, 
the detailed performance required of a man and machine, the 
nature and extent of their interactions, and the effects of 
environmental conditions and malfunctions. Behavioral 
steps are isolated in terms of preceptions, decisions, 
memory storage, and motor outputs required, as well as the 
errors which may be expected. The data is used to establish 
equipment design criteria, personnel and training require- 
ments, etc. 

TAVE 

Thor-Agena Vibration Experiment (experimental payload 
launched with Alouette). 



TELEMETERING 

The technique of relaying instrument readings and intelli- 
gence to remote indicating devices by means of radio or 
radar signals. 

TELEMETERING SYSTEM 

The complete measuring, transmitting, and receiving appara- 
tus for remotely indicating, recording, and integrating 
information. 

TELEMETRY 

The science of measuring quantities, transmitting the 
measured value to a distant station, and there interpreting, 
indicating or recording the quantities measured. 

TELESCOPE 

See— radio telescope 

TEMPERATURE PROFILE 

The variation in temperature throughout an object or region. 

TERM 

A word used to describe an item for the purpose of storing it 
or retrieving it from a storage and retrieval system. 

TERMINAL GUIDANCE 

Guidance required in the final phase of a rendezvous maneu- 
ver of spacecraft. 

TERMINAL VELOCITY 

The hypothetical maximum speed a body, under given condi- 
tions of weight and thrust, could attain along a specified 



97 



TERRELLA 



straight flight path, if diving through an unlimited distance 
in air of uniform density. 

TERRELLA 

Self-contained manned spaceship in which crew life is main- 
tained during space flight by a closed-cycle breathing 
system. 

TERRESTRIAL 

Pertaining to the Earth. 



TEST 

Examination, investigation, evaluation and documentation 
of inherent properties, functionability, environmental re- 
action, variances and reliability of any product, system, sub- 
system, vehicle, equipment assembly, part, material, and 
process. 

See— acceptance test 

acceptable environmental range test 

battleship test 

BOP test 

calibration test 

captive test 

cold-flow test 

controlled test 

development test 

engineering test 

environmental test and service building 

final test data 

flight test 

full duration static test firing 

functional test 

holddown test 

hot test 

individual operational test 

individual reliability test 

inertia! component test equipment 

laboratory calibration test 

post-static test 

prelaunch test 

preproduction test 

pre-static test 

predictive test 

proficiency test 

pyrotechnic test and weight and balance facility 

qualification test 

sampling reliability test 

screening test 

sequential test 

service test 

shake-table test 

simulated flight test 

type approval test 

vehicle calibration test 



TEST CONSOLE 

A grouping of test panels into one integrated rack or 
console. 

TEST DATA 

Results of a test in the form of numbers, charts, tapes, etc. 



TEST FACILITIES 

Devices and facilities which are used in the installation, 
maintenance, operation and calibration of equipment. 

TEST TO FAILURE 

The process of submitting an item to stress levels within 
design limits until failure occurs. (Accelerated tests to fail- 
ure results in subjecting an item to stress levels beyond 
design limits to induce early failure). 

TEST POINT 

A convenient, safe access to a circuit or system so that a 
significant quantity can be measured or introduced to facili- 
tate maintenance, repair, calibration, and alignment. 
See— exposed test point 

TEST SPACECRAFT 

A special spacecraft instrumented for conducting research 
and development testing. 

TESTING 

See— attributes testing 
destructive testing 
development testing and evaluation 
flight testing 
marginal testing 
non-destructive testing 
static testing 

TESTING TO DESTRUCTION 

The intentional operation of an equipment or portion thereof 
to ultimate failure. This type of test will often reveal de- 
sign weaknesses that would cause unreliability. 

THEODOLITE 

A sighting and measuring telescopic instrument that gives a 
reading on horizontal or vertical angles. 

THERMAL 

Pertaining to heat or temperature. 

THERMAL BARRIER 

Speed at which friction heat, generated by rapid passage of 
an object through the atmosphere, exceeds endurance com- 
patible with the function of the object. 

THERMAL LOAD 

Stresses imposed upon a missile structure because of expan- 
sion or contraction (or both) of certain structural elements 
when exposed to a wide range of temperatures. 

THERMIONIC 

Operating by means of an electrically charged particle 
emitted by an incandescent material. 

THERMODYNAMICS 

The study of the relationships between heat and mechanical 
energy. 

THERMOSPHERE 

The ionosphere considered as a region of temperature varia- 
tion from minus twenty-eight degrees F to several thousand 
degrees F. 



98 



TOTAL MEAN DOWNTIME 



THRESHOLD SUSCEPTIBILITY 

An undesirable response which is barely recognizable from 
the normal output. 



THROAT 

In rocket and jet engines, the most constricted section of an 
exhaust nozzle. 



THRUST 

The pushing force developed by an aircraft engine or a 
rocket engine. Specifically, the product of propellant mass 
flow rate and exhaust velocity relative to the vehicle. 
See— dual thrust 

leveled thrust 

maximum thrust 

pound thrust 



THRUST CHAMBER 

The chamber of a jet or rocket motor in which volume is in- 
creased through the combustion process to obtain high 
velocity gases through the nozzle. 



TIME 

See— available time 
operating time 

readiness time ' 

ready time 
real time 
repair time 
shock-wave rise time 
solar time 

trouble-shooting time 
usable time 
warm-up time 

TIME CRITICAL EQUIPMENT 

Equipment with a finite life which if not monitored, could 
result in a failure. Consideration shall be given to shelf 
life. 

TIROS 

Television Infrared Observation Satellite (meteorological 
satellite). 

TM 

Technical Manual. 



THRUST COMMIT 

The time, when all engines have been running for 3 seconds 
and all other parameters are normal, the start of the final 
launch sequence. 



THRUST DECAY 

When a rocket motor bums out or is cut off, propulsive thrust 
does not fall to zero instantaneously, but progressively de- 
clines over some fraction of a second. 



THRUST GENERATOR 

A device which produces motive power. In an electric pro- 
pulsion system, it is composed of an electric power source 
and a device which expels a high velocity flow of the 
propellant. 



THRUST VECTOR CONTROL 

Controlling the flight of a missile by controlling the direc- 
tion of thrust. 



THRUST-TO-EARTH-WEIGHT RATIO 

Ratio of the thrust developed by the vehicle to the mass of 
the vehicle multiplied by Earth's gravity. 



THRUST-WEIGHT RATIO 

A quantity used to evaluate engine performance and is ob- 
tained from dividing the thrust output by the engine dry 
weight. 



TIDE 

See—solar atmospheric tide 



TOL 

Tolerance. 

TOLERANCE TOL 

The total permissible variation of size, form, or location. 
See— bilateral tolerance 

environmental tolerance 
fabrication tolerance 
maximum tolerance 
minimum tolerance 
unilateral tolerance system 

TOPSIDE SOUNDER 

Satellite project to measure electron density of ionosphere. 

TORR 

Suggested international standard term to replace the equiva- 
lent English term "millimeter of mercury" and its 
abbreviation. 

TOTAL DOWNTIME 

The number of hours that a system is not available for use, 
regardless of reason. 

See— total mean downtime 

TOTAL EMISSIVE POWER 

Emissive power emitted over the whole spectrum of 
wavelength. 

TOTAL EMITTANCE 

Emittance of the whole range of wavelengths. 



TOTAL MEAN DOWNTIME 

The total mean active maintenance downtime, including both 
corrective and preventive maintenance, in a time period of 
interest divided by the total number of maintenance actions 
in that time period. 



99 



TOUCHDOWN 



TOUCHDOWN 

The action or moment of landing a space vehicle, manned or 
unmanned, on the surface of a planet. 

TOWER 

See— arming tower 

collimation tower 

escape tower 

ivory tower 

launcher umbilical tower 

ordnance tower 

umbilical tower 

TRACKING 

The process of following the movement of a satellite or 
rocket by radar radio, and photographic observations. 
See— skin tracking 



TRAJ 

Trajectory. 

TRAJECTORY 

In general, the path traced by any body, 
as a result of externally applied forces. 
See— atmospheric trajectory 

ballistic trajectory 

circumlunar trajectory 

escape trajectory 

free-flight trajectory 

Keplerian trajectory 

vacuum trajectory 



TRAJ 

as a rocket, moving 



TRANSDUCER 

A device which converts energy from one form to another for 
the purpose of detection and measurement of information. 
Transducers are often used as sensors. 

TRANSEARTH 

The phase of flight from lunar orbit to Earth orbit or reentry. 

TRANSEARTH TRAJECTORY 

Spacecraft trajectory from the Moon to the Earth. 

TRANSFER ELLIPSE 

Path followed by a body moving from one elliptical orbit to 
another. 

TRANSFER ORBIT 

In interplanetary travel, an elliptical trajectory tangent to 
the orbits of both the departure planet and the target planet. 

TRANSITION FIT 

One having limits of size so prescribed that either a 
clearance or an interference may result when parts are 
assembled. 

TRANSLATION 

Motion in which all points of the moving body have, at any 
instant, the same velocity and direction of motion. 

TRANSLATIONAL THRUST 

Thrust required to propel a missile or space vehicle from a 
given position to a different position. 



TRANSLUNAR 

This word is commonly used in referring to the phase of 
flight from Earth orbit to lunar orbit. Most reference books 
describe translunar as referring to space outside the Moon's 
orbit about the Earth, as compared to cislunar referring to 
space between the Earth and the Moon's orbit. 



TRANSPONDER 

.A radio or radar system which is triggered by a received 
signal. It transmits only in response to a received signal of 
the proper frequency. It is used as an identification device 
and for distance measurement. 

TRANSPORTATION BARGE 

A modified vessel used to provide for river and sea trans- 
portation of large space vehicle stages. 

TRANSPORTATION HANDLING KIT 

A kit which is stage oriented and consists of all the han- 
dling hardware, except hoists and cranes, required to place a 
particular stage of the space vehicle on its transporter. 

TRANSPORTER 

Any vehicle used to support and effect movement of the 
stages on land. 

See— crawler transporter 
launcher transporter 

TRANSPORTER PRIME MOVER 

A tractor-type vehicle which is used to provide the means of 
moving the transporter during land transportation modes. 

TRANSPORTER/LAUNCHER 

A transportable launcher which supports an integral umbili- 
cal tower and an erect space vehicle. It usually consists of 
the transporter (crawler) unit and the launcher (platform) 
unit. 

TRANSVERSE ACCELERATION 

The inertial force produced by an acceleration acting across 
the body, perpendicular to the long axis of the body, as in a 
chest-to-back direction. 

TROPOPAUSE 

The upper limit or limits of the troposphere. 

TROPOSPHERE 

The lower layer of the Earth's atmosphere, extending to 
about 60,000 feet at the equator and 30,000 feet at the poles. 

TROUBLE SHOOTING 

Locating and diagnosing malfunctions or breakdowns in the 
equipment by means of systematic checking or analysis. 

TROUBLE SHOOTING TIME 

The time required to determine or to isolate the cause of a 
system malfunction. It does not include the time required to 
replace or to repair the units in which the fault occurred. 

TWO-BURN BOOSTER 

Proposed configuration for the C-5 booster. The first two 
stages and part of the third will be used for orbital insertion. 



100 



TYPE III DOCUMENTATION 

Once in orbit, the third stage will be relit to accomplish TYPE II DOCUMENTATION 

lunar trajectory insertion. Documentation required for coordination, surveillance, and 

information. , 

TYPE APPROVAL TEST 

A determination of the suitability of a particular model for 
utilization in a specific assignment. TYPE III DOCUMENTATION 

Defined as the documentation requiring preparation and re- 
TYPE I DOCUMENTATION tention by the contractor, being made available to authorized 

Documentation requiring NASA approval. representatives of the NASA for review, upon request. 



101 



u 



ULLAGE 

The amount that a container lacks of being full. 

ULLAGE ROCKET 

Small rockets used to impart forward thrust to the vehicle or 
stage to shift the propellant to the rear of the tanks prior to 
firing the main engines. 

ULTIMATE LOAD 

That load at which a failure-producing general collapse or 
instability buckling of the structure occurs. 

ULTIMATE PRESSURE 

The pressure at which the component material is stressed to 
produce complete rupture or bursting of the component. This 
is also the pressure that produces instability buckling. 

ULTIMATE SAFETY FACTOR 

The ratio of the ultimate strength of a structure to the load 
limit. 

ULTIMATE STRENGTH 

The magnitude of the load or stress which will cause the 
structure to fail, or the magnitude of the maximum load or 
stress which the structure will carry. 



ULTIMATE STRESS 

The stress at which a material fractures or ruptures. 



ULTRAVIOLET RADIATION 

Electromagnetic radiation shorter in wavelength than visible 
radiation but longer than X-rays. Roughly, radiation in the 
wavelength interval between 10 and 4000 angstroms. 



UMBILICAL CONNECTIONS 

The electrical, hydraulic, and pneumatic connections be- 
tween the ground support equipment and the vehicle. 



UMBILICAL CORD 

Any of the servicing electrical or fluid lines between the 
ground and an upright rocket missile or vehicle before the 
launch. Often shortened to umbilical. 



UMBILICAL SERVICE ARM 

An arm whose function is the same as an umbilical arm or 
umbilical swing arm. 

UMBILICAL SWING ARM 

A metal arm which extends horizontally toward the space 
vehicle from the umbilical. It supports the service lines 
that link the space vehicle to the ground systems. The 
swing arm is part of the umbilical tower swing arm system 
and is supported by the tower and fastened to it by a hinged 
joint that contains a rotary hydraulic actuator (ROTAC). 

UMBILICAL TOWER 

A vertical structure supporting the electrical servicing and 
fluid lines running to a rocket in launching position. 

UNDIMENSIONED DRAWING 

Depicts, to scale, loft time information for templates, 
patterns, and printed circuits. 

UNILATERAL TOLERANCE SYSTEM 

Allows variation in only one direction from the design size. 

UNIT 

Anything considered as complete in itself but functioning as 
a part of an assembly, subsystem, or system. 
See— astronomical unit 

coupling display unit 

instrument unit 

sample unit 

UPPER-AIR OBSERVATION 

A measurement of atmospheric conditions above the effective 
range of a surface weather observation. Also called sound- 
ing, and upper air sounding. 

USABLE TIME 

Time during which equipments are capable of doing useful 
work. 

USEFUL LIFE 

The total operating time between debugging and wearout. 

UTILIDOR 

Utility corridor for protective housing of underground 
conduits. 



102 



V 



VAB 

Vertical Assembly Building. 

VACTL 

Vertical Assembly Component Test Laboratory. 

VACUUM 

See— bard vacuum 
high vacuum 

VACUUM TRAJECTORY 

That portion of a missile's flight that takes place above a 
chosen upper limit of the atmosphere. 

VAN ALLEN BELTS 

Two doughnut-shaped belts of high energy charged particles 
trapped in the Earth's magnetic field. The minimum altitude 
of the inner belt ranges from approximately 100 miles near 
the magnetic poles to more than 1000 miles at the equator. 
The maximum altitude of the outer belt extends to approxi- 
mately 40,000 miles at the equator. 

VAPORIZATION RATE 

The unit mass of a solid or liquid that is changed to a vapor 
or gas in a unit of time. 

VAPORIZER 

A piece of equipment which is used to convert liquid hyper- 
golic fluids such as LOX and LH-2 into gaseous hypergolic 
fluids to effect pressurization of the ground LOX and LH-2 
storage tanks. The vaporizer is essentially a radiator-type- 
heat exchanger and forms a part of the LOX system complex 
and LH-2 system complex respectively. 

VARIABLE GEOMETRY INLET 

An engine inlet which can be varied as to shape or area to 
provide for maximum efficiency through a range of airspeeds. 

VECTOR CONTROL 

Control affecting direction, and magnitude of the direction, 
of the motor. 

See— thrust vector control 



VECTOR STEERING 

A steering method where one or more thrust chambers are 
gimbal-mounted so that the direction of the thrust force 
(thrust vector) may be tilted in relation to the center of 
gravity of the missile to produce turning. 



VEH 

Vehicle. 



VEHICLE VEH 

Specifically, a structure, machine, or device (aircraft or 
rocket) designed to carry a burden through air or space. 
More restrictively, a rocket craft. 
See— aerodynamic vehicle 

aerospace vehicle 

development vehicle 

injection vehicle 

launch vehicle 

launch vehicle system 

lunar trajectory injection vehicle 

man rated space vehicle 

operational launch vehicle 

operational space vehicle 

reentry vehicle 

space vehicle 

space vehicle system 



VEHICLE ACCEPTANCE TEST 

System and subsystem test to insure vehicle specification 
compliance, before vehicle is accepted for flight use. 



VEHICLE CALIBRATION TEST 

Tests to determine if the onboard vehicle measuring device 

or component is within specifications. 



VEHICLE HORIZONTAL CHECKOUT 

Systems test performed with the vehicle in the horizontal 
position. 



VEHICLE STAGE 

The documented stage, including those parts installed by 
vehicle documentation plus any portion of an interstage, 
spacer, or vehicle instrumentation unit, which remains at- 
tached to the documented stage for any period of time after 
separation. 

VEHICLE VERTICAL CHECKOUT 

Systems test performed with the vehicle in the vertical 

position. 

VELOCITY 

Rate of motion in a given direction. 
See— acoustic velocity 
burnout velocity 
circular velocity 
escape velocity 
exhaust velocity 
orbital velocity 
radial velocity 
terminal velocity 



103 



VENDOR 

VENDOR 

An individual or concern from which a contractor or subcon- 
tractor purchases equipment or services which usually do 
not require research and development effort. 

VERNIER ENGINE 

A rocket engine of small thrust used primarily to obtain a 
fine adjustment in the velocity and trajectory of a ballistic 
missile or space vehicle just after the thrust cutoff of the 
last propulsion engine. Used secondarily to add thrust to a 
booster or sustainer engine. Also called vernier rocket. 

VERNIER ROCKETS 

Small rockets on a spacecraft, fired on command or auto- 
matically, to correct spacecraft spin, attitude, direction, or 
orbit. 

VERTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM 
An optical equipment system which is used to align the 
space vehicle with the launcher or launcher platform so that 
it is properly oriented in the launch position. 

VERTICAL ASSEMBLY BUILDING VAB 

An enclosed structure to be used for the vertical assembly 
and checkout of space vehicles and their components. 



VERTICAL CHECKOUT 

System or subsystem tests performed with the vehicle in the 
vertical position. 

See— vehicle vertical checkout 



VERTICAL LAUNCH 

A launch in which the missile, or vehicle, starts from a 
vertical position. 



VESTIBULAR MECHANISMS 

The processes of the inner ear. 

VIBRATION 

See— acoustic vibration 

VICINITY PLAN DRAWING 

Delineates the relationship of a site to features of the sur- 
rounding area, such as towns, bodies of water, railroads, 
highways, etc. 

VIS 

Visual Instrumentation Subsystem (camera payload for lunar 
photography). 

VISIBLE RADIATION 

Electromagnetic radiation lying within the wavelength inter- 
val to which the human eye is sensitive. This portion of the 
electromagnetic spectrum is bound by ultraviolet and infra- 
red radiation. 

VISUAL ACUITY 

A more concentrated form of visibility. It is the resolving 
ability of the eye to discern fine details. 

VORTEX 

See— gas vortex system 

VOYAGER 

Mars and Venus space probe program (follow-on to Mariner). 

VPLCC 

Vehicle Propellant Loading Control Center. 

VTF 

Vertical Test Fixture. 



104 



w 



WADD 

Wright Air Development Division (USAF). 

WAIVER 

Any relaxation of existing requirements. 

WALLOPS STATION 

Provides a launch, tracking and data acquisition capability 
for small launch vehicles and many of the sounding rockets 
used in NASA's program. Serves as an experimental station 
in support of advanced aerodynamic research programs, and 
provides for flight tests on instrumentation. The site is 
located on a small island off the east coast of Virginia, 
about ten miles from Chincoteague. 

WARM-UP TIME 

Time measured from the application of power to an operable 
system to the instant when the system is capable of func- 
tioning in its intended fashion. 

WARNING STREAMERS 

Protective covers removed before flight, for space vehicle 
protuberances and apertures which must be protected during 
ground operations. 

WATER TORUS 

A water spray ring with V-jet and fog nozzles. It is some- 
times referred to as an emergency water fire-fighting system 
and is located on the launcher in an area where water can be 
directed at the first stage engines. 

WAVELENGTH 

Distance measured along line of propagation between two 
points which are in phase on adjacent waves. 

WEAROUT FAILURES 

Failures caused by the normal aging process. They can be 
forestalled by preventive maintenance. 

WEIGHT WT 

Gravitational force on a mass . 
See— actual weight 
dry weight 
empty weight 
takeoff weight 

WEIGHT AND BALANCE KIT 

Equipment used to weigh a complete, assembled dry stage of 
a space vehicle to determine its longitudinal center of grav- 
ity. This equipment is also known as mass-properties 
determination equipment. 

WEIGHT FLOW RATE 

The flow rate of a liquid propellant expressed in pounds per 
second. 



WEIGHTLESSNESS 

Absence of any apparent gravitational pull on an object. 

WESTERN OPERATIONS OFFICE WOO 

NASA's Western Operations Office at Santa Monica, Cali- 
fornia, serves all operational interests of the agency as a 
headquarters branch in the western region of the United 
States. The office, reporting to the Headquarters Office of 
Administration, has as it primary mission contract negotia- 
tion and management of research and development contracts 
with the aeronautical and space industry in its territory. 

WET EMPLACEMENT 

A launch emplacement that provides a deluge of water for 
cooling the flame bucket, missile engines, and other equip- 
ment during the launch of a missile. 



WHITE NOISE 

Noise which contains the whole spectrum of frequencies 
(or tones). Similar to white light which contains the spec- 
trum of colors. 



WHITE ROOM 

A clean room designed to be inherently free of dust and 
other contaminants. 



WHITE SANDS MISSILE RANGE WSMR 

Located at White Sands, New Mexico, this site is used for 
evaluating the stability and operational characteristics of 
the launch escape system (LES). 



WIND TUNNEL 

A device, for aerodynamic tests, through which a stream of 
velocity controlled air is drawn. 



WINDOW 

See— launch window 
reentry window 

WIRING DEVICES 

The accessory parts and materials which are used in the 
installation of wiring, such as terminals, connectors, junc- 
tion boxes, conduit, clamps, insulation, and supports. 

WOO 

Western Operations Office. 

WORD DESCRIPTION DRAWING 

An item that can be completely described without any de- 
lineation, whenever misinterpretation cannot occur. 



105 



WORKING LAYOUT 

WORKING LAYOUT WRIGHT AIR DEVELOPMENT DIVISION WADD 

Fully released layouts containing all the necessary informa- A center located at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, conducting 

tion for the manufacturer and assembly of the parts de- research, development, test, and evaluation in aerodynamics, 

scribed on the layout. Working layouts are used primarily human factors, materials, electronics equipment, and aero- » 

for relatively small, singular designs of apparatus mockups space sciences, 

employing simple details. 

WSMR 

White Sands Missile Range. 
WORKING PRESSURE 

The maximum pressure to which the component is subjected WT 

under steady state conditions. Weight. 



106 



X 



X-RAY 

Electromagnetic radiation of very short wavelength, lying 
within the wavelength interval of 0.1 to 100 angstroms (be- 
tween gamma rays and ultraviolet radiation). Also called 
X-radiation, and roentgen ray. 
"X-radiation," "roentgen ray." 

X-15 PROGRAM 

A joint NASA-Air Force-Navy program of hypersonic and 
very high altitude flight research utilizing a rocket powered 
research aircraft designated as X-l. 



X-20A PROGRAM 

An Air Force-NASA program employing a manned hypersonic 
glider launched into orbit by a Titan III booster. The pri- 
mary mission is to test the feasibility of orbital glider 
systems. 



107 



Y 



YAW 

Lateral rotational or oscillatory movement of a vehicle about 
its vertical axis. The amount of movement is measured in 
degrees. 

YIELD LOAD 

That load which must be applied to the structure in order to 
cause a permanent deformation of a specified amount. 

YIELD SAFETY FACTOR 

The ratio of the yield strength of a structure to the limit 
load. 



YIELD STRENGTH 

The magnitude of the load or stress which must be applied 
to the structure in order to cause a permanent deformation of 
a specified amount. 



YIELD STRENGTH LOAD FACTOR 

The load factor which will cause the yield strength to be 
reached. 



108 



z 



ZERO FAILURE CRITERIA ZERO GRAVITY EFFECT 

For qualification tests, this term relates to the ground rule . The change in the behavior of a substance or system intro- 

of assuming that no failures will occur during the qualifica- duced into an environment free of gravitational force. 
Lion program. 

ZONE 

ZERO GRAVITY See-anacoustic zone 

Weightlessness. hyperacoustic zone 



109 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



This form is available to provide the user with a convenient method of submitting comments, 
additions, deletions, or revisions to aid OMSF in keeping the Apollo Terminology current 
and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Code MII-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



(can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



WORD OR TERM 


ABBREVIATION [if any) 


PROPOSED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 


SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 


SYMBOL [if any) 


□ REVISION 


□ OTHER (state below) 




□ DELETION 







DEFINITION (if available) 



SUBMITTED BY 



DATE 



AFFILIATION 



ADDRESS 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



This form is available to provide the user with a convenient method of submitting comments, 
additions, deletions, or revisions to aid OMSF in keeping the Apollo Terminology current 
and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Code MII-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



(can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



WORD OR TERM 


ABBREVIATION (i/ any) 


PROPOSED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 


SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 


SYMBOL Uf any) 


□ REVISION 


□ OTHER (state below) 




□ DELETION 







DEFINITION (if available) 



SUBMITTED BY 



AFFILIATION 



ADDRESS 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 

This form is available to provide the user with a convenient method of submitting comments, 
additions, deletions, or revisions to aid OMSF in keeping the Apollo Terminology current 
and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Code MII-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



(can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



WORD OR TERM 



PR OPO SED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 

□ REVISION 

□ DELETION 



DEFINITION (if available) 



SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 

□ OTHER (state below) 



ABBREVIATION {if any) 



SYMBOL (if any) 



SUBMITTED BY 



AFFILIATION 



DATE 



ADDRESS 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



This form is available to provide the user with a convenient method of submitting comments, 
additions, deletions, or revisions to aid OMSF in keeping the Apollo Terminology current 
and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Code Mn-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



( can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



DEFINITION (if available) 



WORD OR TERM 


ABBREVIATION (i/ any) 


PROPOSED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 

□ REVISION 

□ DELETION 


SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 

□ OTHER (state below) 


SYMBOL (if any) 



SUBMITTED BY 



AFFILIATION 



ADDRESS 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 

This form is available to provide the user with a convenient method of submitting comments, 
additions, deletions, or revisions to aid OMSF in keeping the Apollo Terminology current 
and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Code MIJ.-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



(can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



WORD OR TERM 



PR OPO SED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 

□ REVISION 

□ DELETION 



DEFINITION (if available) 



SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 

□ OTHER (state below) 



ABBREVIATION (if any) 



SYMBOL (if any) 



SUBMITTED BY 



AFFILIATION 



DATE 



ADDRESS 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



This form is available to provide the user with a convenient method of submitting comments, 
additions, deletions, or revisions to aid OMSF in keeping the Apollo Terminology current 
and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Code MII-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



(can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



WORD OR TERM 


ABBREVIATION [if any) 


PROPOSED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 


SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 


SYMBOL [if any) 


□ REVISION 


□ OTHER (state below) 




□ DELETION 







DEFINITION (if available) 



SUBMITTED BY 



DATE 



AFFILIATION 



ADDRESS 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



This form Is available to provide the user with a convenient method of submitting comments, 
additions, deletions, or revisions to aid OMSF in keeping the Apollo Terminology current 
and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Code MII-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



(can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



WORD OR TERM 


ABBREVIATION {if any) 


PROPOSED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 

□ REVISION 

□ DELETION 


SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 

□ OTHER (state below) 


SYMBOL (if any) 



DEFINITION (if available) 



SUBMITTED BY 



AFFILIATION 



DATE 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



ceeping the Apollo Terminology current 



National Aeronautics and Space Administrat 

Code MII-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



ion 



(can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



WORD OR TERM 



PROPOSED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 

□ REVISION 

□ DELETION 

DEFINITION (if available) 



SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 

□ OTHER (state below) 



ABBREVIATION tif any) 



SYMBOL (if any) 



SUBMITTED BY 



AFFILIATION 



DATE 



ADDRESS 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



This form is available to provide the user with a convenient method of submitting comments, 
additions, deletions, or revisions to aid OMSF in keeping the Apollo Terminology current 
and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Code MII-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



(can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



WORD OR TERM 



PR OPO SED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 

□ REVISION 

□ DELETION 



DEFINITION (if available) 



SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 

□ OTHER (state below) 



ABBREVIATION Uf any) 



SYMBOL {if any) 



SUBMITTED BY 



AFFILIATION 



ADDRESS 



DATE 



PROPOSAL FOR ADDITION, REVISION, OR DELETION 
TO THE APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



This form is available to provide the user with a convenient method of submitting comments, 
additions, deletions, or revisions to aid OMSF in keeping the Apollo Terminology current 
and useful. Please submit your proposals to: 



National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Code MII-E 

Washington, D. C. 20546 



(can be folded to fit window envelope) 



APOLLO TERMINOLOGY 



WORD OR TERM 



PR OPO SED ACTION 

□ ADDITION 

□ REVISION 

□ DELETION 



DEFINITION (if available) 



SOURCE OF DEFINITION 

□ ORIGINAL 

□ OTHER (state below) 



ABBREVIATION (if any) 



SYMBOL (if any) 



SUBMITTED BY 



AFFILIATION 



DATE 



ADDRESS 



