AIAA-2000-4431 

OPTIMIZATION OF MANEUVER EXECUTION FOR LANDSAT-7 ROUTINE OPERATIONS' 

E. LucienCox, Jr. 



Abstract 

Multiple mission constraints were satisfied 
during a lengthy, strategic ascent phase. Once routine 
operations begin, the ongoing concern of maintaining 
mission requirements becomes an immediate priority. 
The Landsat-7 mission has tight longiUide control box 
and Earth imaging that requires sub-satellite descending 
nodal equator crossing times to occur in a narrow 30- 
minute range fifteen (15) times daily. Operationally, 
spacecraft maneuvers must' be executed properly to 
maintain mission requirements. The paper will discuss 
the importance of optimizing the altitude raising and 
plane change maneuvers, amidst known constraints, to 
satisfy requirements throughout mission lifetime. 
Emphasis will be placed not only on maneuver size and 
frequency but also on changes in orbital elements that 
impact maneuver execution decisions. Any associated 
trade-off arising from operations contingencies will be 
discussed as well. Results of actual altitude and plane 
change maneuvers are presented to clarify actions 
taken. 



Introduction 

The Landsat-7 spacecraft is in a Sun- 
synchronous, frozen polar orbit currently at a 705- 
kilometer altitude. During its mission lifetime, 
Landsat-7 will take numerous images of the Earth at 
many longitudes. These imaging activities are made 
possible by the spacecraft orbit conforming to a World 
Reference System groundtrack grid path. The World 
Reference System (WRS) is a global notation system 
used to characterize Landsat image data. Satellite 
imagery ("scenes") is designated or identified by path 
and row. Landsat-7 orbits the Earth in a 16-day repeat 
cycle containing 233 orbits equally spaced around the 
equator. These orbits create a grid pattern of reference 
longitudes, approximately 170 kilometers apart, thus 
facilitating imaging. As Landsat-7 orbits the Earth, the 
Local Mean Solar Time (LMST) at the descending 
nodal equator crossing must remain between 9:45 AM 
and 10:15 AM. In addition to the LMST condition, the 
longitudinal point at which the Landsat-7 spacecraft 
crosses the equator must be controlled to within +/- five 
(5) kilometers of a WRS reference longitude. The 
ascent phase completed for the Landsat-7 mission 



'Copyright ©2000 by the American Instimte of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. No copyright is asserted in the 
United States under Tide 17, U.S.Code. The U.S. Government has a royalty- free license to exercise all rights under 
the copyright claimed herein for Government Purposes. All other rights are reserved by the copyright owner. 

^ Aerospace/Electrical Engineer, Flight Dynamics Analysis Branch, Guidance, Navigation and Control 
Center, Goddard Space Flight Center; Phone: 301-286-6222; email: ccoxrftpopfOO.gsfc.nasa.gov 



1 
.American Institute of Aeronautics and .\strodynainics 



low solar tlux data will produce burn results tarther to 
the western control box boundary than predictions 
generated with high solar tlux data. Studies of these 
type produce results to help "bound" the drift 
predictions and the associated choice of maneuver 
duration to use when the solar activity is not certain. 
The risk of selecting a maneuver duration that 
ultimately causes the spacecraft to drift beyoncl,its 
constraints is then minimized. Maneuver planning 
predictions that are performed within a three-week time 
period use the daily JR files. Predictions performed 
longer than three weeks in advance should use the 
Schatten monthly files. 

Landsat-7 Inclination Maneuvers 

The choices for inclination maneuver (Ai) 
execution depend upon what LMST evolution is 
desired. Landsat-7 has a 30-minute range for its nodal 
crossing but utilizes only fifteen minutes of this range. 
Once a target inclination is determined, the resulting 
LMST curve must be observed. Landsat-7 ascent phase 
planning observed LMST drift data based on targeted 
launch dispersion insertion inclinations of 98.165 
degrees to 98.265 degrees. A value of 98.215 degrees 
was chosen because it suited the agreed upon two- 
minute launch window (18:32-18:34 GMT), resulted in 
an initial LMST range of 10:03 - 10:05 AM, and kept 
the LMST values within the mission constraints of 9:45 
- 10:15 AM for approximately two years. 

Inclination maneuvers can be plaimed so that the LMST 
requirement is not violated. It is important to plan the 
execution of the inclination maneuver prior to LMST 
violation. To optimize the inclination maneuver for 
acceptable results, the actual decay in orbit inclination 
must be observed to determine the magnitude of delta 
velocity (AV) maneuver duration needed to achieve the 
target inclination. Inclination decay can be plotted and 
compared to the LMST evolution over a two-year 
period. The amount of inclination decay allowable'is 
arbitrary as long as the corresponding LMST has not 
gone beyond the 9:45 AM boundary. The target 
inclination desired and associated AV required to 
achieve that value must be determined. The 
requirements for an inclination maneuver are 
widespread. For Landsat-7. targets to achieve a Sun- 
synchronous inclination or returning the inclination to 
the insertion value were investigated. 

An inclination value for a spacecraft in a Sun- 
synchronous orbit will depend on the altiUide of the 



spacecraft orbit. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) 
engineers performed analysis on this subject and 
determined inclination values for s'pacecraft in altiuides 
ranging from 200 km to 5900 km." Using Eq. 1, 

dfl'dt = -(3/2) J: { R,-/(a-( 1 -e')) | V(|j;'a') cos(i) ( 1 ) 

where 

J. = spherical harmonic associated with Earth's 

oblateness 
Re = Earth's mean equatorial radius 
a = semimajor axis of satellite's orbit 
e = eccentricity of satellite's orbit 
p = Universal Gravitational constant 
i = inclination of satellite's orbit 

Sun-synchronous inclinations were determined. The 
mission orbit semimajor axis and eccentricity were used 
in Eq. 1 to determine what the Sun-synchronous 
inclination would be for Landsat-7. A value of 98. 1845 
degrees was determined. Prior to launch a study was 
performed to assess inclination maneuver magnitudes 
approximately two (2) years after launch. A maneuver 
of about 25-30 minutes would be necessary to increase 
the inclination by 0.07 degrees. Spacecraft engineers 
and project personnel agreed that this maneuver 
duration would be a risk to thruster performance and 
interrupt image operations for the science community. 
To remain conservative, GSFC flight dynamics 
engineers investigated measures to return the orbit 
inclination to its insertion value of 98.215 degrees. 
This value produced an optimal LMST drift within 
required constraints and the AV maneuver duration was 
acceptable to spacecraft engineers. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 
respectively, show Lansat-7 inclination decay and 
LMST evolution post ascent. 



I 


sitlm- ' InclnMion Dsciy 


JSr: 


. 


r:^ 


%«*fc^" :;::r:z;:r. 


.- ___u.- 


^**^::::;::i;: 


: 


._:;^Si,^^ 


: .. -V- 


. - . - - i - . ^"■8* 



Figure 2 



The data in these figures were used to plan the first Ai 
maneuver for Landsat-7. LMST evolution was well 
within constraints peaking at a time of 10:05:10 
(10.0865) and reaching 9:55:30 (9.925) in two years. 
Inclination decay was on the order of O.Oldegrees every 
100 days. At 200 days, a maneuver of 9 minutes was 
needed to restore 0.025 degrees of inclination decay. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Aslrodynamics 



Results 

Results for the June 6, 2000 (day 158) drag 
make-up maneuver, the first inclination maneuver, 
performed November 9, 1999, and a proposed 
inclination maneuver for mid-October 2000 are 
presented. 

Operationally, the Landsat-7 WRS longitude drift is 
controlled within 2 km west and 1 km east of the 
control box center. The maneuvers to date have been 
on the average of 17 seconds. Figure 4 and Figure 5 
show pre- and post-maneuver WRS longitude drift data 
respectively for the June 6, 2000 maneuver. 



November 9"' maneuver. The profile is quite similar to 
Figure 2. 



jt^sus m at±JUJ-iSi H HiU '■^r^^ir^z^^ 



Ljncta-? 


Man L.^sl 


inic Lv,-l 


tl..Tl 




- * ■ ' ' ' : ' 


'-]■-■ \ I '- ■ 


1 \ ■ 


- \ 





Figure 6 



WRS Dnfl - No bum 









; 


1 
























c-'' 


i 










;._ 


_„ 






: k-- 


,l._U_ 







LS7 ElRPMOOayifrunEpvcK lDiv<l 



Figure 4 

The maneuver was planned for 1 6 seconds and 
effectively stopped the eastward drift (shown in Fig.4) 
and returned the drift westward at about 500 meters per 
day (Fig. 5). Also noticeable is that the desired control 
box interval is maintained and the drift period is on the 
order of 14 days (Fig. 5). 





Post MancuvL 
Epoch \3-> '.a 


r WKS Dnft 








•i- 


- - - — - - 







\ 


1 
-A ■ 


° t 
i i ■ 




1 r^ 


' t ' 









—!'^ 


1 


I ■ . % 




t- 




. -.vV . .■ 
^ ■* .V V "• - " 




' 



.Sr Elap«MO«y«Frti 



Figure 5 

Results of the inclination maneuver, held on November 
9, 1999, are shown in Figure 6 and 7. Figure 6 shows 
the resulting LMST profile based on maneuver goals 
designed to return the orbit inclination to the insertion 
value; i.e. Figure 3 is almost identical to Figure 6. 
Figure 7 shows the resulting inclination decay after the 



M^iM nl.l tlii Irt^- tmt:» 



■93 



L«tilB«-T Indinanofi Onuy 



;-f^ 



::-t:-J' 



Figure 7 

The next inclination maneuver, for Landsat-7 is planned 
for mid-October 2000. Flight operations management 
has agreed to two significant maneuver goals. The first 
is to schedule inclination maneuvers once per year (fall 
quarter). Secondly, a target inclination has been 
determined such that in one year, the inclination will 
decay to a value slightly above the initial inclination. 
Planning this sequence is identical to the steps outlined 
earlier. The only difference is that the target inclination 
is 98.22 degrees, 0.005 degrees above the value 
targeted in the first Ai, and the maneuver duration has 
increased to about 1 8 minutes. 



H:linal»jn IJcxa^ 






^m^ 



. ) ! Ciw»aO n^r -«- Cw* . nx 



Figure 8 



American In.stitute of .-Aeronautics and .-Xstrodynamics 



