NASA/TM— 1999-209390 




Performance and Feasibility Analysis of 
a Wind Turbine Power System for 
Use on Mars 



Matthew D, Lichter 

The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 

Larry Viterna 

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 



National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 

Glenn Research Center 



September 1999 



This report is a formal draft or working 

paper, intended to solicit comments and 

ideas from a technical peer group. 



This report contains preliminary 

findings, subject to revision as 

analysis proceeds. 



Available from 



NASA Center for Aerospace Information 
7121 Standard Drive 
Hanover, MD 21076 
Price Code: A03 



National Technical Information Service 

5285 Port Royal Road 

Springfield, VA 22100 

Price Code: A03 



PERFORMANCE AND FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS OF A WIND TURBINE POWER SYSTEM FOR USE ON MARS 



Matthew D, Lichter 

The Pennsylvania State University 

University Park, Pennsylvania 



Larry Viterna, Ph.D. 

NASA Glenn Research Center 

Cleveland, Ohio 



ABSTRACT 

A wind turbine power system for future missions to 
the Martian surface was studied for performance and 
feasibility. A C++ program was developed from existing 
FORTRAN code to analyze the power capabilities of 
wind turbines under different environments and design 
philosophies. Power output, efficiency, torque, thrust, 
and other performance criteria could be computed given 
design geometries, atmospheric conditions, and airfoil 
behavior. After reviewing performance of such a wind 
turbine, a conceptual system design was modeled to 
evaluate feasibility. More analysis code was developed 
to study and optimize the overall structural design. 
Findings of this preliminary study show that turbine 
power output on Mars could be as high as several 
hundred kilowatts. The optimized conceptual design 
examined here would have a power output of 104 kW, 
total mass of 1910 kg, and specific power of 54.6 W/kg. 

INTRODUCTION 

Future missions to Mars will require power 
generation capabilities far beyond those of conventional 
space power systems. To sustain life and equipment for 
extended periods will require very large energy stores. 
To synthesize propellant on Mars for the return trip will 
require even more power. Currently, the two main 
proposals for energy generation during planetary 
exploration are solar power and nuclear power. Research 
has shown that these methods are feasible, but each has 
major drawbacks that require serious consideration. 
Solar power methods are grossly inefficient, 
cumbersome, and heavy. Nuclear power methods 
require elaborate safety systems and violate international 
agreements on the launch of radioactive materials. 

Wind power might provide an alternative to these 
two power systems. Mars contains a thin atmosphere 
possessing high wind speeds. Wind turbines have 
proven feasible on Earth after years of research and 
development. Performance, structural dynamics, and 
design philosophy of wind turbines are well understood. 
Due to their success and relative simplicity, wind 
turbines might provide a good method for power 
generation on Mars. 



An ideal power system would provide a high level 
of power at a minimum weight. This is because the costs 
associated with transport of such a system to Mars are 
extraordinarily high and are a direct function of total 
mass. Construction costs of the system would be small 
compared to the transportation costs. Thus, the ratio of 
power output to total mass (known as specific power) is 
the major design concern for such a system. It is 
therefore essential to predict both the power output and 
the total mass when studying the feasibility of a power 
system for Mars. 

Because of this, computer code was developed to 
analyze power capabilities of conceptual wind turbines. 
This code was used to determine power levels, 
efficiencies, thrust loading, and other critical design 
parameters of the turbine, given inputs such as blade 
shape, atmospheric properties, airfoil characteristics, 
blade shape, and general turbine geometry. 

Next, a structural design was developed for the 
wind turbine system. After careful review, it was 
determined that conventional Earth-based structural 
designs would be inappropriate for the environment of 
Mars. These designs would be very heavy, difficult to 
install, and incapable of providing sufficient height for 
the turbine. Instead, a new design was developed that 
would be much lighter, easier to install, and capable of 
providing the necessary altitude for the turbine. This 
system would utilize a helium balloon and tether to raise 
the turbine to an appropriate height. 

In order to study feasibility of this system, more 
computer code was developed and utilized to model its 
overall structural characteristics. With this code, it was 
possible to analyze total system mass, static loading, and 
other important design parameters. With the system 
analysis code, performance curves could be generated by 
changing design variables. After plotting specific power 
as a function of several design variables, it was then 
possible to locate the design configuration that would 
yield the highest specific power. With this information, 
an optimal design could be selected and examined 
further for feasibility. 



NAS A/TM— 1 999-209390 



TURBINE PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 



TURBINE PERFORMANCE RESULTS 



The program used to analyze wind turbine 
performance on Mars was developed from existing code. 
The existing code was written in FORTRAN by Dr. 
Robert E. Wilson and Stel N. Walker of Oregon State 
University in 1975 [1]. This code was used to evaluate 
performance of Earth-based wind turbines. In 1981, it 
was modified by Dr. Larry A. Viterna of NASA Lewis 
Research Center to incorporate additional features and 
increase accuracy. 

This code was then converted to C programming 
language using FORTRAN to C translation software [2]. 
A graphical user interface was designed to simplify use 
of the program. Editing and compiling was performed 
through the software VisualAge for C+ + for Windows by 
IBM, For more information regarding the design and 
refinement of this code, see [3]. 

The program could compute power output, 
efficiency, torque, and axial thrust loads. Atmospheric 
inputs included wind speed, density, and viscosity. 
Blade geometry inputs included twist and chord length 
along the blade, and total blade length. Airfoil properties 
were given through a table of lift and drag coefficients 
versus angle of attack. Other inputs included rotor 
speed, number of blades, and hub radius. 

The new code contained many improvements over 
the original. First, the code was expanded to accurately 
model turbine behavior for the atmosphere of Mars. The 
original code used only the atmospheric properties of 
Earth and could not account for the very different 
atmosphere that exists on Mars. New algorithms were 
added to model behavior for any given air density and 
viscosity. Second, the subroutines involving the airfoil 
characteristics of the turbine blades were rewritten to 
accommodate a wider variety of airfoil types. The 
original code used only NACA 0012, 4418, and 23018 
airfoils. These airfoils do not perform well on Mars due 
to the extremely low Reynolds numbers encountered 
there. High turbine performance on Mars requires good 
low-Reynolds-number airfoils and thus the new code 
needed to accommodate these new types of airfoils. The 
new code allows the input of airfoil characteristics 
through a table relating lift and drag coefficients versus 
angle of attack. Third, additional coding was added to 
model airfoil behavior beyond stall. The Viterna- 
Corrigan post-stall model [4] was incorporated to 
determine lift and drag coefficients when the blades stall. 
This ccxiing provided better modeling accuracy. Fourth, 
the code was clarified and condensed. The origTnaT code 
contained many inefficient algorithms, unnecessary 
variables, and poor comments. These were all amended 
to reduce computation time and enhance readability. 



Once the analysis code was developed, it was used 
to study power capabilities of wind turbines in the 
Martian environment. It was quickly realized that 
airfoils that perform well on Earth do not perform well 
on Mars. Due to the very low atmospheric density on 
Mars, the Reynolds number related to the turbine blades 
is extremely low (on the order of lO'*). Conventional 
turbine airfoils experience too much drag in this regime, 
which significantly reduces efficiency. Therefore, 
unconventional airfoils would be needed to provide good 
turbine performance on Mars. 

After reviewing twenty-six different airfoils 
designed for the low-Reynolds-number regime [5], it was 
concluded that good turbine performance would be 
possible on Mars. Best performance came from the CM 
15, SD 7037A, SD 8000, and BE 50 airfoils. 
Efficiencies of at least 40 percent and power levels on 
the order of hundreds of kilowatts could be attained, 
given proper airfoil selection and blade design. This is 
close to performance levels attained on Earth and is good 
enough to warrant further examination of wind turbine 
systems. 

CONCEPTUAL SYSTEM DESIGN 

After concluding that significant power levels and 
efficiencies could be realized on Mars, it became 
necessary to study the overall wind turbine system. The 
wind turbine, generator, housing, and structural support 
needed to be integrated into one design. Once a design 
was decided upon, it would then be possible to analyze 
total system mass and power capability in order to assess 
feasibility. 

To begin, power output of a wind turbine system is 
given by the equation 

/3 



P = i/2r|pAV' 



(1) 



where P is power, r| is turbine efficiency (found using 
the performance analysis code), p is air density, A is 
swept frontal area of turbine, and V is wind speed. 
Through Eq. 1, it can be seen that wind speed has the 
greatest influence on power output. 

The atmosphere of Mars is very different from that 
on Earth. The pressure and density of Mars' s 
atmosphere is about one percent that of Earth's 
atmosphere. However, wind speeds can be up to five 
times faster on Mars jhan on Earth. These two 
phenomena counteract each other when affecting power 
output, as can be seen by Eq. I. The net effect is that 
power output on Mars is roughly comparable to that on 
Earth. 



NAS A/TM— 1 999-209390 




(a) 



(b) 



Figure I: Possible wind turbine system 
designs, (a) Conventional tower structure, (b) 
Balloon and tether system. Conventional 
tower structures might not be feasible on Mars. 

Unfortunately, wind speeds capable of providing 
this high level of energy exist only at around 7 to 10 km 
altitude in the Martian atmosphere [6]. Conventional 
Earth-based wind turbine systems consist of a turbine 
and generator affixed to the top of a large tower (Fig. 
la). On Mars, this design would not be practical for 
several reasons. First, in order to achieve significant 
altitude, the tower would have to be large and thus 
extremely heavy. Second, installation of such a design 
on the Martian surface would be incredibly difficult due 
to the complexity of struts, foundations, and assembly 
procedures. Third, it would be impossible to create a 
tower strong enough to hold the turbine at such a high 
altitude, even in the reduced gravity of Mars. 

A totally new system structure would need to be 
developed if the wind turbine concept were to work. In 
response to this, a conceptual system was developed in 
which a helium-filled balloon would be used to suspend 
the turbine at high altitude (Fig. lb). The very large 
balloon would be connected to the turbine assembly with 
cables and/or struts. The system would be anchored to 
the ground using a very long tether. A lightweight 
electrical cable following the tether would transmit 
power down to a ground station for conditioning and 
distribution. 

SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION METHODS 

This design can be optimized based on two 
independent variables: turbine altitude and blade length. 
Power output, tether length and diameter, generator size, 
transmission cable diameter, and balloon diameter are all 
functions of these two independent variables. 



The optimal design is not obvious upon simple 
inspection. Many phenomena counteract each other to 
affect power output. At higher altitudes, wind speed 
increases, but atmospheric density decreases. It is not 
immediately clear which of these factors has more effect. 
Closer investigation of atmospheric data reveals that 
increasing altitude will actually increase power output 
for a given turbine size. 

However, total power output is not the real measure 
of feasibility. The real measure is specific power, the 
ratio of power output to total system mass. For example, 
if design A produces twice the power of design 5, but 
weighs ten times as much, then design A is not the best 
design. In this case, it would be more efficient to use 
two of B instead of one A. Using two systems of design 
B would achieve the same total power capabilities of 
design A for only one-fifth the weight. 

Therefore, in order to optimize the design for 
feasibility, total system mass must be computed in 
addition to power output capability. This is not a simple 
task, When turbine altitude increases, total mass 
increases rapidly. This is because to reach higher 
altitudes, a longer tether is needed. Since the tether was 
found to constitute more than half the system mass, this 
phenomenon is critical. When the tether gets longer, it 
weighs more and thus must be larger in diameter to 
support its own weight. Increasing its diameter increases 
its weight further. A heavier tether also increases the 
size requirement for the balloon. In addition, a larger 
balloon is required at higher altitudes because buoyancy 
decreases as atmospheric density drops. As balloon size 
grows, the wind drag it experiences also grows. This 
increases the tension in the tether, and again the tether 
must increase in diameter. Balloon and tether sizes are 
coupled in such a way that a small increase in altitude 
will dramatically influence total system mass. 

It is unclear upon inspection which altitude will 
provide the best specific power. Increasing altitude 
increases both power output and total mass. It is also 
unclear which turbine blade length will provide the best 
specific power. When blade length increases, power 
output and turbine mass both increase. These two 
parameters increase at different rates and it is not 
obvious which blade length will provide optimal results. 

Since the ultimate measure of design feasibility is 
specific power, it was necessary to generate performance 
curves of specific power versus altitude and blade length. 
With these curves, it would be possible to locate the 
altitude and the blade length that would provide 
maximum specific power. Once these two parameters 
are chosen, the rest of the system parameters can be 
determined and the system is then well understood. 



NAS AHM— 1 999-209390 



SYSTEM ANALYSIS 

In order to generate performance curves, a 
computer code needed to be developed to quickly 
compute power output, system mass, and specific power 
for any given turbine altitude, blade length, and material 
construction. This code was written in C++ and a 
graphical user interface was created for ease of use. For 
more information regarding the specifics of this code, see 
[3]. 

The analysis code was developed based on many 
design assumptions and approximations. Only static 
loads were applied to the system; fatigue failure was not 
examined in the code. The tether connecting the system 
to the ground was assumed to sag under its own weight 
and follow the shape of a catenary curve. Electrical 
cables ran along the tether. Slope of the tether at the 
ground anchor was designed at zero degrees so that 
tether force on the anchor would be purely horizontal. A 
single 200-m cable provided the connection between 
balloon and turbine. Drag from the balloon, cables, and 
turbine assembly was accounted for in the model. The 
atmosphere and helium were approximated as ideal gases 
to simplify the calculation of balloon buoyancy. Turbine 
blade mass for any given blade length was computed by 
extrapolating from actual wind turbine data. Likewise, 
generator and electrical cable masses for any given 
power level were computed from curve-fits of actual 
aircraft generator data [ 10] and electrical cable data [12]. 

Once turbine altitude, blade length, turbine 
efficiency, factors of safety, atmospheric properties, and 
structural material properties are given, the code can then 
compute the rest of the system parameters. Power output 
is computed using turbine efficiency, blade length, and 
atmospheric properties. Transmission cable diameter 
and generator size can be computed from this power 
requirement. Their masses can then be computed from 
their sizes. Turbine mass is calculated from the blade 
length, as discussed above. Since balloon diameter and 
tether dimensions are coupled parameters, an iterative 
process is used to find a solution that satisfies both the 
tether and balloon size requirements simultaneously. 
From these sizes, the tether, balloon, and helium masses 
can be found. Total system mass is then found by 
summing all the component masses. Specific power is 
then simply the power output divided by the total system 
mass. 

Once the code was built, it was then possible to 
generate performance curves by varying materials, 
altitude, and turbine size (Fig. 2). With these 
performance curves, the optimal design configuration 
(that which achieves the highest specific power) could be 
determined by locating the peak of the performance 



60 



50- 



I 40 

O 30 

o. 

o 



I 



20 



10- 




8 km Altitude 
1 1 km Altitude 

6 km Altitude 



20 



40 



60 



Blade Length (m) 

Figure 2: Specific Power vs. Blade Length for 
Various Turbine Altitudes (Aramid Fiber 
Tether), The optimal design has 8 km turbine 
altitude, 13 m blade length. Note that the highest 
altitude does not provide the best specific power, 

curve. In Fig. 2, this optimal configuration is 
represented by the tallest peak on the graph; the optimal 
design would have a blade length of 13 m and a turbine 
altitude of 8 km. Performance curves for systems that 
use other tether materials are similar in shape to the one 
shown here. 

SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION RESULTS 

The optimal design configurations for various 
tether materials is shown in Table 1. The atmosphere 
and material property data used in the analysis are shown 
in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. The optimal turbine 
altitude for all tether materials was 8 km. Optimal blade 
length, however, was different for each tether material. 

The optimal design of all these would consist of an 
Aramid fiber tether and two aluminum electrical cables 
each 58 km in length, a plastic film helium balloon 80 m 
in diameter, a lOO-kW aircraft-grade generator, and two 
lightweight turbine blades of length 1 3 m. The 
optimized design would operate at an altitude of 8 km, 
would have a launch mass of about 1910 kg, and would 
have a specific power around 55 W/kg. 



These parameters 
efficiency of 43 percent. 



were based on a turbine 
balloon film mass of 10 
grams/m^, balloon drag coefficient of 0.2, and tether 
factor of safety of 2.0 based on ultimate strength. 
Turbine efficiency of 43 percent was found to be an 
attainable value from the power capability analysis 
described earlier. Balloon film mass was based on the 
estimated weights of films such as Mylar or biaxial 
nylon-6. Balloon drag coefficient was found using a 



NAS A/TM— 1 999-209390 



Table I: Optimized Designs for Various Tether Materials. 



Tether Material 


Blade Length 
m 


Power Output 
kW 


Total Mass 
kg 


Specific Power 
W/kg 


Steel 


34 


712 


35 800 


19.9 


Aluminum Alloy 


36 


799 


43 900 


18.2 


Titanium Alloy 


35 


755 


40 400 


18.7 


E-glass Fiber 


16 


158 


3 510 


45.0 


Carbon Fiber 


15 


139 


2 940 


47.1 


Aramid Fiber 


13 


104 


1910 


54.6 



Table 2: Atmosphere Data for Mars. 



Table 3: Property^ Data for Tether Materials, 



Altitude 


Density 


Wind Speed 


km 


kg/m^ 


m/s 


I 


0.01270 


3 


2 


0.01 170 


6 


3 


0.01080 


12 


4 


0.01000 


19 


5 


0.00930 


25 


6 


0.00857 


33 


7 


0.00785 


41 


8 


0.00730 


50 


9 


0.00670 


58 


10 


0.00620 


66 


11 


0.00570 


72 


12 


0.00525 


78 


13 


0.00485 


84 


14 


0.00442 


90 


15 


0.00405 


96 


16 


0.00371 


100 


17 


0.00340 


104 


18 


0.00310 


108 


19 


0.00280 


112 


20 


0.00257 


115 



Sources: [6], [7] 

chart of drag coefficient versus Reynolds number for a 
sphere [10]. The tether factor of safety was based on 
recommendations from a technical article concerning an 
Earth-based balloon and tether system similar to that 
analyzed [II]. 

DISCUSSION 

From this preliminary analysis, the ground tether 
was determined to be the primary design driver. More 
than half of the system weight comes from this single 
component. It is critical that the materials used in the 
tether have a very high strength-to-weight ratio. At 
about 8 to 10 km turbine altitude, the higher power levels 
attained by increasing altitude are not enough to offset 
the tether weight penalty. 



Tether Material 


Density 
kg/m' 


Tensile Strength 
GPa 


Steel 
AISI4142Q&T 


7800 


1.93 


Aluminum Alloy 
7075-T6 


2710 


0.593 


Titanium Alloy 
6A1-4V 


4850 


1.10 


E-glass Fiber 


2580 


3.45 


Carbon Fiber 


2150 


3.30 


Aramid Fiber 
Kevlar 49 


1440 


3.60 



Sources: {8}, [9] 

A special airfoil would need to be designed to 
perform well at the low Reynolds numbers experienced 
on Mars. This airfoil would need high lift-to-drag ratios 
in order to increase turbine efficiency. Design would 
probably be similar to those discussed in [5], 

An autonomous balloon pressure regulator would 
need to be designed. The atmospheric pressure on Mars 
fluctuates greatly on a daily and yearly basis due to 
changes in temperature. Such a regulation system would 
need to bleed off or absorb balloon pressure when 
atmospheric pressure drops during the night and the 
winter. This aspect of a wind turbine system has not 
been examined yet. 

Lightweight composite construction throughout the 
system would be essential. The turbine blades are the 
strongest candidates for this type of construction, 
because they account for a significant portion of the total 
mass. Minimal weight is important not only because it 
reduces transportation costs, but also because it is a self- 
influencing parameter. That is, to shave 50 kg off the 
turbine blades might actually shave 400 kg off the entire 
system due to tether and balloon size reductions. 



NASA/TM— 1 999-209390 



A lightweight generator would have to be designed. 
As said about the turbine blades, every effort to reduce 
component weight must be taken. This generator might 
need to be designed for variable speed operation, 
depending on the specifics of the turbine design. 

Dynamic loading, cyclic loading, creep, and 
stability would need to be studied further. The analysis 
performed here examined only static loading with 
regards to ultimate tensile strength. Due to sparse wind 
data, it was not possible to study cyclic loading, fatigue, 
or creep in the system. In addition, this analysis did not 
examine the stability of this particular system design. It 
is highly likely that a system would require more support 
between balloon and turbine than that provided in this 
simple preliminary design. 

Temperature and ultraviolet radiation effects on 
construction materials would need to be studied. 
Atmospheric temperatures vary from roughly -100 to -50 
degrees Celsius [6]. Ultraviolet irradiation is orders of 
magnitude higher on Mars than on Earth. This would 
strongly affect materials selection. Epoxies used in 
composite rotor blades, for example, might break down 
under UV radiation or fatigue quickly at low 
temperature. Because this was only a preliminary 
feasibility study, this environmental aspect of the design 
was not examined in great depth. 

A detailed, long-term survey of wind speeds at 
many altitudes for many locations would be necessary. 
Present knowledge of the Martian atmosphere is not 
detailed enough for realistic wind turbine planning. The 
wind speed data used in this analysis were taken from 
measurements made by Mariner 9 [61. Peak wind speeds 
were measured at 45 degrees north latitude. However, 
some data suggest that wind speeds drop by 15 percent at 
a latitudinal deviation of only 5 degrees. It appears that 
only a narrow region of the Martian atmosphere contains 
high-energy winds. Unfortunately, this narrow region 
might not be the most suitable for habitation or 
exploration. In addition, this Martian jet stream probably 
moves with time, much the way Earth's jet stream does. 
This would make long-range planning for such a wind 
turbine system extremely difficult. More atmospheric 
research would be needed before any final plans for wind 
turbine systems could be made. 

Further research into balloon design might prove 
beneficial. The balloon shape studied here was spherical 
(Fig. 3a). The shape of the balloon might be modified to 
provide lift, as in a wing (Fig. 3b), or to provide 
enhanced flow for the turbine, as in a duct (Fig. 3c). 
With a duct design, the turbine might be located within 
the balloon, and the duct would provide greater effective 




(c) 

Figure 3: Possible balloon designs, (a) Sphere. 
(b) Wing, (c) Duct. A wing would increase the 
lift-to-drag ratio on the balloon, while a duct 
might enhance the effective wind speed for a 
turbine situated within. 

wind speeds. It is not immediately clear whether these 
ideas would enhance performance and feasibility. 

CONCLUSIONS 

A preliminary performance and feasibility analysis 
was conducted for a conceptual wind turbine power 
system for use on Mars. Two different computer codes 
were developed to aid in this study. The first code 
analyzed the aerodynamic details of the turbine itself to 
determine power output, efficiency, torque, and loads. 
This code was used to determine realistic, attainable 
power levels and efficiencies. After finding these, it was 
concluded that further research was justified. At this 
point, the second code was developed to analyze the 
structural details of the entire system, which included 
balloon, tether, turbine, generator, housing, and electrical 
cables. The second code was used to generate 
performance curves for the overall system. With these 
curves, it was possible to locate the optimum design 
configuration. 

Wind turbines would not be effective at low 
altitudes (below I km). Wind speeds and atmospheric 
densities there are too low to provide significant power 
levels. High altitudes might be reached by using a 
balloon and tether system to lift the turbine high into the 
Martian jet stream. If this design were used, the primary 
design driver would be the tether. It would account for 
more than half the system weight and would influence 
size requirements for other components. 

The initial results of these preliminary analyses 
show that the optimum design would utilize an Aramid 
fiber tether. The blades would be 13 m long and the 
turbine would be suspended at an altitude of 8 km. As a 
result, the balloon would be 80 m in diameter, the tether 
and electrical cables would be 58 m long, the system 
mass would be 1910 kg, the power output would be 104 
kW, and the specific power would be 54.6 W/kg. A 
diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 4. 



NASAAM— 1999-209390 



Balloon 
Diameter: 80 m 




Anchor/ 
Ground Station 



Figure 4: Optimized conceptual design. Drag on the balloon and turbine pushes the system far downwind. 



Much more research would need to be conducted to 
take the wind turbine concept beyond this preliminary 
conceptual design. Detailed wind surveys, material 
degradation analyses, airfoil/balloon/generator design, 
and tether studies would need to be performed if this 
concept were to be taken beyond this preliminary design 
stage. 

REFERENCES 

1. Wilson, Robert E„ and Stel N. Walker, 1975: A 
FORTRAN Program for the Determination of 
Performance, Loads, and Stability Derivatives of 
Wind Turbines, Corvallis, Oregon: Oregon State 
University. 

2. AT&T Bell Laboratories and Bellcore, 1997: 
FORTRAN to C Conversion Utility, ftp://netlib.bell- 
labs.com/ netlib/f2c/ libf2c.zip. 

3. Lichter, Matthew D., 1997: A Program for the 
Analysis of Extraterrestrial Wind Turbines, 
unpublished document, Cleveland, Ohio: NASA 
Lewis Research Center. 

4. Lissaman, Peter B. S., 1994: 'Wind Turbine 
Airfoils and Rotor Wakes," Wind Turbine 
Technology. D. Spera, ed., New York: The 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, pp. 
288-289- 

5. Selig, Michael S., John F. Donovan, and David B. 
Fraser, 1989: Airfoils at Low Speeds, Virginia 
Beach, Virginia: H. A. Stokely. 



6. Kaplan, David, 1988: Environment of Mars, NASA 
TM-100470, Houston, Texas: Lyndon B. Johnson 
Space Center. 

7. Marov, M. Ya., V. V. Kerzhanovich, V. S. 
Avduevsky, and M. K. Rozhdestvensky, 1976: 
"Measurements With the Mars 6 Lander and a 
Model of the Martian Atmosphere," Space 
Research, Vol. XVT, M. J. Rycroft, ed., Berlin: 
Akademie-Verlag, p. 1026. 

8. Callister, William D., 1997: Materials Science and 
Engineering: An Introduction, New York: John 
Wiley and Sons. 

9. Shigley, Joseph Edward, and Charles R. Mischke, 
1989: Mechanical Engineering Design, Fifth 
Edition, New York: McGraw-Hill. 

10. Baumeister, Theodore, ed., 1978: Marks' Standard 
Handbook for Mechanical Engineers, Eighth 
Edition, New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 2-38, 3-35, 
4-50, 6-11, 6-60, 8-90, 1 1-69, 15-60, 15-66. 

1 1 . Redkar, R. T., 1977: "Scientific Ballooning in 
India," Space Research, Vol. XVTT, M. J. Rycroft, 
ed,, Oxford: Pergamon Press, pp. 779-793. 

12. Fink, Donald G., ed., 1978: Standard Handbook for 
Electrical Engineers, Eleventh Edition, New York: 
McGraw-Hill, p. 23-11. 



NASA/TM— 1999-209390 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMB No, 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of Information. Including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington. VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0186), Washington, DC 20503. 


1 . AGENCY USE ONLY {Leave blank) 


2. REPORT DATE 

September 1999 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Technical Memorandum 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Performance and Feasibility Analysis of a Wind Turbine Power System for 
Use on Mars 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

WU-251-30-07^00 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

Matthew D. Lichter and Larry Viterna 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

E-11819 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, DC 20546-0001 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

NASA TM— 1999-209390 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Matthew D. Lichter, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, and Larry A. Viterna, NASA 
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio. Responsible person, Larry A. Viterna, organization code 9400, (216) 433-5398. 


12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Unclassified - Unlimited 

Subject Categories: 20 and 44 Distribution: Nonstandard 

This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, (301) 621-0390. 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


13. ABSrnACJ (Maximum 200 words) 

A wind turbine power system for future missions to the Martian surface was studied for performance and feasibility. A 
C++ program was developed from existing FORTRAN code to analyze the power capabilities of wind turbines under 
different environments and design philosophies. Power output, efficiency, torque, thrust, and other performance criteria 
could be computed given design geometries, atmospheric conditions, and airfoil behavior After reviewing performance 
of such a wind turbine, a conceptual system design was modeled to evaluate feasibility. More analysis code was 
developed to study and optimize the overall structural design. Findings of this preliminary study show that turbine 
power output on Mars could be as high as several hundred kilowatts. The optimized conceptual design examined here 
would have a power output of 104 kW, total mass of 1910 kg, and specific power of 54.6 W/kg. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Wind energy; Space exploration 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 
13 


16. PRICE CODE 

A03 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 


19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 



NSN 7540-01-280-5500 



Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-ie 
298-102 



