International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) 

Conference Issue | March 2019 Available Online: www.ijtsrd.com e-ISSN: 2456 - 6470 

♦ > 

Fostering Innovation, Integration and Inclusion Through 

Interdisciplinary Practices in Management 

♦ > 

A Review- Role of Mobile Application for Medical Services 


Miss. Naina S Thorat 1 , Dr. R. V Kulkarni 2 

department of Computer Science, department of Commerce and Management 
!Sadguru Gadage Maharaj College, Karad, Maharashtra, India 
2 Chhatrapati Shahu Institute of Business Education and Research Center Kolhapur, Maharashtra, India 


Organised By: 

Management Department, Chhatrapati 
Shahu Institute of Business Education 
and Research, Kolhapur, Maharashtra 



4) ^1 ctrKI Pi 

KOLHAPUR" 


An Autonomous Institute Under UGC ft Shivaji University 
College with Potential for Excellence (CPE) - III Phase, 


How to cite this paper: Miss. Naina S 
Thorat | Dr. R. V Kulkarni "A Review- 
Role of Mobile Application for Medical 
Services" Published in International 
Journal of Trend in Scientific Research 
and Development (ijtsrd), ISSN: 2456- 
6470, Special Issue | 

Fostering 
Innovation, 

Integration and 
Inclusion Through 
Interdisciplinary 
Practices in IITSRD23060 

Management, March 
2019, pp.43-45, URL: 

https ://www.ijtsrd.com/papers/ijtsrd2 
3060.pdf 



ABSTRACT 


In advanced mobile communications and portable computation devices are now 
combined in handheld devices called "smart mobile phones, IPADs, Tablet PC", 
which are also capable of running third-party software. The number of smart 
mobile phones users is growing rapidly, including among healthcare 
professionals. The purpose of this study was to classify smart mobile phones - 
based healthcare technologies as discussed in academic literature according to 
their functionalities, services and summarize articles in each category. 

Many medical applications for smart mobile phones have been developed and 
widely used by health professionals, doctors, consultant and patients. The use of 
smart phones is getting more attention in healthcare and medical services day by 
day. Medical service provider applications make smart mobile phones useful 
tools in the practice of evidence-based medicine at the point of care, in addition 
to their use in mobile clinical communication with an correct references. Also, 
smart mobile phones can play a very important role in patient education, disease 
self-management, and remote monitoring of patients. 


KEYWORDS: OPD-Out Door Patients , I PD-In Door Patients; HSR- Health Service 
Research 


INTRODUCTION 

Medical services or mobile services are the combination of to 
make user friendly relationship between patients and 
doctors. There are lots of barriers and problems are faced to 
providing health service to the patients. In India there is a 
provide the awareness of medical services .It is one kind of 
challenges, to providing services, investigation, quality, cost 
and key features. The researcher provides the proper 
outcome, service quality, service cost for populations. 

The health service research (HSR) held to provide the 
medical facilities. The goal of HSR is to provide information 
to improve health of patients or citizens. HSR is a 
multidisciplinary field that moves beyond basic and applied 
research, drawing on all the health professions and on many 
academic disciplines, including biostatistics, epidemiology, 
health economics, medicine, nursing, operations research, 
psychology, and sociology. 


ft n 20 30 4D 50 

|—t—|—i— l —I | I—|-.> millions 

Topnliegfi^ D{jw , ycad& 

i>ji 

Weigh! loss . > 50 million 

Exercise —■■■■'■.* 26.5million 

Women's Hearth . . .10.5 million 

Sleep £ Meditation ——.-...> & million 

Pregnanqj .*..> 15 million 

Tools & instruments Q ..-> £ million 

OJ/iej- ..-.> 1ft million 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD23060 | Conference Issue | FIIITIPM - 2019 | March 2019 


Page: 43 





















International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


In the United States, the National Healthcare Quality 
Report, 11 National Healthcare Disparities Report 12 and 
Healthy People Year 2010 13 exemplify our capacity for 
monitoring quality and assessing change. As per the previous 
researcher to research the health services to the patients, or 
survey it is beneficial for the maintain security or reduce the 
paperwork. 

Mobile health app are to be work on the parameters of 
patient report. Mobile health app is beneficial for the doctors 
because: - 40% doctors believe mobile technology can reduce 
the number of visits to the clinic. 93% physician accepts that 
mobile can improve patient's health as well as it helps to 
provide the required details at emergency. 

Goals for Health Services and Patient:- As per pre scenario 
there is a to maintain the patient doctor relationship. There 
was a one kind of the good citizen responsibility. 

Patient safety:- It will be provide the fast service to the 
patients at the time of emergency. The patient get the detail 
knowledge about the their medical situation. 

Effectiveness:- Mobile app are helped to the patients or 
relatives to get all report or parameters regarding the 
decease or any medical service detail which is provided by 
hospital or doctors. 

Patient centered:- All medical services are for the user or 
patients, patient is the center point of medical services or 
health services. It all about the patient safety. 

Equity: - Any health service to maintain the quality of health 
services. 

MOBILE MEDICAL APPLICATION 

Mobile health app or medical services apps are targeting to a 
patient monitoring, documentation and service intimations 
are increasingly useful to every user which is related to 
accessing or using these smart phone mobile phone app. 
Healthcare apps can radically improve the ease access and 
speed with which healthcare professionals can access, 
analyze, and respond to clinical data and reference 
information. Smart mobile phones or touch screen devices 
also aide the clinicians by providing the capability of visual 
representation and manipulation of reference material and 
parameter based reports. General architecture of health 
monitoring application or health service applications 
consists of three separate tiers. The first tier consists of 
sensors devices that monitor vital signs of human body. The 
second tier includes the devices at the end user such as 
IPDAs, Tablet PC or smart mobile phones. These devices act 
as mediators that communicate the data between first tier 
and the third tier. At the third tier, there are actually servers 
the platform to perform actual functionality and provide 
database operation facilities to the number of applications. 

Recent years in India it has seen an increased adoption of 
smartphones by healthcare professionals. The smartphone 
is a new technology that combines mobile communication 
and computation in a handheld-sized device like Tablet, 
IPADs, facilitating mobile computing at the point of care. The 
main objective of this study is to classify the Smartphone- 
based healthcare technologies in the literature according to 
their functionalities and summarize them in each category. 


We presenting a systematic literature review in this regard. 
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first study for 
classifying and summarizing health service applications for 
smart mobile phones in a systematic literature review 
format. 

The healthcare system is highly mobile in nature, involving 
multiple clinical locations such as clinics, IPD patient wards, 
OPD patient services, emergency departments, operating 
theaters, intensive care units (ICUs), Test laboratories, etc. 
As such, working in the healthcare system requires extensive 
mobility of healthcare professionals as well as 
communication and collaboration among different 
individuals, including their colleagues and patients. 
Healthcare professionals mainly used pagers for mobile 
communication until the wide availability of cell phones in 
1990s 

The Advantages of Mobile App for Healthcare Industry:- 

1. Medical Service Apps for Doctors and Medical staff:- 

As per studied scenario near about 93% doctors are using 
apps for improving knowledge about health condition of 
their patients. It helps to view your all report through the 
app to take quick decision in emergency cases. 

2. Medical services apps are beneficial for Patients:- 

The patients are receive the most benefits of the medical 
service apps whether it is quick appointment with doctors, 
finding an appropriate specialist with on experience, view 
the medical test reports from labs online and so on. 

3. Reduce the risk of wrong Diagnosis:- 

In earlier days we heard a lot of cases where the patients 
having a dangerous an diagnostic approach, at that time 
number of medical health apps useful for receive an accurate 
report of the patients health condition and it helps to 
prescribe the most accurate medicine with write dosage. 

4. Reducing Medical Bill and Expenses:- 

It it one of the important advantage of medical apps to 
reduces medical bills and expenses. It help to reduce time to 
visit hospital for appointment, collection of reports etc. 

5. Easy Payment Bills:- 

It reducing queue to pay bill, it is highly secure to pay 
amount as well as if you forget to make a payment you will 
get notifications and reminder to do necessary. 

REVIEW OF LITERATURE 

For studied before scenario mobile health apps are the use of 
wireless communication devices to support public health 
and clinical practice. The purpose of mobile app is to rapidly 
to share health data at any time anywhere, patients can self 
monitor, and access their full record. 

In(2007)- Researcher demonstrate usefulness queuing 
model providing guidance to patient panel size.[l] 

In (2008)- Researcher describe the daily patient treatment 
and discussion on paper to reduce delay. [2] 

International journal these paper representing the 
scheduling system of outdoor patients and consulting 
configuration. [3] 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD23060 | Conference Issue | FIIITIPM - 2019 | March 2019 


Page: 44 





International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


This book represents involvement of information technology 
in all health care related sectors in United States. [4] 

In (2011)- In international journal of computer science, 
shows the multi-agent environment to provide better quality 
service on java platform. The researcher or developer 
maintain the patient doctor meeting schedule. [5] 

He make the strong relationship between outdoor patients 
and doctors behind the consult with a particular doctors. [6] 

The researcher representing the classification, sequencing, 
scheduling, under new classification. [7] 

In this article researcher describe about computer based 
electronic information system to build and maintain a 
patient database for analysis of data and to facilitate 
evidence-based decision making process. [8] 


REFERENCES 

[1] Linda V. Green, Sergei Savin (2007): "Reducing Delays 
for Medical Appointments: A Queuing Approach”, 
Operations Research, Volume 56, No. 6, ISSN 0030- 
364X 

[2] Linda V. Green (2008): Using Operations Research to 
Reduce Delays for Healthcare 

[3] Zhu Z. C., Heng B. H., Teow, K. L. (2009): "Simulation 
Study of the Optimal Appointment Number for 
Outpatient Clinics” 

[4] Devon M. Herrick, Linda Gorman, John C. Goodman 
(2010): "Health Information Technology: Benefits and 
Problems” 

[5] Srividya Bhat, Nandini S. Sidnal, Ravi S. Malashetty, 
Sunilkumar. S. Manvi (2011): "Intelligent Scheduling in 
Health Care Domain” 


In this article researcher research android based patient 
appointment scheduling and medicine collection system 
developed, it helps to rescheduling appointment and 
cancelation process of appointment. [9] 

In these paper to study the concepts of time and motion 
study, monitoring outdoor patients waiting time. [10] 

The researcher represent efficient queuing model for 
appointment system to give long wetting time in hospital. 
[ 11 ] 

CONCLUSION 

In real world OPD patients are facing number of significant 
problems like appointment, registration, searching OPD 
locations, finding medicals, way to visit and lengthy process 
for consulting with doctors. The researcher develops the 
mobile app model to provide better medical services to 
citizens. 

The use of mobile health apps could improve patient 
experience, especially with regard to accessing health 
information, making physician-patient communication more 
convenient, ensuring transparency in medical charge, and 
ameliorating short-term outcomes. All of these may 
contribute to positive health outcomes. Therefore, we should 
encourage the adoption of mobile health apps in health care 
settings so as to improve patient experience. 


[6] C. Kavitha, A. Venkat Ramana, S. Sushma Raj (2012): 
"Embedded Management System for Out Patient 
Department” (IJESA), Volume 2, No.3, DOI : 
10.5121/ijesa.2012.2305 

[7] Hyun-Jung Oh, Thomas Ptaszkiewicz (2013): 
"Guidelines for Scheduling in Primary Care Under 
Different” Healthcare Systems Engineering, Volume 3, 
ISSN: 1948-8300 Patient Types and Stochastic Nurse 
and Provider Service Times” 

[8] Ayanthi Saranga Jayawardena (2014): "The Electronic 
Hospital Information System Implemented at the 
District General Hospital 

[9] Swabik Musa Abdulla Wani, Suresh Sankaranarayanan 
(2014): "Intelligent Mobile Hospital Appointment 
Scheduling and Medicine Collection”, Volume 1 No. 02, 
ISSN: 2312-7694 

[10] Pradipti Verma, Dr. Risha Saxena(2015): "An Effective 
Time Motion Study (Tms) On Opd Patients Of A 
Tertiary Care Hospital In September 2015 In Goa” 

[11] Obulor R., Eke B. O. (2016): "Outpatient Queuing Model 
Development For Hospital Appointment System”, 
Scientific Engineering and Applied Science, Volume 2, 
Issue 4, ISSN 2395-3470 


Copyright © 2019 by author(s) and -ssr- i 

International Journal of Trend in fccj kU 
Scientific Research and Development fc— 

Journal. This is an Open Access article distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 
4.0) (http://creativecommons.Org/licenses/by/4.0) 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD23060 | Conference Issue | FIIITIPM - 2019 | March 2019 


Page: 45 







