International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) 

Volume 3 Issue 5, August 2019 Available Online: www.ijtsrd.com e-ISSN: 2456 - 6470 

Implementation of Doppler Radar-Based 
Vehicle Speed Detection System 

May Zin Tun 1 , Kay Thwe Zin 2 

lecturer, Department of Electronic Engineering, Technological University, Mandalay, Myanmar 
2 Lecturer, Department of Electrical Engineering, Technological University, Mawlamyine, Myanmar 


ABSTRACT 


Nowadays, vehicular accidents have been increasing from day to day. Most of 
them are the cause of over speeding. This thesis describes the Arduino based 
vehicle speed detection system using Doppler radar. The primary goal of this 
system is to design of the vehicle speed detector using Doppler radar which is 
used to reduce the amount of accidents caused by over speeding. In this 
system, continuous wave (CW) Doppler radar which is a special case that only 
provides a velocity output is used as a sensor and the microcontroller is used 
to calculate the speed of the vehicle. Moreover, the amplifier is used to amplify 
the voltage level to drive the microcontroller as the sensor output is in micro 
volts. It is also included LCD display to indicate the speed level. A Doppler 
radar that can determine the frequency shift that occurs in electromagnetic 
waves due to the motion of scatters toward or away from the observer through 
measurement of the phase change that occurs in electromagnetic waves during 
a series of pulses. The Doppler frequency is negative for objects receding from 
the radar. The Doppler frequency is positive for objects approaching the radar. 
This system can be acceptable in real-time applications because it is 
independent of temperature, humidity, noise airflow, dust, light, etc. The 
results of design are tested and follow through realization. Each of the 
implementation is evaluated and these evaluations lead to the conclusion that 
the design is able to achieve high accuracy of the speed. The major components 
of the design are Doppler radar (HB100), Arduino Uno, LCD display and 
LM324. C++ programming language is developed in this system. The results of 
this work can improve the performance of automobile safety system. 

KEYWORDS: Doppler radar (HB1 00); Arduino Uno ; LCD display and LM324; C++ 
programming language 

INTRODUCTION 

The most unwanted thing to happen to a road user is road 
accident. Most of the fatal accident occurs due to over 
speeding. Faster vehicles are easier to accident than the 
slower one. There is a wide range of technologies available 
for vehicle speed detectors. Some of the most common and 
some developing technologies are using video image 
processors, using ultrasonic detectors and using microwave 
radar. Among the various methods for detecting speed of the 
vehicle, object detection system based on Radar have been 
replaced for about century for various purposes like 
detection of aircrafts, spacecraft, ships and reading weather 
information. The essential feature in adaptive vehicle 
activated sign systems is the accurate measurement of a 
vehicle's velocity. The velocities of vehicles are acquired 
form continuous wave Doppler radar. A very low amount of 
power is consumed in this system and only battery can use 
to operate. The system works on the principle of Doppler 
Effect by detecting the Doppler shift in microwaves reflected 
from a moving object. The receive Doppler shift by the 
Doppler radar is directly proportional to the speed of the 
object. Since, the output of the sensor is sinusoidal wave 


with very small amplitude and needs to be amplified with 
the help of the amplifier before further processing. The 
purposed to calculate and display the speed on LCD is 
performed by microcontroller. This proposed system deals 
with one the efficient methods to provide safety to road 
users. 

Operation of Overall Proposed System 

The speed detection system can be simply divided into two 
main categories: the amplifier circuit and the frequency 
counter for speed display. The proposed block diagram for 
the Doppler radar-based vehicle speed detection system is 
shown in figurel.The speed detection system will manage 
the speed limit of a vehicle on road. This system will 
compose of Doppler radar, voltage regulator circuit, 
amplifier circuit and a main Arduino Uno. The Doppler radar 
operates by radiating electromagnetic waves and detecting 
the echo returned from the target. Although radar cannot 
resolve the detailed features of target like the human eyes, it 
can see through darkness, fog and rain, and over a much 
longer range. 


How to cite this paper: May Zin Tun | Kay 
Thwe Zin "Implementation of Doppler 
Radar-Based Vehicle Speed Detection 
System" Published 
in International 
Journal of Trend in 
Scientific Research 
and Development 
(ijtsrd), ISSN: 2456- 
6470, Volume-3 | 

Issue-5, August 
2019, pp.1708-1713, 

https://doi.org/10.31142/ijtsrd26653 



Copyright © 2019 by author(s) and 
International Journal of Trend in Scientific 
Research and Development Journal. This 
is an Open Access article distributed 
under the terms of "^r 

CCj 


the Creative 

Commons Attribution 
License (CC BY 4.0) 

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by 
/ 4.0) 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD26653 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 5 | July - August 2019 


Page 1708 












International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 



Figure 1.Overall Block Diagram of Doppler Radar-based Vehicle Speed Detection System 

The vehicle speed is acquired from a continuous wave Doppler radar. It can detect motion or speed or speed of moving objects 
through Doppler Effect. The chosen radar for this system is HB100 whose transmitted frequency is 10.525GHz.The radar 
module operates at a+5Vdc for continuous wave(CW) operation.Consequently,+12V battery is used as the power supply by 
converting itto +5V via the voltage regulator using LM7805.The output of the 12V to 5V voltage regulator circuit is connected 
to +5V pin of the module. There are three main terminal in this module, +5V pinged (ground) pin and IF (intermediate 
frequency) pin. After applying the power supply to the radar module, the system starts working. 

The module sends its transmitted signal from the transmitting antenna to the vehicle. Then, the reflected signal is back to the 
receiving antenna with a shift in the frequency. The difference between the transmitted and received signal is known as the 
Doppler shift. The microcontroller operates only if its supply voltage is 3.5V at least. Therefore, a high gain low frequency 
amplifier is usually connected to the IF terminal in order to amplify the Doppler shift. The output of the amplifier is fed to the 
microcontroller. The purpose of the microcontroller is to calculate the speed of the vehicle via its frequency which is the major 
factor representing the speed of the vehicle. After performing the task of the calculating the speed of the vehicle, the LCD 
display is used to indicate the vehicle speed to the driver to know his speed is in over speed or not. 

Circuit Diagram of Doppler Radar-based Vehicle Speed Detection System 

The Doppler Radar-based Vehicle Speed Detection System uses Doppler Radar (HB100) to transmit to the motion and receive 
pulse to amplify output. The two LM324 amplifiers are connected to use for amplify and avoid the noises. The amplifier output 
is fed to the microcontroller. A microcontroller of Arduino Uno family is used to achieve the desired operation. 



Figure2. Circuit Diagram of Doppler Radar-based Vehicle Speed Detection System 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD26653 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 5 | July - August 2019 


Page 1709 



































































International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


And then, the LCD and buzzer are connected to the 
microcontroller. When the system is going on, the Doppler 
Radar (HB100) send pulse to the target and the pulse is hit 
the target and returned to the radar. The radar receives the 
pulse and converts to the frequency wave. But, the output of 
the frequency very low. So, we have to use the amplifier to 
amplify the frequency and avoid the noises. And then, the 
output is fed to the microcontroller. The microcontroller 
calculated the speed and display on the LCD. The circuit 
diagram of Doppler radar-based vehicle speed detection 
system is shown in figure 2. 

Flow Chart of the Doppler Radar-based Vehicle Speed 
Detection System 



Figure3. Flow Chart of the Doppler Radar-based Vehicle 
Speed Detection System 


This flow chat is used from start. Initializing the input port 
and output port, the system is activated. In the first step, the 
Doppler radar is sensed the motion and transmit the pulse 
and reflect back from the target. In the second step, the pulse 
is converted pulse from frequency counter to as a speed. If 
the speed is detected, the microcontroller IC calculated and 
the speed is display on the LCD. And the next step, the 
calculated speed is over the assigned limit, the buzzer will 
make the noise. The flow chart of the Doppler radar-based 
vehicle speed detection system is shown in figure 3. 


test, experimental test and surveying test. Simulation test 
can be done by Proteus 8 Professional software. 
Experimental test and surveying test are done by the 
hardware construction. In this chapter, the Doppler radar 
cannot test by simulation as it is not contained in the device 
selection. It can only test by hardware device. 

Therefore, simulation test for amplifier circuit, experimental 
test for Doppler radar, amplifier circuit, and surveying result 
for the whole system are presented in this paper. The 
simulation testing for the amplifier circuit can be done by 
using Proteus 8 Professional Software before constructing 
the hardware whether the result is good or not. 

A. Simulation Results for Amplifier Circuit 

While choosing the IC for amplifier circuit, the system first 
selects two types of IC which are LM358N and LM324N. Both 
types are tested in Proteus software to know which result is 
better to use. The microcontroller needs to give the power 
supply of 3.5V at least. According to the simulation result 
shown in Figure 5 LM358N cannot amplify the voltage up to 
3.5V. It can only amplify 3 V and the output voltage is not the 
pure DC voltage. Using LM324, the amplifier circuit can 
amplify the voltage to 4Vdc as shown in Figure 7. Therefore, 
the system chooses to use LM324 for the purpose of 
amplifying the Doppler shift. The output of the Doppler radar 
is Doppler shift which is in micro volts. Therefore, the 
amplifier circuit using LM324N is used in the vehicle speed 
detection system based on Doppler radar. Testing and result 
the simulation of amplifier circuit using LM358N is shown in 
figure 4 and figure 5. 



Figure4. Testing the Simulation of Amplifier Circuit Using 
LM358N 



FigureS. Simulation Result of Amplifier Circuit Using 
LM358N 


Test and Results 

This paper describes the test and results of the proposed 
system. The test can be divided in three sections: simulation 


Testing and result the simulation of amplifier circuit using 
LM324N is shown in figure 6 and figure 7. 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD26653 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 5 | July - August 2019 


Page 1710 






























































































International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 



Figure6. Testing the Simulation of Amplifier Circuit Using 
LM324N 



Figure7. Simulation Result of Amplifier Circuit Using 
LM324N 

B. Testing the Output of the Doppler radar with 
Oscillator 

The Doppler radar cannot be tested in Proteus software. So, 
the output of the Doppler radar module is tested by 
hardware component and oscilloscope. By testing with 
oscilloscope, it can be known that the output waveforms are 
changed according to the rate of motion of the target. The 
amplitude of the output waveform in fast motion occurs 
more oscillation than that of the output waveform in slow 
motion. The experimental results of the Doppler radar are 
shown below. 



Figure8. Testing the Output Waveform of the Doppler 
radar 



Figure9. Result Output Waveform of the Doppler radar 


Likewise, the output of the amplifier circuit occurs more 
oscillation in fast motion than in slow motion. 


C. Experimental Testing for Doppler Radar (HB100) 
and Arduino Uno 

Figure 10 and Figure 11 show the constructed hardware 
circuit from top view and front view. When the system is 
turned on, the power on Arduino board system is turn on. 
The Doppler radar detect the motion to transmit the pulse 
and receive the pulse. And then convert the pulse to 
frequency and form as a speed. Finally, display the speed 
results on the LCD. 



Figure 11 Overall Hardware Circuit (Front View) 


D. Surveying, Experimental Test and Results for 
Complete Constructed Circuit 

After constructing the whole circuit, the system needs to 
survey on the road shown in Figure 12. The results are 
changed according to the height of the pole that radar placed 
(h), the distance to the oncoming lane (d), and the angle that 
the radar must be titled (0). The cosine of the angle between 
the radar device and its target determines the magnitude of 
the error which is known as the cosine error and it becomes 
significant when the angle to the roadway is large. The 
greater the angle between the radar and the roadway, the 
lower is the indicated velocity. 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD26653 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 5 | July - August 2019 


Page 1711 








































































































International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


To get the better result, the surveying on the road was done 
again and again with different parameters. At first, the 
target's velocity was measured by placing the radar device 
on the ground beside the road. At the time, the error 
percentage for both car and cycle are very large. Therefore, 
the radar was placed at different heights and different angles 



Figure 12 Surveying the Constructed Complete Circuit on 
the Road 


E. Test and Results of the Vehicle' Speed 

Figure 13 to Figure 4.16 shows the tests and results of the 
vehicle's speed. If the vehicle's speed is over the assigned 
limit, its speed will show on the LCD and display the result 
over. If the speed is low the assigned limit, its speed will 
show on the LCD and display the result pass. 



Figure 13 Testing the Speed of the Vehicle (Pass) 




Figure 15 Testing the Speed of the Vehicle (Over) 



Discussions 

In this system, a low cost and efficient embedded vehicular 
speed detecting system is presented. The work aimed at 
implementing the better results by comparing the existing 
methods such as FFT, DSP and LASAR based techniques. The 
output was more accurate with no other moving objects in 
the surrounding. In reality, the radar will not measure the 
actual velocity when the vehicle is not travelling directly 
towards the radar and slightly inclined at an angle. The 
measured velocity calculated from the frequency counter is 
different from the actual velocity displayed on the 
speedometer according to the cosine error. Although it is 
said that the sensor can detect in 20m range in the data 
sheet, it works well for the vehicle at a close range of about 
7m. When the radar is placed at the height of about 2.25m, 
the result is more accurate for car. Otherwise, the result is 
more accurate for cycle when the radar is placed at the 
height of about 1.5m. The output was more accurate with no 
other moving objects in the surrounding. Sometimes, the 
sensor does not work well and cannot display the speed on 


LCD. 


Conclusion 

This system mainly composes of the amplifier circuit, 
Doppler radar (HB100), Arduino Uno, microcontroller 
ATmega328 and LCD display. The amplifier circuit is used to 
amplify the output of the Doppler radar as it is small dc value 
which cannot be fed directly to a microcontroller. The 
information about the target range, direction and velocity 
are provided by the nature of the returned signal of the 
Doppler radar. By keeping track of the time it takes the radio 
waves to leave the antenna, hit the target, and return to the 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD26653 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 5 | July - August 2019 


Page 1712 































International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


antenna, the radar can calculate the distance to the target. By 
measuring the shift in phase between a transmitted pulse 
and a received echo, the target's radial velocity can be 
calculated. If the radar was placed directly in front of the car, 
the car speed would be very close to the actual speed. If the 
reflecting object is located from the centerline of the radar 
beam, the lower the estimate of car speed. The 
microcontroller performs the task of calculation of frequency 
and speed. After calculating the frequency and speed, the 
information is indicated on the LCD display 

References 

[1] Sairaj, B., Mayuresh, S., and Bhusan., T.: Survey of 
Various Methods used for Speed Calculation of a 
Vehicle, (2010). 

[2] Lamis, I., A., Z.: Radar System Design, August (2011). 

[3] Thomas, L., F.: Electronic Devices: Ninth Edition, 

( 2012 ). 

[4] Anonymous, Typical Doppler Signal Amplifier, April 

( 2012 ). 


[5] Mohammed, A., Ahmed, A., and Mohammed, B.: Radar 
Vehicle Detector Mode, International Journal of 
Enhanced Research in Science Technology & 
Engineering. 2(3) March (2013) ISSN: 2319-7463. 

[6] Asha, G., H., Udayshankar, R., and Rashmi, N.: Radar 
Based Cost Effective Vehicle Speed Detection Using 
Zero Cross Detection, International Journal of 
Electrical, Electronics and Data Communication, 1(9) 
November (2013) ISSN: 2320-2084. 

[7] Mohammad, A., Bara, S., and Hasan, K.: Target Tracking 
Using Doppler Radar, (2014). 

[8] Diala. J., Siril, Y., and Mark, D.; Data Based Calibration 
System for Radar Used by Vehicle Activated Signs, 
Journal of Data Analysis and Information Processing. 
ISSN: 106-116, November (2014). 

[9] Amit, S.., Abhishek, T.; Low Cost X-Band Radar System 
for Multiple Target Detection, International Journal of 
Research in Engineering Technology, 4(3) May (2015). 

[10] Agilsense.: HB100 Microwave Sensor Application Note, 
MSAN-001, ST Engineering Co. Ltd (2016). 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD26653 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 5 | July - August 2019 


Page 1713 





