
International Journal of Trend in Scientific 

Research and Development (IJTSRD) 

♦.♦ 

International Conference on Advanced Engineering 

and Information Technology (ICAEIT-2017) 

♦.♦ 

ISSN No: 2456 - 6470 | www.ijtsrd.com | Special Issue Publication 



Quality Factor between Visual Studio and Android Studio for 
Developing Video Control Based on Hand Gestures 

Siti Norhidayah Aman, Noor Zuhaili Md Yasin, Illiana Azizan 

Faculty of Engineering and Technology, Linton University College, Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia 


ABSTRACT 

In this paper, research of a video control, based on 
hand gesture which recognizes a play and pause, is 
proposed. In the field of image processing, being able 
to recognize human gesture in daily life application is 
one of the most appealing technology as it represents 
the communication between human and machine. 
Comparative tools such as Visual Studio (VS) and 
Android Studio (AS) can be used in developing the 
video control based on hand gestures. A comparison 
that will be discussed in this paper is based on the 
quality factor which is the simplicity for each of the 
software proposed. 

Keywords: Video Control, Hand Gesture, Visual 
Studio (VS), Android Studio (AS), Quality Factor 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Hand gesture apparently need more advanced 
technology in order for the system that applied the 
function to run smoothly. Gesture recognition is 
defined as a “mathematical interpretation of a human 
motion by computing device” [10] and image 
processing “is the study of any algorithm that takes an 
images as input and return an image as an output” [2], 
However, with current software technology it is only 
possible to make it look nice and more significantly, 
the system also can perform based on the required 
functions such as play and pause. Non-functional 
requirement is specified “what must behave” [12] for 
the system. As non-functional requirement for the 
simplicity, it can be understood as how the system is 
“easy to understand or explain” [12]. It is clear that 
Visual Studio have a myriad of function that can be 
used as it is not restricted only for the form 
development but also web, windows presentation 


foundation (wpf) application and android 
development. Moreover, based on the software name 
itself indicates that Android Studio is used for android 
development purpose only. 

2. OVERVIEW OF THE TOOLS 

Microsoft Visual Studio (VS) is “an integrated 
development environment (IDE) from Microsoft. It is 
used to make app development easy for any platform 
and language” [3]. VS enable users to write coding 
“accurately and efficiently without losing current file 
context” [3], The functionality also can be control into 
“refactor, identify and fix code issues” [3], 

While, Android Studio (AS) is an “official IDE for 
android’s” [4] and have the purpose to build for 
android application in order to “accelerate the 
development and help developer to build the highest 
quality apps for each and every android device” [4], 
This tool offers the developer the functionality of 
“rich code editing, debugging, testing and profiling 
tools” [4], 

3. SIMPLICITY 

“Quality that is identified independent of any 
measurable characteristics. That is, quality is defined 
as the products or services capability to meet 
customer expectations” [13]. To ensure the quality of 
product, quality factor will represent the behavioral 
characteristic of system. The quality factors or non¬ 
functional requirement describe “different types of 
system behavior characteristics, and the quality 
criterions are attributes to one or more of the quality 
factors” [15], 


@ IJTSRD | Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com | Special Issue Publication | November 2018 


P- 181 











International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) | ISSN: 2456-647 


Quality model is “the represent of the characteristics 
of the software that describe the quality factor” [15]. 
McCall’s quality model [11] has figured “between 
users and developers by focusing on a number of 
software quality factors that reflect the users’ 
perceptions and the developers’ priorities” [14], 
However, the problem in this model is “no method, no 
standard and tool to measure these quality factor” 
[11]- 

Jim McCall et al [7] has identified 11 quality factors 
in order to ensure the quality of product to meet user 
satisfaction. One of 11 quality attribute is simplicity. 
Simplicity can be defined as the ease with which 
software can be understood by the user. The quality 
factor is important in order to obtain to view of 
quality based on users or customer perspective. 

As human hand is a complex object that required a 
myriad of devices in order to recognize and tracked 
the image, the implementation of hand gesture is still 
in a research development. Even if it the 
implementation occurs, it still limited to a specific 
application such as music control and PowerPoint 
slide control. In awareness of this matter, the 
implementation of hand gesture recognition also new 
to the normal user. This indicates that the system 
should be develop as a simple as possible with the 
functions that a normal user can understand how to 
using it. 

Hayim Makabee has written a good article about 
simplicity in software design. The author says: 

“A simplistic software design may be one that focuses 
only on present requirements and ignores future needs 
such as maintainability, extensibility and reusability.” 
[ 1 ]. 

The author also added that: 

“I think that the danger of simplistic design is very 
well expressed by this quote: 

‘Keep it simple, as simple as possible, but not 
simpler.’ 

- Albert Einstein” [1] 

Based on the above statement, the simplicity can be 
applied to the hand gesture system to the maximum as 
long as the features of the system is fully function and 
all user from normal ones to the professional user 
such as IT user can understand easily on how to used 
it. This is important for the system to be introducing 


worldwide before it can be upgrade and used daily in 
the future. 

In Visual Studio, the video control based on hand 
gesture system has the simplicity in creating the 
Graphical User Interface (GUI). “A GUI framework 
allows user to create an application with a wide range 
of GUI elements such as labels, textboxes and other 
well-known elements” [5], Without this framework, 
the developer will have to draw “these elements 
manually and handle all the work of the user 
interactions scenario such as text and mouse input” 
[5], Instead of making a lot of work, GUI framework 
is used by most of developers as the framework “will 
do all the basic work and allowed them to focus on 
making great applications” [5], 

As long as the system can play the video, the interface 
of the system should be simple enough as the main 
idea of the system is to play and pause using hand 
gestures. The system is used the GUI framework in 
order to create the simple interface. The focus of the 
system interface is how the video will be played and 
paused easily. The system is create with only have 
“Open” file for user to find the movie included play 
and pause button for starter. 



^P| 

nm 

_ 



Figure 1: Interface design of the system based on 
simplicity 



Figure 2: The system is worked by played the 
video 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Special Issue Publication | November 2018 


P- 182 












International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-647 



Figure 3: Play gesture is recognized 



Figure 4: The system is worked by paused the 
video 



Figure 5: Pause gesture is recognized 


On the other hand, Android Studio simplicity is based 
on feature such as “development for all Android 
devices” [4], That is to say, Android Studio offers 
multiple environment using a single project to 
developing the application. These application can 
have a sharing code among different version of app 
such as Android phones, Android TV, tablets, 
Android Wear and Android Auto. 

In addition, Android Studio simplicity feature also 
implied to the “robust and flexible build system” [4] 
for the application. Based on Jagdish L. Raheja 
researched, for the portable hand sign recognition to 
be able to used, “computer vision based techniques 
were used for image analysis and PCA was used after 
image tokenizer for recognition. This method was 
tested with webcam results to make system more 
robust” [8], 


Following this further, the best example is the android 
SDK. With android SDK, developer can create their 
own applications or changing the platform. Based on 
Matthias Mellouli, “this kit contains a set of libraries, 
powerful tools for debugging and development, a 
phone emulator, thorough documentation, FAQ and 
tutorials” [9], For instance, high performance build 
automation can be performed using Gradle and 
resulted to the developer can easily plug all the holes 
of the system when it crashes. 



Figure 6: Statistic crashes by Android OS [6] 


4. FUTURE ENHANCEMENT 

Gesture recognition is a new advance technology that 
is important these days as it is most likely will play a 
major role in human daily lives in the future. The 
hand gesture can be used in advance to control 
applications and enter new area besides than media 
player such as browser, internet of things (IoT), 
medical area and army area. Certainly, a simple way 
to have better lives. However, for the implementation 
to be applied, the system must be simple enough for 
everyone to be using it. 

On the contrary, this review is one of the work that 
has been done in order to achieved the objectives of 
creating the video control based on hand gesture using 
the best tools. In order that, the non-functionality 
requirement which is simplicity is chosen to compare 
these tools that is Visual Studio and Android Studio. 
Though this review is presented based on the analysis 
and critical thinking through the research done, it is 
possible that it will have a mistake. Before, this 
review is only based on research. But, when the 
system is ready in full functionality using both of 
tools, this review will be fixed in the future work. 

5. CONCLUSION 

The quality factor presented within this paper by 
using different tools probably “could be fitted within 
the user view, manufacturing view or product view” 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Special Issue Publication | November 2018 


P- 183 






















International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) | ISSN: 2456-647 


[15]. However, the advantages are the quality factor 
that I has choose to reduce “the notion of quality to a 
few relatively simple and static attributes” [15]. The 
benefit of this quality factor is that they are simpler to 
use and easy to understand. The good of quality factor 
are depending on the good quality model used to 
ensure the product has meet user satisfaction. Some 
“quality models such as Boehm, FURPS, Dromey and 
ISO 9126 also has its own quality characteristics 
along with the factors and sub-factors” [15]. 

In final analysis, video control based on hand gesture 
provided its own versatile form by using either Visual 
Studio or Android Studio. The used term simplicity in 
both software is such contrary as Visual Studio 
provide simplicity in graphical user interface (GUI) 
which make it easy to focus on developed a good 
application without worried the small details. The 
quality factor of simplicity is achieved as shown in 
the images above. In contrast, the term simplicity for 
Android Studio is the features that is given to it. 
Hence, the development of video control based on 
hand gestures by using visual studio with efficient 
software quality factor in that will assist in the 
creation of high quality software will become one of 
the most important research area in my future works. 

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The authors would like to express their gratitude to all 
the members of the Faculty of Engineering and 
Technology of Linton University College for all the 
detailed and helpful suggestions and comments. 

7. REFERENCES 

1. Hayim Makabee, “Simplicity in Software Design: 
KISS, YAGNI and Occam’s razor”, 2013 

2. “Introduction: What is image processing?” from 
http://www.coe.utah.edu/~cs4640/slides/Lecture0. 
pdf, 2012 

3. Microsoft, “Visual Studio IDE: Build apps of the 

future today”, from 

https://www.visualstudio.com/,2017 


4. “Android Studio: The Official IDE for Android”, 
from 

https://developer.android.com/studio/index.html 

2017 

5. “What is WPF?” from http://www.wpf- 
tutorial.com/about-wpf/what-is-wpf/, 2012-2017 

6. Tomio Geron, “Do iOS Apps Crash More Than 
Android Apps? A Data Dive”, 2012 

7. Ines Fey, DaimlerChrysler AG, Berlin, Germany. 
Ingo Sturmer, Model Engineering Solutions, 
Berlin, Germany, “Quality Assurance Methods for 
Model- based Development: A Survey and 
Assessment”, SAE International, 2007. 

8. Jagdish L. Raheja, A. Singhal, Sadab, “Android 
based Portable Hand Sign Recognition System”, 
2015. 

9. Matthias Mellouli, “PROJECT REPORT Android 
Application”, 2010. 

10. Margaret Rouse, “Gesture recognition” from 
http://whatis.techtarget.com/defmition/gesture- 
recognition, 2015. 

11. Rikard Edgren, “Software Quality Models and 
Philosophies”, 2010. 

12. Ramesh Kartik, “Non-Functional Requirements 
(NFR) in Agile Practices”, 2013. 

13. “Chapter One: 1. Software Quality Models and 

Philosophies” from 

http://www.bth.se/com/besq.nsf/ 

(WebFiles)/CF 1C3230DB425EDCC12570690031 
7C 44/$FILE/chapter_l.pdf, [no date]. 

14. Singh, B. and S. P. Kannojia, “A Review on 
Software Quality Models”, International 
Conference on Communication Systems and 
Network Technologies, 2013 

15. Noor Zuhaili Md Yasin, “Software Quality Factor 
and System Overview”, 2014. 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Special Issue Publication | November 2018 


P- 184 



