AL/CF-SR-1995-0017 





FORCE REFL ECTING EXOSKELETON (FREFLEX) 
WORKSPACE MAPPING 


Barry O. Hill 
David K. Nelson 

CREW SYSTEMS DIRECTORATE 
BIODYNAMICS AND BIOCOMMUNICATIONS DIVISION 
WRIGHT-PATTERSON AFB OH 45433-7901 


FEBRUARY 1995 


19960910 092 



INTERIM REPORT FOR THE PERIOD AUGUST 1993 TO MARCH 1994 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


one QiJALmr inspscted 3 

AIR FORCE MATERIEL COMMAND 

WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE, OHIO 45433-6573; 










NOTICES 


When US Government drawings, specifications, or other data are 
used for any purpose other than a definitely related Government 
procurement operation, the Government thereby incurs no 
responsibility nor any obligation whatsoever, and the fact that 
the Government may have formulated, furnished, or in any way 
supplied the said drawings, specifications, or other data, is not 
to be regarded by implication or otherwise, as in any manner, 
licensing the holder or any other person or corporation, or 
conveying any rights or permission to manufacture, use or sell 
any patented invention that may in any way be related thereto. 

Please do not request copies of this report from the Armstrong 
Laboratory. Additional copies may be purchased from: 

National Technical Information Service 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield VA 22161 

Federal Government agencies and their contractors registered with 
Defense Technical Information Center should direct requests for 
copies of this report to: 

Defense Technical Information Center 
Cameron Station 
Alexandria VA 22314 


TECHNICAL REVIEW AND APPROVAL 
AL/CF-SR-1995-0017 

This report has been reviewed by the Office of Public Affairs 
(PA) and is releasable to the National Technical Information 
Service (NTIS). At NTIS, it will be available to the general 
public, including foreign nations. 

This technical report has been reviewed and is approved for 
publication. 


FOR THE COMMANDER 



THOMAS J. MOORE, Chief 

Biodynamics and Biocommunications Division 
Crew Systems Directorate 
Armstrong Laboratory 









THIS DOCUMENT IS BEST 
QUALITY AVAILABLE. THE 
COPY FURNISHED TO DTIC 
CONTAINED A SIGNIFICANT 
NUMBER OF PAGES WHICH DO 
NOT REPRODUCE LEGIBLY. 




REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
0MB No, 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for this collection of information Is esttmated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports. 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503. 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 

FEBRUARY 1995 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Force REFLecting EXoskeleton (FREFLEX) 
Workspace Mapping 


6. AUTHOR{S) 

Barry 0. Hill 
David K. Nelson 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

SPECIAL REPORT - AUGUST 1993-MARCH 1994 


S. FUNDING NUMBERS 

PE - 65502F 
PR - 7231 
TA - 38 
WU - 08 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Armstrong Laboratory, Crew Systems Directorate 
Biodynamics and Biocommunications Division 
Human Systems Center 
Air Force Materiel Command 

Wright-Patterson AFB OH 45433-7901 _ 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME{S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


AL/CF-SR-1995-0017 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 



12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited, 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

Determining a robot's reachable volume is important both for operator safety and 
for ease in the design and specification of experiments. This was the main focus 
in establishing the workspace for the Force REFLecting EXoskeleton (FREFLEX). 
Cartesian position data are collected by i»aneuvering the FREFLEX pistol grip 
manually. A program written in C first collates these coordinates into "slices" 
of data. Then, a second algorithm determines the outer boundary of each si tee. 
Stacking the adjusted data slices together provides a clear definition of the 
maximum FREFLEX boundaries. Additional graphical manipulation through workspace 
rotation enhances both the view and worker understanding of the FREFLEX work area, 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

FREFL'EX workspacd boundary 

exoskeleton volume 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

UNCLASSIFIED 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

UNCLASSIFIED 


19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

UNCLASSIFIED 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 


16. PRICE CODE 


20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


i 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 
298-102 

















This page intentionally left blank. 


ii 




PREFACE 


This research was conducted from August 1993 through March 1994 by the Human 
Sensory Feedback for Telepresence group in AL/CFBA. Two individuals served as project 
managers: Capt David K. Nelson (Aug 93-Sept 93) and 1st Lt Barry 0. Hill (Oct 93-Mar 
94). Acknowledgements are offered to Bob Bolia of Systems Research Laboratories Inc. for 
developing and writing the algorithms utilized during this project. 


m 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

INTRODUCTION. 1 

PROCEDURE. 1 

Collecting Data. 1 

Analyzing Data. 2 

DATA. 4 

RECOMMENDATIONS. 4 

LIST OF FIGURES 

Page 

1. Data slice utilizing algorithm bound 1 . 5 

2. Data slice utilizing algorithm bound2 . 6 

3. FREFLEX Workspace: 180 degrees on z-axis. 7 

4. FREFLEX Workspace: 210 degrees on z-cixis. 8 

5. FREFLEX Workspace: 240 degrees on z-axis. 9 

6. FREFLEX Workspace: 270 degrees on z-axis. 10 

7. FREFLEX Workspace: 300 degrees on z-axis. 11 

8. FREFLEX Workspace: 330 degrees on z-axis. 12 

9. FREFLEX Workspace: 360 degrees on z-axis. 13 


IV 



















INTRODUCTION 


When working with robotic systems, it is useful to know the robot’s reachable volume and 
configurations. The reachable volume may be defined as the sum of all positions in cartesian space 
that the robotic end-effector can achieve. The robot’s arm configurations may be defined as the 
various joint orientations to which the arm must be driven as it reaches throughout its workspace. 

These parameters are of interest because we need to know what orientations the exoskeleton 
arm can achieve and what its overall volumetric configuration looks like. Having a visual idea of 
these parameters will aid in the efficient use and design of experiments for the Force REFLecting 
EXoskeleton (FREFLEX). This will enable specification of the practical work volume, limitations 
of the workspace due to kinematic constraints, and the operator’s reachable subworkspace. Most 
importantly, this work will provide a determination of unsafe operating orientations, and establish 
the limit of safety for both the operator and observers. 

PROCEDURE 

Collecting Data 

Cartesian position information of the FREFLEX’s pistol grip was collected without the motors 
being powered up. To collect position data, the following sequence must occur. The FREFLEX’s 
VME controller chassis and host 486 personal computer (PC) must be turned' on. Initially, the 
PC must download the real-time controller-executable code to the 68030 board housed in the 
FREFLEX’s VME controller chassis. This is done automatically when the PC is powered on. Once 
the onscreen counter reaches 99 percent completion, the screen prompts the user to reset the 68030 
card and hit RETURN to finish the initialization of the controller. Upon successful completion, 
the host PC boots into the appropriate directory with the program for data collection. The user 
types RUN and the development display appears. The FIO function key displays the OPTIONS 
drop-down menu. Moving the cursor to the XYZ DATA COLLECTION entry and returning 
the carriage initiates the data collection process. A data collection output file is specified and 
begins once ENTER is pressed. P is the pause key which suspends and reinstates data collection. 
The cartesian information is then collected by manually moving the exoskeleton through every 
possible arm configuration including the arm’s reachable limits. When a data collection run is 
completed, the ESCAPE key ends the process. The data are collected at a sampling rate of 210 
Hz with the potentiometer values (pistol grip position) communicating over a dedicated line to 
the controller. These values are converted to cartesian xyz position with 0.1-inch resolution. The 
collected data file is stored on the PC’s hard drive and should be transferred to another system 
for safe keeping and processing. This procedure of data collection can be reiterated as many times 
as needed. The data files can be concatenated to develop a single data set that is more complete. 
The positional information of the pistol grip delineates an irregular volume of space that will be 


1 



called the FREFLEX’s reachable workspace. To aid in the interpretation of this volume, a series 
of interactive software programs that segment the raw data file into a form that can be graphically 
presented was written. 


Analyzing Data 

The C program empress takes the random collection of data points and collates them into 
“slices” of data points. These slices are of user-specified width and may be taken along any 
coordinate axis. The empress program uses a self explanatory prompt to guide the user. The 
following information is needed to execute the program: the input file to be used (the raw data 
file), the name of the new output file, the cartesian plane in which the slice will be taken, and the 
minimum and maximum range of values along the designated axis that are to be compressed within 
the selected plane. The nomenclature used to label the input files for processing is the suffix .dat. 
All of the raw data points are concatenated within the file called total.dat. The empress output 
files are designated by the following form: XiX 2 XzXi.prss. The first symbol, Xi, identifies the 
3X1S (x, y, or z) along which the slice is taken. X^ indicates the direction (p-positive values or 
n-negative values) of the slice with respect to the origin. The last two labels define the position 
of the slice, in inches, from the center of the origin. Each slice is taken in one-inch segments. The 
number shown is the minimum position from where the slice was taken. For example, the slice 
between 5 and 6 shows 5 in the file name, while a slice between -12 and -13 displays the lower 
value of -13 (the negative displayed by symbol X 2 as discussed above). 

The boundary points of this slice of information are determined using the boundl program. 
This program can manipulate any raw data file, whether the total raw data file or a slice of raw 
data from the empress output. It determines which data points maintain the outer boundary of 
the volume. First, boundl requests the filenames of the input and output files, and follows by 
opening both. The user is then prompted to select one of the three coordinate planes to consider. 
For this description, the xy plane is designated. Once the plane has been specified, the data 
points in the input file are converted to integers (via multiplication by 10 and truncation) and 
read into an array called alldata[3][12000]. The data, therefore, maintain a 0.1-inch resolution. As 
the points are read into memory, the minimum and maximum values are calculated for all three 
dimensions, and a count is taken of the number of points in the file. The input file is then closed. 
The algorithm loop begins by locating all points having the coordinate z = min ^. For each such 
point, a “1” is placed into a 600x600 matrix, the rows and columns of which correspond to the x 
and y dimensions. This gives a picture of one slice of the data. Through this slice of data, two 
passes are made as shown in Figure 1. Each pass stops at the first point found in each row or 
column and assigns a negative value (-1) to its position in the matrix. Following the passes, the 
points found are converted back to floating point numbers and written to the output file. This 
procedure is followed {maxt —mini) times, because all slices are taken at one-inch intervals. Then, 
the output file is closed and the program is exited. The output of this program is an ordered list 


2 



of points that roughly approximates the perimeter of their volume. The nomenclature that has 
been used to label the boundary files uses the suffix .bnd. The naming of the boundary output 
file is the same as that used by the empress program. 

A second algorithm, bound2^ was also written. This program resembles boundl exactly except 
for one detail. Bound2 makes two scans from the two sides not utilized in the other program. These 
two passes are made along the sides parallel to the operator’s position. This can be seen in Figure 
2. A visual comparison between the plots showed that bound2 resulted in a loss of accuracy and 
detail of the maximum boundaries. Therefore, it was decided to use only boundl for determining 
the outer regions of the workspace. 

The plot of the boundl output file graphically shows a contour of the workspace volume for 
a specific slice in elevation. The contour is not a smoothed boundary due to the fact that, in 
data collection, the motion of the exoskeletal arm is randomly chosen. Therefore, the contour 
displays a jagged perimeter since not all boundary points are available within an elevation. Also, 
this boundary search method cannot correctly resolve a concave-shaped boundary in a slice. In 
order to deal with these problems, two similar, yet separate, adjustments were made to previous 
algorithms to achieve success with this final boundl program. 

To correct for the irregular perimeter, an adjustment was made to the resolution, allowing the 
user to specify the level of resolution desired in increments of one-tenth inch up to 1.9 inches. 
Increasing the resolution eliminates most of the interior points which, when plotted, cause the 
jagged appearance. Instead, only the outermost points are plotted, forming a smoother contour of 
the slice. A drawback remains in the possible loss of accuracy incurred by this program. Some of 
the gaps eliminated may actually exist at that area in the workspace. Additional, more extensive 
work would be necessary to verify the existence of this problem. 

To adjust the concavity at the corners, the original seven-scan algorithm was adjusted to scan 
only twice from opposing sides. As described above, each scan stops at the first point found 
in each row or column. The problem was apparently the inability of the plotting program to 
correspond with the selected data points. The program maintained an ordered, numerical pattern 
while plotting by connecting each point in the order in which it was read. Points from one scan 
were all connected before those located from another. Therefore, the first point read by a scan is 
often numerically closer to mid-points located in the previous scan than to the final one. However, 
the plotting program was unable to incorporate the first point of the subsequent scan into the plot 
until connection of the preceding points was complete. This resulted in erratic patterns around the 
edges (corners) of the plot. By utilizing only two scans, these rough configurations were eliminated; 
however, it was not possible to replicate complete concavity within the plots. 

The entire workspace height was determined to be approximately 50 inches. With respect to 
the origin, this area extended 25 inches below the center position (negative direction), and 25 inches 
above the origin (positive direction). Fifty one-inch slices were taken of the workspace, and then 


3 


run through empress and boundl respectively. Then, by plotting the contour lines consecutively, a 
3-D shell of the FREFLEX’s reachable workspace was better represented. The graphical program, 
Gnuplot 3.5, does not implement hidden lines, which adds to the uncertainty of the interpretation. 
However, the plot is clear enough to provide reasonable clarity of the workspace. A 2-D graph of 
each separate plane of view for the workspace provides for the best determination of the actual 
size and measurements of this area. 


DATA 

The first group of plots is documented in the text. These aid in the explanation of the algo¬ 
rithms and methods used to map the workspace. The final set of graphs (Figures 3-9) displays the 
initial representation of the entire workspace area of the FREFLEX. The plots are shown consec¬ 
utively in 30-degree increments of rotation for a 180-degree turn, establishing a solid description 
of the workspace region. 


RECOMMENDATIONS 

First, more data must be gathered from the FREFLEX. Additional data will fill in many gaps 
in the present plots, will aid in eliminating unwanted interior points, and thereby improve the 
visual details of the workspace. 

The final step will eventually be to map an individual’s reachable workspace as a subworkspace 
of the exoskeleton’s. This experiment should utilize gravity compensation to provide an easier task 
for the operator. Once the individual’s reachable workspace is determined, the amount of useable 
exoskeleton workspace will be known. These two parameters are needed in order to specify many 
things about the exoskeleton. They will delineate the volume that is useful for experiment design, 
graphically display the orientations and areas that must be guarded against being reached due 
to potential operator harm, and aid in identifying any present kinematic design limitations which 
could be rectified in a next-generation exoskeleton. 


4 























' tot.bnd' 



20 15 10 5y 0 -5 -10-15 


Figure 6. FREFLEX Workspace: 270 degrees on z-axis. 


10 



















U. S. Government Printing Office 1996 750'071/00169 



