ARI Research Note 92-41 



Investigation of the Influence of Air 
Defense Artillery on Combat Pilot 
Suppression and Attrition 
Management Practices 


AD-A252 249 



Donald B. Headly 

U.S. Army Research Institute 



DTIC 

ELECTE 
JUN 3 01992 



Manned Systems Group 
John L. Miles, Jr., Chief 

MANPRINT Division 
Robin L. Keesee, Director 


92-17003 

llllllillllllllll 


May 1992 



United States Army 

Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

<■} O 

/ . 


92 6 






U.S. ARMY RESEARCH INSTITUTE 

FOR THE BEHAVIORAL AND SOCIAL SCIENCES 


A Field Operating Agency Under the Jurisdiction 
of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel 


EDGAR M. JOHNSON 
Technical Director 

Technical review by 
David M. Johnson 


MICHAEL D. SHALER 
COL, AR 
Commanding 



Accesion For 

NT/S CPA&I 
OTIC TAB 
Unannounced 
JiisiifiC.tlic; 






NOTICES 

DISTRIBUTION: This report has been cleared for release to the Defense Technical Information 
Center (DTIC) to comply with regulatory requirements. It has been given no primary distribution 
other than to DTIC and will be available only through DTIC or the National Technical 
Information Service (NTIS). 

FINAL DISPOSITION: This report may be destroyed when it is no longer needed. Please do not 
return it to the U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences. 

NOTE: The views, opinions, and findings in this report are those of the author(s) and should not 
be construed as an official Department of the Army position, policy, or decision, unless so 
designated by other authorized documents. 









1992, May 


Final 


Jul 86 - Jun 89 


Investigation of the Influence of Air Defense Artillery 63007A 

on Combat Pilot Suppression and Attrition Management 793 

Practices 1205 


Headley, Donald B. 


U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and 

Social Sciences ARI Research Note 92-41 

ATTN: PERI-S 
5001 Eisenhower Avenue 
Alexandria, VA 22312-5600 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


Performance under combat conditions should equal the best levels achieved under 
training conditions. However, wartime performance may be degraded by the suppressive 
(psychological, indirect, or deterrent) effect of enemy weapons. This report exam¬ 
ines the effect of air defense artillery (ADA) on air-to-ground missions. The 
methodology focuses on searches of the stress-and-performance and aviation combat 
literature, pilot interviews, and analysis of aviation tactics. A definitional 
framework of the concepts of actual and virtual suppression and attrition is pre¬ 
sented. Command-and-control attrition management practices are examined, and ex¬ 
amples from recent and past warfare are provided. Suppression was studied from the 
points of view of the performance-in-dangerous environments literature and cockpit 
workload. Examples of air-crew reactions to air defense artillery are included, and 
a summary chart lists pilot and mission characteristics influencing accuracy in 
weapons delivery. The authors conclude that (a) effective ADA can indirectly affect 
the otherwise effective firepower of attack aircraft through attrition management— 
safer attack profiles to preserve pilot and aircraft resources, (b) high cockpit 
workload in a threat-rich environment can contribute to suppression of (Continued) 

Performance (human) Attrition 

Stress (psychology) Air strikes 

Air defense Weapon delivery — 


Unclassified 


Unclassified 


Unclassified 


Unlimited 


i 





ARI Research Note 92-41 


BLOCK 13. ABSTRACT (Continued) 

pilot performance because of task overload, and (c) pilot-induced practices 
incluence pilot performance. 


ii 




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The author would like to thank John E. Stewart II of the 
U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social 
Sciences for his role as technical consultant to the project. In 
addition to his thoughtful comments on an earlier version of this 
paper, he contributed greatly to the Appendix on pilot workload. 


iii 





INVESTIGATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF AIR DEFENSE ARTILLERY ON COMBAT 
PILOT SUPPRESSION AND ATTRITION MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 


CONTENTS _ 

Page 

BACKGROUND . 1 

The Problem . 1 

Approach . 1 

Definitions . 2 

ATTRITION MANAGEMENT (PRUDENT PRACTICES) . 4 

THE SUPPRESSION EFFECT . 5 

Performance in Dangerous Environments: Background ... 5 

Stress and Performance in Combat Aviation . 11 

Summary of Factors Influencing Suppression . 15 

SUMMARY. 16 

REFERENCES. 21 

APPENDIX A. SUMMARY OF THE STRESS-AND-PERFORMANCE 

LITERATURE. A-l 

B. ROLES OF COMBAT AIRCRAFT, CREW SIZE, AND 

WORKLOAD IMPLICATIONS . B-l 

LIST OF TABLES 

Table 1. Definitions of terms. 3 

2. Examples of attrition management in aviation 

warfare . 6 

3. Examples of air crew reactions to air defense 

artillery. 13 

4. Factors influencing pilot performance on a 

given combat mission.. . 17 


v 





















INVESTIGATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF AIR DEFENSE ARTILLERY ON 
COMBAT PILOT SUPPRESSION AND ATTRITION MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

BACKGROUND 


The Problem 

The use of weaponry under combat conditions hopefully equals the best 
levels achieved under training conditions. However, performance under the 
stress of combat may in fact not approach baseline levels. For example, 
evidence from World War II indicates that infantrymen may not always fire 
their rifles under warranted circumstances—indeed, the data shew that in some 
infantry companies as few as 25 per cent of combat soldiers fired or continued 
to fire their rifles when in fact such action would have been clearly 
warranted (Marshall, 1947). The control of disruptive fear reactions was an 
important factor in selection and training during WWII (see Stauffer, et al., 
1949, Ch. 4). Likewise, the efficacy of much of today's high-tech weaponry 
depends on the ability of the human operator to function properly, that is, 
operate the equipment to its full capacity under combat conditions. 

The study of the suppressive influence of weapons (also referred to as 
deterrent, indirect, or psychological effects) has been largely applied to 
ground warfare—for example, the use of artillery fire, mines, tank rouixis, 
or rifle fire to pin down, harass, or cause the threat to alter movement or 
tactics. (For an excellent summary, see the articles in Thompson et al., 1990; 
see also Schecter, Richards, & Rcmberg, 1989; Gilman, 1990; Dept, of the 
Army, 1975; & U.S. Anny Field Artillery School, 1979.) The issue of interest in 
this report is whether performance is degraded in air-to-ground missions that 
are disrupted by air defense threats. Pilots must be aware of and react to 
surface-to-air missiles and antiaircraft artillery. The stress and cockpit 
workload of operating in the often dangerous environment around a target area 
might result in inacxxirate or incomplete weapons delivery. Furthermore, 
heavily defended targets may cause aviation command and control to attack 
important targets under less risky profiles. This practice may place limits 
on the otherwise efficacious use of an attack aircraft's firepower. 

This report is an expanded version of a presentation prepared for the 
Forward Area Air Defense System (FAADS) Study Advisory Group, which requested 
information on pilot reactions to air defense artillery (ADA). A need was 
identified for adding soldier (i.e., pilot) aspects into attrition computer 
models that simulate the performance of air defense systems against attacking 
aircraft. The earlier version was presented before the TRADOC Systems 
Analysis Activity (10 Sept., 1986, Ft. Bliss, TX), to the US Army Materiel 
Systems Analysis Activity (29 Sept., 1986, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD), and 
at the Virtual Attrition Briefing to the Chief of Staff, Army (Washington., 

D.C., 31 October, 1986). 

Approach 

Initial searches of computerized bibliographic data bases revealed that 
information on the specific topics of the effects of ADA on mission planning, 
fighter pilot behavior, and weapons-de1ivery accuracy has not been cohesively 


1 








developed. Indeed, the conclusions from the Army Scientific Advisory Panel 
(Dept, of the Army, 1975) and the Fire Suppression Symposium (US Army Field 
Artillery School, 1979) on the status of suppression data in general were that 
there is (1) no adequate quantification of the effects on combat outcomes, (2) 
no adequate description of the stimuli causing suppressive reactions, and (3) 
no accepted data on the effects on dismounted troops, mounted troops, or 
aircraft. As a result, one data collection technique was an examination of 
accounts of past warfare in an attempt to determine if pilot behavior and 
acrobat aviation tactics were affected by ADA weapon systems. Specifically, 
aviation warfare during World War II, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, the Yearn 
Kippur War, the Falkland Islands War, and the Chad and Afghanistan conflicts 
were studied. This literature search was combined with these additional 
approaches: 

• Literature search on "performance in dangerous environments" 

(the psychology of stress and performance) 

• Literature search on psychiatric battle casualties 

• Interviews with pilots 

• Intelligence briefings on aviation tactics and doctrine of 
Red Force 

• Analysis of pilot selection practices 

• Analysis of pilot personality characteristics 

• Identification and analysis of relevant aviation combat data bases 

• Definition of terms 


Although this topic has been one of interest for some time (as witness 
e.g., a 1972 Technical Report entitled "The Effect of Pilot Stress on Delivery 
Accuracy" (Lovell & Walker)), quantitative operational performance data are in 
fact hard to come by (see also Youngling, Levine, Mochamuk, & Weston, 1977, 
viz. the sparse entries in the "Reaction to Stress" row of Figure 3.2-2, which 
summarizes studies of aviation combat effectiveness as a function of predictor 
variables). By necessity, the methods outlined above are essentially 
descriptive in nature and the information generated from them is intended to 
serve as a basis for further research in the area. Also out of necessity, the 
majority of information accessed, analyzed, and presented is from a friendly 
force perspective, but it is assumed that the general principles outlined in 
this report will hold for enemy application as well. 

Definitions 

The four-cell matrix of terms in Table 1 separates "suppression" and 
"attrition" into categories of "actual" and "virtual." The value of a good 
air defense system is most dramatically manifested by an actual hit of an 
aircraft. Whether the aircraft crashes or is damaged to the extent it 
must abort, actual attrition has occurred (note further that if other aircraft 
acocnpany the aborting plane as a safety escort, then from the enemy's point 


2 






Table 1 


a 

Definitions of Terms 


Attrition 


Suppresion 


Aircraft shot dcwn; 
mission aborted due 
Actual to physical damage 

to the aircraft; 
wingman escorts a 
damaged aircraft to 
base 


ADA causes on the spot 
pilot-induced "prudent 
practices" that might 
result in inaccurate 
weapons delivery due 
to hurrying, pre¬ 
occupation with avoid¬ 
ance of ADA, or high 
cockpit workload in a 
threat-rich environment 


Management procedures 
("prudent practices") 
designed to reduce 
Virtual risk to pilots & air¬ 
craft; designated 
attack profile may 
therefore be less 
than desirable 


Reduction in efficiency 
of attack results due 
to threat per se of ADA 
(e.g., during mission 
briefing it is reported 
that enemy ground troops 
may have shoulder-launched 
missiles) 


a 

More examples are given throughout the report (see the sections on 
Attrition Management; Table 2; Summary of Factors Influencing Suppression; & 
Summary). The concepts of attrition, suppression, and attrition management 
have been developed further by Cheever (1986) and in articles by Goodson, 
Haering, Hardison, and Kramer, which can be found in Payne and Cheever (1987). 
The term attrition management was first used by Haering. 


3 






of view, attrition of these aircraft has been accomplished as well). 

The recognition of the threat becomes attrition management (virtual 
attrition) when cxximand and control chooses different (safer) targets or 
alters tactics: For example, ordnance is delivered at higher altitudes, time 
over targets is reduced, single passes only are made, a low-level, pcp-up 
attack profile is decided upon, and the support-to-striker aircraft ratio is 
increased. These situations are differentiated from suppresion. 

Suppression is evidenced by pilot behaviors which may result in a 
degradation in efficiency of the attack. When performance is altered as a 
result of reaction to ADA, the suppression is actual. Performance decrements 
might be attributed to high cockpit workload when under fire near the target 
area. Decrements cculd be the result of the stress of operating in a 
dangerous environment, that is, pilot-induced prudent practices over and above 
the attrition management tactics outlined in the mission briefing. For 
example, in reacting to ADA the pj jt may over control the aircraft 
(hyperreact), or deliver his ordnance at a less risky attack profile, the net 
result of which may be reduced bombing accuracy. 

When mission efficiency is altered because of the threat of ADA, but in 
fact no enemy fire is encountered, then the suppression is virtual because the 
enemy has achieved the same effect as with its ADA weapons without actually 
firing ary ordnance. Attrition management and suppression are the foci of 
this report and are respectively developed in the following sections. 


ATTRITION MANAGEMENT (PRUDENT PRACTICES) 

Air defense artillery's role is to hit aircraft, cause disruption of the 
planned mission which could result in mission abort, or cause inaccurate or 
incomplete ordnance delivery. The ultimate desired effect, however, would be 
a decision by the enemy to bypass completely the particular target area. 
Declaring certain targets as "off limits" would be an attrition management 
decision, a prudent practice by the aviation command and control to weigh the 
risk of aircraft and pilot losses against the requirement to gain and maintain 
air superiority and to effect a certain operating tempo throuc^iout the combat 
area. Other forms of this practice are represented by (l) the use of 
stand-off weapons (such as TV- or laser-guided bombs); (2) certain airspace 
designated as "no fly" zones, and certain ADA weapon systems as "avoid, do not 
engage"; (3) weapon-delivery attack profiles which sacrifice accuracy for 
safety; (4) number of target passes limited to one; (5) stand-dcwn procedures, 
or less risky assignments during a pilot's last few missions; (6) ground-based 
and air-based suppression of ADA; and (7) ADA countermeasures. 

During the Vietnam War the necessity of effective ADA countermeasures 
became paramount to survival. These measures included (Nordeen, 1985): 

• Evasive maneuvering techniques ("jinking" against radar 
guided missiles) 

• Low altitude, "pop-up" attack profiles 

• Radar homing-and-warning (RHAW) devices in the cockpit 


4 




• Chaff and flare dispensers 

• Electronic countermeasures radar-jamming pods 

• "SAM killers" (called Wild Weasels or Ironhand) in a strike 
force: fighters whose role was to attack or suppress 
threatening SAM (surface-to-air-missile) sites on a given 
mission, usually just preceding the main strike group's 
arrival at the target 

The use of massed ADA (i.e., both missiles and antiaircraft artillery— 
AAA) at times made route planning difficult. Lew altitude flying (say, 3,000 
feet or less) to avoid missile effective ranges subjected an aircraft to AAA 
and small-arms fire. Flying at higher altitudes to avoid AAA put the aircraft 
back in the missile's tactical envelope. The technological introduction of 
equipment such as the RHAW meant that aircraft could fly at higher altitudes 
to avoid AAA and have sufficient warning of a missile attack to begin evasive 
maneuvers (Nordeen, 1985, p. 40). 

Attrition management is in fact a widely practiced strategy. Examples 
from various conflicts are provided in Table 2; this historical account 
represents a sampling of policy decisions made by the "chain of command" to 
reduce the risks that pilots and their aircraft would be subjected to under 
various conditions. Again, these management decisions are a balance between 
risk to pilot, aircraft, and mission, and are reflected in the mission 
briefing by such details as types of targets to be attacked, desired effects, 
attack profiles, weapon selection, and procedures upon enemy contact. 


THE SUPPRESSION EFFECT 

Performance in Dangerous Environments: Background 

In order to provide a proper setting for the discussion of operational 
performance on air-to-ground missions, a section will first be presented on 
the general topic of performance under stressful conditions. Additional 
background on relevant stress-and-performance literature is presented as 
Appendix A. 

The effects of battlefield stress on degradation of performance have been 
of interest as early as WWII when Marshall (1947) remarked on the lew 
percentages of infantrymen who actually fired their rifles in combat (see also 
Rowland, 1986). The suppressive effect of weaponry on the other side's fire 
power is one main objective of combat: "Extensive effort is expended in 
battle in attempting to degrade the performance of the other side—large parts 
of the effect of artillery fire, small arms and tank fire are expended in the 
belief that they do have seme finite effect" (Rowland, 1986, p. 33). For 
example, especially fearful to ground troops is area (indirect) artillery 
shelling accompanied by loud noise, smoke, earth tremor, and debris (see 
Labuc, 1981 for a summary of the psychological effects of weapons). The 
assumption is that nonlethal effects of weapons can in fact exert a 
significant impact on the outcome of a battle because of the perceived 
dangerousness of them. Thus, "suppression is the degradation of hostile 
operational capabilities through the employment of military action that has 


5 







Table 2 


Examples of Attrition Management in Aviation Warfare 


General 

"While destroying the enemy fighter or attack aircraft is the aim of 
defensive air warfare, the goal of offensive air pcwer usually is ordnance on 
target. During the past several decades, a number of countries have 
investigated means to more accurately deliver weapons, and to do so outside 
the lethal envelope of short-range antiaircraft fire and surface to-air 
missiles. Two basic paths have been taken to develop accurate and survivable 
weapon delivery systems: precision guided weapons and sophisticated aircraft 
weapon-delivery systems." (Nordeen, 1985, p. 208) 

"The Defense Dept., faced with improved Soviet and third nation air defense 
capabilities, is increasing its emphasis on air-launched standoff weapons by 
promoting development of an interim Navy long-range ground attack missile and 
a family of modular standoff weapons to be built within the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization".... "Standoff is more attractive because of faster 
response time, increased survivability of the attacking aircraft and 
compatibility with stealth aircraft and their operational tactics." (North, 
1986, p. 16.) 


World War II 

"By April 1940, it was clear that losses in day operations were 
prohibitively high, and the Air Ministry issued a Bombing Directive which 
switched the strategy of Bomber Command to night attacks on major 
concentrations of industry." (Reid, 1979, pp. 2-3) 


Korean War 

"The light bombers were highly effective in lew-level operations, but the 
B-26 crews were finding it difficult to maneuver at low altitudes in the small 
valleys of Korea. More serious was the fact that hostile small-arms fire was 
wreaking substantial losses and damages upon the low-flying conventional 
bombers. By 7 July it was evident that the light bombers had to operate at 
medium altitudes if they were to survive." (Futrell, 1983, p. 86) 

"The horizontal-bombing B-29's operated under severe disadvantages. To 
escape flak, they had to bomb from altitudes above 18,000 feet, and at such 
heights the B-29's were inherently unsuited for pinpoint work." (Futrell, 

1983, p. 224) 


6 






Table 2, cant. 

Examples of Attrition Management in Aviation Warfare 


Vietnam War 

US Air Force had a separate policy for the first and last 10 missions of a 
pilot's 100-mission tour (they were flcwn in supposedly relatively benign 
combat environments; Basel, 1982, pp. 101, 103). 

US Navy carrier pilots had a shorter tour (6 months) and were allowed to 
pick their own targets on the last few missions 

"Hie best way to escape a SAM was to turn into it with a hard diving turn, 
then make an abrupt four-G rolling pull-up keeping the speed up throughout the 
maneuver... .but since so much altitude was needed for these maneuvers, weather 
conditions became a critical consideration in our planning for all missions 
into SAM-defended areas." (Mantyer, 1979, p. 127). "During 1965-1968, we 
sought a 10,000 foot ceiling and no more than 5/10 to 6/10 cloud coverage so 
that our pilots had both sufficient visibility to see a SAM launch and 
adequate ceiling for maneuvering to avoid the SAM." (Mantyer, 1979, p. 177) 

"Pilots in the 1966-1968 campaigns couldn't do much to avoid the SAMs with 
erratic flight (or "jinking") if they wished to have any hope of getting the 
bombs on target. But our later bombing systems which compensated 
automatically for speed, altitude, and a moderate amount of jinking provided 
pilots much more protection. Also, with the laser weapons used in the 1972 
offensive, strike forces had greater freedom of maneuver and could release 
their weapons from a much higher altitude." (Mcntyer, 1979, p. 133) 

"When ground forces were involved and needed the support, pilots pressed 
their attacks as lew a possible to get the job done. There were, hewever, 
occasions when friendly ground forces were not actively involved in the target 
area or even scheduled to enter the area after an air atttack. In those 
cases, the minimum pull-out altitude for the fighters was raised to 3,500 
feet. We simply did not want to risk the life of a pilot and the loss of an 
aircraft by over-exposure in the danger zone when no friendly ground forces 
were involved. Ihe pilots, of course, didn't like this, always wanting to go 
as lew as possible for better accuracy." (Momyer, 1979, p. 280) 

"With the advent of the jamming pod, F-105D flights could once again 
penetrate at medium altitude between 12,000 and 15,000 feet where airspeed, 
range, and maneuverability were all good—above the range of the murderous 
automatic weapons and without fear of the higher-altitude radar-directed 
antiaircraft artillery and surface-to-air missiles." (Nordeen, 1985, p. 24) 


7 








Table 2, cont. 

Examples of Attrition Management in Aviation Warfare 


Ycm Kippur War (1973) 

"To counter the new Arab air defenses, the Israel Defense Force/Air Force 
modified tactics, employed chaff, installed new U.S. supplied electronic 
countermeasures equipment, and repeatedly staged extensive defense-suppression 
attacks".... "All the jammers and deception devices were designed to degrade 
the effectiveness of search and acquisition radars, antiaircraft fire control 
radars, and the guidance radars for the SA-2 and SA-3 missiles." (Nordeen, 
1985, pp. 165; 147) 


Falkland Islands War 

The Argentines use of AAA and missiles achieved seme air denial: "Whenever 
the weather permitted. Harriers strafed airfields and radar positions. They 
had now abandoned low level direct attacks — the risk of attrition was too 
great. Instead, they 'toss-bombed 1 , releasing their weapons well short of the 
target, and turning away at maximum distance from the defences.. .Harriers 
lingered over Port Stanley at 20,000 feet, above the ceiling of the enemy's 
Roland anti aircraft missiles." (Hastings & Jenkins, 1983, p. 157) 

"Laydcwn attacks were successful in hitting runways but in the main our 
aircraft were vulnerable and damage to the runways was not extensive. On the 
other hand, high angle and loft deliveries kept aircraft out of the range of 
ground defenses, but accuracy was poor." (Squire, 1983, p. 100) 

"Experience shewed that cur greatest threat was from ground-to-air weapons 
which varied from surface-to-air missiles to small arms fire. The two major 
surface-to-air missile systems were Roland and Tigercat. We had a fair idea 
where they were located and planned to fly outside or below their engagement 
zones... .The remaining surface-to-air missile threat came from the shoulder 
launched variety, and these were in plentiful supply. By flying lew and fast 
in the target areas we could negate" this threat. (Squire, 1983, p. 100) 


Chad Conflict 

Libyan aircraft bombed their captured air base in Chad from as high as 
30,000 feet to elude the shoulder-fired Redeye missiles of the Chadian 
soldiers. (Randal, 1987) 

Because the French Air Force had the luxury of time on their side, missions 
were based on selected criteria: early morning attack, full visibility of 
target, clear weather, no enemy aircraft in vicinity of target, knowledge of 
ADA around target, use of sun as a tactical aid, one target pass only. 

(information from presentation by French pilots to the US Army Air Defense 
Artillery School, 25 March, 1987, Fort Bliss, Texas) 


8 






Table 2, cont. 

Exanples of Attrition Management in Aviation Warfare 


Afghanistan Conflict 

Early War: Because of the threat posed by the massed use of SAM-7s by the 
Afghan rebels, "...Soviet aircraft, primarily MiG-2ls, would make their 
weapons delivery runs from high altitude and release their weapons at 
2,000-3,000 ft., in effect sacrificing accuracy for safety" (Gunston, 1984). 
The Soviets then decided that flares could successfully counteract the SAM-7 
threat. Attack altitudes were lowered. Strike fighters operated in pairs: 
one would fly high-speed, nap-of-the-earth while the other would dispense 
decoy flares from a higher altitude. 

Later War: After the introduction of Stinger shoulder fired missiles into 
the war, the tactics of the Soviet pilots changed such that fixed wing 
aircraft flew higher and the hovering tactics of attack helicopters was 
eliminated: 

"Ihe Stinger has forced high-performance Soviet strike aircraft pilots to 
deliver their weapons frcsn high altitudes, seriously eroding accuracy. It 
also has forced pilots of Soviet helicopter gunships and tactical strike 
aircraft, such as the Sukhoi Su-25 Frogfoot, to fly nap-of-the-earth missions 
and deliver their ordnance on the first pass, making them vulnerable to massed 
small arms fire and further eroding accuracy".... "It appeared that the pilots 
involved were putting survival before accuracy"... .Their altitude denied "the 
Stingers a reasonable shot while at the same time sacrificing their own weapon 
accuracy ..." "Helicopter gunship attacks and missions by Su-25s are 
apparently assigned only to areas where the Stinger is thought to be absent." 
(Gunston, 1988, pp. 46, 47, 48) 

"the Stingers forced the Soviets to change their tactics in Afghanistan, 
reducing the number of lew-level assualts by Mi-24 Hind helicopters and the 
Sukhoi-25 Frogfoot close-support aircraft. For months, the Soviets were 
forced to fly at higher altitudes, out of range of the Stingers. But new 
Soviet aircraft reportedly are releasing flares to confuse the Stinger's 
targeting system and serve as cover for surprise lew-level assualts." (Dorsey, 
1987) 


9 











psychological and/or physical effects temporarily impairing the combat 
performance of enemy forces and personnel who have not themselves been killed 
or wounded" (Dupuy, 1987). 

Whether a person finds himself in a dangerous environment by choice or 
not by choice, his behavior can be categorized as either non-goal oriented 
(i.e., he panics, freezes, or tries to remove himself from the noxious 
stimuli) or goal directed. Performing effectively under conditions of combat 
stress necessitates not only engaging in goal-directed behavior, but also 
eliciting responses which are accurately and timely performed (Kern, 1966). 
That is, a soldiers's class of behaviors should be job performance centered. 
After an initial adaptation period to the unique environment of combat, most 
soldiers' behavior would be expected to be goal directed. However, over time 
in combat, perceptions and orientations may change, to the extent that one's 
stimulus orientation becomes weighted more towards danger cues as opposed to 
cues which he uses to adapt to his new environment. With further time in a 
combat zone, attention to environmental signs of danger gradually gives way to 
preoccupation with anticipatory damage, and behavior is oriented to 
self-preservation. To summarize this behavioral reaction process (Kern, 

1966), after an initial adaptation-to-the-battlefield phase, a soldier can be 
expected to perform at his best for some period of time before thoughts of 
danger, then harm, begin more and more to act as distractors (anticipatory 
fear reaction) to the conduct of efficient, job-oriented behaviors (self focus 
vs. task focus). 

Factors which are important in one's decision to perform in dangerous 
environments under stress are one's predisposition (trait anxiety, trait 
arousal), previous exposure to such environments, the perceived assessment of 
the situation, and one's perceived ability to cope with, or control, the 
situation (Idzikcwski & Baddeley, 1983). Thus, the judged quality of one's 
training and equipment to perform a particular task or tasks, confidence, and 
one's sense of competence are crucial ingredients in the quality 
of performance (Rachman, 1978, 1982). 

The stress-and-performance literature suggests that a lew to medium 
arousal state acts by narrowing attention, focusing it on the primary task 
before the subject (data and theory are summarized in Baddeley, 1972, and 
Idzikcwski & Baddeley, 1983; see also Hockey, 1979; Hockey & Hamilton, 

1983). In high arousal states, anxiety acts as a cause of overt distraction. 
Attention is shared by and shifted between task-relevant variables and 
self-relevant variables (e.g., self-preservation). In such states, 
performance degradation is likely on secondary tasks, on tasks requiring 
manual dexterity, and on sensory-motor tasks such as tracking which require 
periods of concentration. These effects are especially likely in those who 
are novice to performing in dangerous environments. Adaptation in the sense 
of inhibition of anxiety does occur in some individuals after subsequent 
exposure to stressful stimuli, thus resulting in a lesser degree of 
performance impairment. 

Theoretical frameworks to account for the effects of stress on 
performance have included arousal theory (for example, the Yerkes-Dodson 
"inverted U" hypothesis), and capacity (cognitive resource allocation) models 
(see Hockey, 1979; Hockey & Hamilton, 1983; Idzikcwski & Baddeley, 1983; and 
Sanders, 1983 for summaries). The Yerkes-Dodson Law states that performance 


10 







on a given task will decrease when an optional level of arousal for that task 
is exceeded. One facet of the hypothesis is that less stress is required to 
disrupt the performance of a complex task. This postulate would have obvious 
relevance to the cockpit environment. In capacity models, performance 
degr adat ion has been explained in such concepts as selectivity in processing 
of environmental stimuli (i.e., selective attention), divided attention, time 
sharing, decision making, and perceptual motor load. Thus, the stressed 
performer of a difficult task, for exanple one requiring the use of 
information front many sources (i.e., a high cognitive workload environment) 
would show a selectivity of inputs as well as responses. Wickens and Flach 
(1988; see also Wickens, Barnett, Stokes, Davis, & Hyman, 1989) apply capacity 
concepts to the decision making requirements of the aviator. When a judgment 
is called for, the experienced pilot will have more reaction repertories 
available via direct retrieval front long term memory and will not have to rely 
so much on working memory. Because stress is postulated to exert its 
influences more on the resource-limited working memory, an expert should be 
less prone to making poor judgments under stressful conditions (e.g., 
scenarios characterized by risk or time pressures). 

Stress and Performance in Combat Aviation 

Background . The emphasis of this suppression section is on the effects 
of "chronic intermittent" stress (Burchfield, 1979) on fighter pilot 
performance in the combat environment—both the appropriateness of the pilot's 
goal-directed behavior as well as its quality (e.g., weapons delivery 
accuracy). ihe intermittent (acute) nature of the stressful environment is 
based on the operational definition here of the dangerous environment being 
the mission itself—from time of take off to the return landing. Aviation 
crews, unlike marry ground troops, are in relatively benign environments 
between missions (see e.g., Grinker & Spiegel, 1945, Ch. 2), and an attempt is 
made to limit the frequency of missions per unit of time so that fatigue does 
not become a factor. The chronic nature is the repeated exposure of pilots to 
combat missions over the length of the tour. 

One important aspect of the pilot training program is to teach fighter 
pilots to perform effectively under stressful operational conditions. By 
virtue of selection and training, the combat pilot has special aptitudes and 
acquired skills. Service pilot selection and classification batteries usually 
include tests of psychomotor skills, personality questionnaires (which include 
tests of decisiveness and risk taking), and an assessment of a wide range of 
information-processing capabilities (Kantor & Bordelon, 1985; see also North & 
Griffin, 1977; Youngling et al., 1977). Upon successful completion of initial 
and advanced ooursework, and selection into the fighter/attack track for 
specialized training, a close match hopefully exists between those qualities 
needed for successful combat flying and those possessed by the pilot. By the 
time combat status has been conferred on a pilot, his training will have 
exposed him to a number of stressful situations, such as first solo, first 
night flight, participation in air combat maneuvering training (Burton, Storm, 
Johnson, & Leverett, 1977), and Red Flag exercises, first spin maneuver, and 
first aircraft carrier landing (Miller, Rubin, Clark, Crawford, & Arthur, 

1970). 

The Impact of High-Tech Aircraft and Weaponry on Air-tn Ground Delivery 
Accuracy: Workload . A key concept to the study of successful performance in 


11 








an operational aviation environment is that of workload. Part of what makes 
today's air-to-ground missions potentially stressful is the high demands 
placed on the operator for constant attention to multiple inputs, rapid 
decision making and efficient motor responding. That is, pilot performance in 
high-tech aircraft is contingent upon the ability "to quickly sort, 
prioritize, and act on a continual stream of visual, auditory, and tactile 
information" (Kantor & Bordelon, 1985, p. 259). Multi-channel information 
processing capability, ability to concentrate and filter out irrelevant 
stimuli (thus, divided as well as selective attention abilities), rapid 
decision making, memory for procedures, and sensory-motor skill proficiency 
are indeed all a must. Specifically, the fighter pilot's cognitive workload 
must be time-shared between the duties of target acquisition, ordnance 
selection, communications, choice and use of countermeasures, ADA sightings, 
decision to engage the target, and attack posture to target (to include 
altitude, speed, maneuver pattern). The issue, then, is the effect of a high 
degree of sympathetic and central nervous system arousal (e.g., pounding 
heart, tense muscles, dry mouth, queasy stomach, sensory overload, disrupted 
attention) on performance of a complex task which must be performed quickly 
and accurately. Does the required activity in the cockpit actually act as an 
"anxiety distractor" in keeping the pilot's attention focused on the tasks at 
hand, or is he so overwhelmed by multiple stimuli and requirements for action 
that his main duty of weapons delivery is degraded? The stress of operating 
in a dangerous environment may interact with the high task load of operating a 
sophisticated aircraft to the extent that a degree of indecisiveness or 
hesitancy or sensory overload may result in inaccurate weapons delivery 
accuracy. 

Thus, in a high workload environment, stress can act to force the 
individual to be selective about information input and response output. 
Although today's air-to-surface weaponry represents sophisticated technology, 
the sophistication of the attack avionics itself (i.e., the weapons delivery 
system from the pilot's point of view) must not represent task saturation if 
accurate delivery is to be achieved. For example, it was mentioned in the 
"Attrition Management" section that jinking became a widely used and effective 
technique during the Vietnam War against radar guided weapons. However, 
altitude, speed, and dive angle must be coordinated at the weapons release 
point, and during this delivery envelope the aircraft is most vulnerable to 
ADA. To the extent that ADA results in either a workload "overage" to the 
pilot and he does not stabilize the aircraft properly for weapons release, the 
pilot has been suppressed. The operation of some aircraft is so complex that 
both a pilot and a weapons officer are required to handle all the functions. 

In single-seat fighters, items such as on-board computers and head-ip displays 
have shared the workload to allow the pilot to attend to all his duties. This 
topic of pilot workload is developed further in Appendix B. 

Air Combat Exairples . Examples of air crews' reactions to operating in 
air space covered by ADA are provided in Table 3. A number of important 
concepts are contained in the entries. The first panel covers examples from 
the literature on World War II. The first two entries from the next panel on 
the Vietnam War illustrate the previously discussed point of ADA affecting 
v orkload capacity. The last two entries reflect helicopter combat duty 
during the IAMSON 719 engagement of that war. 

Although certain events of air combat may be perceived as stressful fcy 


12 







Table 3 

Examples of Air Crew Reactions to Air Defense Artillery 


World War II 

Interviews with seme 4,500 ccmbat fliers (Shaffer, 1947) upon their 
return to the United States revealed that the latter missions of one's tour 
were felt to be more stressful than earlier ones. Part of the trepidation 
long into the tour was fear of the law of averages catching up on one; the 
greater fear on the first mission was being a ccward, a failure. 

Additionally, greater stress was felt on preplanned versus on-the-spot 
missions (possibly due to anticipatory anxiety). Specific fears while in the 
air included seeing flak or enemy tracers, and not being able to return fire 
or spot a reported enemy plane. Positive factors were confidence in one's 
equipment and crew. 

The degree of motivation for ccmbat was a function of type of aircraft, 
the lowest motivation being in heavy bomber crews, followed by medium and 
light bombers, and fighter pilots (Stauffer et al., 1949, Ch. 8). The 
differences in feeling were likely due to the perceived controllability over 
the situation (i.e, the superior speed, maneuverability, and fire pewer of 
filters. (Radhman, 1978, pp. 72, 80-81; Stcuffer et al., 1949, pp. 408-409) 

Within the Royal Air Force, the cumulative effects of stress as exhibited 
by neurotic behavior were distributed along a continuum of perceived 
dangerousness of the type of mission: Thus the incidence of neurosis was 
greatest on pilots flying nic£it bombing missions, less on fighter pilots, and 
least on Coastal Command missions. (Symonds & Williams, 1943; Tcmpkins, 1959) 

The German ADA proved effective against the English Bomber Command 
sorties: "Precision was also adversely affected by the strength of enemy 
aircraft artillery, for the scatter of bombs round an aiming point was 
greatest when the target was most heavily defended". (Reid, 1979, p. 3) 

The calculation and platting error of wind vectors by British navigators 
during night operational sorties increased in and around the target area as 
compared to safer sections of the route and performance during quasi- 
operational night training flights. (Reid, 1945) 

Bcmbadiers' ability to guide (track) bombs to their targets showed 
increasing degradation as a function of intensity of the ccmbat situation 
versus during training. The more nonsensitive the guided system, the worse 
the performance under ccmbat. (Walker & Burkhardt, 1966) 


13 







Table 3, cont. 

Examples of Air Crew Reactions to Air Defense Artillery 


Vietnam War 

"The missiles and their associated radar threats considerably ocnplicated 
the task of ccmbat pilots and military mission planners. Pilots, in addition 
to navigating, flying, searching for, and attacking ground targets or enemy 
aircraft, new also had to monitor radar homing and warning (KHAW) sensors, 
listen to transmissions from ships or aircraft radar systems for warnings of 
approaching MiGs, operate electronic countermeasures equipment, and visually 
watch out for undetected flying 'telephone poles* or marauding MiGs." 

(Nordeen, 1985, pp. 208-209) 

"North Vietnam's heavy air defenses damaged or downed many aircraft; 
furthermore, they lessened the effectiveness of those that were untouched by 
forcing pilots to divide attention among a multitude of tasks. While evading 
surface-to-air missiles, antiaircraft artillery, or MiGs, pilots got lost, 
were forced to jettison their bombs and/or fuel tanks, or bombed the real 
target with much less accuracy than they had the target on the practice 
range." (Nordeen, 1985, p. 209) 

During the Vietnam War, the fighter's reliance on "SAM killers" 

(mentioned in the "Attrition Management" section) to attrit or suppress ADA 
sites was heavy: "With the strike forces and escorting fighters flying at 500 
knots and higher, seconds became critical. If a Weasel's timing were off, it 
could well mean that a member of the strike farce would be shot down or that 
the enemy's defenses would force unacceptable bembing errors". (Mcmyer, 1979, 
p. 131) 

"The most frequently used and frightening antiaircraft weapons the Hueys 
encountered were the 12.7 mm or 50 caliber machine-guns. These weapons had a 
distinctive sound and fired tracers every few rounds, which looked liked 
basketballs or pumpkins coming at the aircraft." (Fulbrook, 1986a, pp. 43-44) 

"Generally, there are two types of aviators when bullets start flying. 

All of us experience a lot of anxiety, but some have a facilitating anxiety 
and actually fly more precisely. Others have a debilitating anxiety and 
overtorque or overcontrol their aircraft in an instant." (Fulbrook, 1986b, p. 
12 ) 







pilots, this stress may not necessarily affect certain kinds of performance, 
as perceived by the pilots. A questionnaire was administered to 563 members 
of the Red River Valley Filter Pilot's Association (Kantor & Ideen, 1980). 
Membership in the Association is contingent upon having flcwn combat missions 
around the Hanoi region. Data regarding the pilots' combat experience was 
obtained through questions pertaining to the frequency with which they 
performed or encountered each of 43 events common to combat missions. They 
also rated the stress of each. These data were analyzed as a function of 
their perceived "number of sorties that could be flown effectively by a single 
pilot in a two-week period under the stress levels encountered in missions 
flown into North Vietnam." Events such as personal encounters with and 
perceived stressfulness of ADA were not judged by these pilots to be 
significant limiters of sortie run estimates. 

British pilots in the Falkland Islands War reported that they did not see 
tracers or flak bursts fired at them because they were too busy concentrating 
on the task of making their run and keeping the cross-hairs centered on the 
target (i.e., the "tunnel vision" effect). 

An hypothesis put forth by Haering (1986) states that ADA does not 
function as a stressor which reduces pilot accuracy, but acts as a 
precipitator of tactical changes which reduce risk (i.e., the application of 
attrition management). The statement is based on Vietnam War United States 
Air Faroe (USAF) F-105 data which indicate that dive bombing accuracy was 
similar whether air defense intensity was light or heavy. It is to be noted 
that release altitude was 8,000 feet, visual bombing was employed, and the 
dive bombing tactic placed the aircraft over the drop area for no more than 10 
seconds. To sumnarize Haering's position, ADA could cause reduced weapons 
delivery accuracy by virtue of the necessity to use nonoptimal target 
identification and attack profiles (e.g., the prudent practice of increased 
standoff or one target run), but if the experienced pilot commits to a tactic 
during the attack phase of his mission, accuracy is not affected. 

It is noteworthy that Air Force command and control foresaw possible 
performance degradation during a pilot's last few missions in Vietnam (recall 
that WWII pilots were concerned with the "law of averages" catching up): In 
recognition of the potential harm of end-of-tour distractions in fighter 
pilots (i.e., paying undue attention to external danger and internal fear 
stimuli), their last ten missions were flown in relatively benign combat 
environments. This policy was an attrition management practice in recognition 
of the human tendency of the pilot to become more conservative (i.e., 
suppressed) in his willingness to take risks and to be more oriented toward 
self-preservation behavior near the end of the tour. As stated by a former 
USAF fighter pilot: "After X number of missions, human nature being what it 
is, the pilot suddenly realizes he has made it this far alive and it seems 
that there is indeed a chance that life may be possible. It becomes utterly 
priceless again, and the warrior becomes a Candy-Ass. He starts planning to 
survive the terminal disease of war, and his courage leaves him. He is now 
vulnerable and a hazard to himself and his compatriots" (Basel, 1982, p. 103). 

Summary of Factors Influencing Suppression 

Attrition management was previously defined as command and control 
practices which function to weigh the risk of assets against mission needs. 


15 











To sane degree suppression could be construed as a pilot's self-initiated 
prudent practice and the reasons for the behavior could be manyfold: for 
example, (1) unforeseen events near the target area (such as threat intensity 
much greater than anticipated); (2) cockpit task workload in a threat-rich 
environment on a particular mission becomes too high to the point of overload 
(cognitive suppression), as manifested perhaps in inaccurate or incomplete 
weapons delivery; (3) preoccupation with nearness to end of tour could cause 
lapses in attention or a conservative attitude, resulting perhaps in early 
bomb release or over jinking. 

Thus, many variables are interactively at work influencing pilot 
performance on a ground attack mission under pressure. These variables are 
listed in Table 4. The relative weight or importance of any given factor 
would be time-and-pilot specific, but one which showed to be important in WWII 
was that of mission experience. Pilots in their initial combat missions were 
more concerned with peer pressure to behave properly under fire (performing as 
trained) and not look bad to the rest of the squadron. As the number of 
required missions or number of ccmbat hours was reaching completion, combat 
motivation decreased and more concern was shewn for self-preservation, making 
it safely to the end of the tour (Rachman, 1978, pp. 53, 59-60; Stauffer et 
al., 1949, p. 385). The Air Force practice of having combat pilots fly 
relatively safer missions for the last ten missions of their Vietnam tour was 
to guard against concern over the "law of averages". 

Many of the other factors listed in Table 4 are equally important in 
terms of their influencing the pilots' performance on any given mission. For 
example, a pilot may be more willing to accept risk and be oriented toward 
completing his mission if he is in the middle of his tour (i.e., combat 
experienced), if the mission has been briefed to him as being critical, if he 
perceives his aircraft, weaponry, and own personal skills as superior to those 
of the enemy, if he is well rested, and if visibility and other weather 
factors favor the successful aocarplishment of the mission. If these factors 
are weighted negatively, he may become more risk-adverse and inclined to adapt 
a more conservative attack profile in "heavy" operational conditions. 


SUMMARY 

As with many weapons, air defense artillery can be an effective 
deterrent. In fact, ADA can affect air-to-ground weapons delivery accuracy 
without actually shooting down aircraft: (1) Its existence could force the 
invoking of attrition management , command and control practices which allow a 
protected target to be attacked but with a reduced risk to pilot and aircraft 
(safer attack profiles, single passes, use of standoff weapons, use of 
countermeasures, support aircraft in strike package, instructions for action 
upon contact). A nonlethal effect, then, of ADA is that the attacking force's 
strategy is altered to preserve resources, and as a result accuracy may be 
sacrificed. Attrition management is widely practiced as evidenced by the 
examples provided in Table 2. (2) Suppression of pilot performance can be 

achieved by task overload. In the face of ADA, the numerous duties in 
addition to simply keeping the aircraft airborne may be so demanding that 
proper attention may not be paid to weapons delivery. (3) Pilot factors 
(self-induced prudent practices) as presented in Table 4 can have a 
suppressive effect on the efficacious use of a high-tech fighter's firepower. 


16 







Table 4 


a 

Factors Influencing Pilot Performance on a Given Combat Mission 


Pilot Characteristics 


• Combat experience 

—Beginning, middle, or end of tour and hew pilot felt he performed on 
previous missions 
—Aircraft ever been shot at 
—Aircraft ever been hit 
—Squadron aircraft ever been hit 
—Number of hazardous missions flown recently 

• Type and intensity of ADA is as predicted, or is different from, the intel¬ 
ligence forecast 

• Visual sitting of tracers by self or others in formation; cockpit warning 
signifying enemy missile lockon; observation of signature signifying a SAM 
launch 

• Performance expectations: Perceived ability and confidence in flying and 
weapons delivery skills; perception of supremacy of aircraft (speed, 
firepower, maneuverability, ability to take hits) and capability of 
ordnance on board; perception of control over situation 

• Perception of usefulness of countermeasures such as ECM, chaff, and flares 

• Perceived probability of ADA missiles or guns scoring a hit; perceived 
skill of the enemy; reputation of enemy's ADA 

• Degree of hatred of enemy; degree of desire for revenge 

• Fatigue level (is the pilot's confidence undermined, does he become afraid 
of his own abilities while in a less-than-optimal level of alertness) 

• Crew configuration (1 or 2 sea ter) and workload; if 2-seater, is the pilot 
in charge of weapons delivery 

• Amount of time between mission briefing and take off (precombat 
apprehension) 


a 

Performance is defined as completeness and accuracy of weapons delivery 
accuracy. 


17 






Table 4, cent. 

a 

Factors Influencing Pilot Performance on a Given Combat Mission 


Mission Characteristics 


• Type of target 

• Type of mission: E.g., close air support over friendly lines or a strike 
deep within enemy territory 

• Type and intensity of ADA threat (intelligence forecast) 

• Visibility around target area 

• Type of terrain 

• Night or daytime mission 

• Attack instructions 

—Exposure time over target 
—Attack profile 
—Attack order in squadron 
—Number of passes over target 
—Use of stand-off weapons 

• Aircraft fired upon during ingress phase 

• Predefined command and control instructions for action upon enemy contact; 
criteria for mission abort 

• Type and number of support aircraft (strike/support ratio) 

• Suppression of ADA and radar by ground forces or standoff airborne jamming; 
ECM and flare equipment onboard 

• Importance of targets (both to caimand and control and to pilot) and 
necessity of achieving target damage on this particular mission 


a 

Performance is defined as carpleteness and accuracy of weapons delivery 
accuracy. 


18 









The stress of operating in a dangerous environment may be expected under 
certain conditions to result in seme degradation, but severe stress reactions 
(aborting, exhibiting severe startle responses, or overflying the aircraft) 
would in general not be expected given these considerations: 

• It is a reasonable hypothesis that pilots who become combat 
pilots have by virtue of previous exposure to stressful 
experiences during their stringent training period been 
somewhat "immunized" to the stress of performing in dangerous 
environments. 

• Pilots are the most highly trained of all the combat arm 
skills and are trained to act in emergencies under realistic 
conditions. 

• Their high task orientation, motivation, confidence in their 
skills (i.e., high self esteem) and the abilities of their 
high performance aircraft would give a sense of control¬ 
lability (mastery; influence on outcome) over the situation. 

• Pilots are indoctrinated during their expensive training 
that they are worth several million dollars and are an 
important investment. They knew that they are flying a 
very expensive aircraft, and believe that command and 
control decision makers will carefully weigh the risks 
when sending airpewer on a mission. The prudent practices 
represented in attrition management preclude pilots from 
being placed in conditions of unacceptable risk. Their 
actions upon contact are covered in the mission briefing. 

• Pilots believe that their air defense countermeasures (ECM, 
chaff, evasive manuevers) reduce the effectiveness of 
current ADA weapons. The belief that their aircraft's 
capabilities represent a technological lead over ADA 
produces pilot confidence. "Fully aware of the dangers 
which beset him, the good pilot is provoked to put out his 
best and meet them by appropriate and effective activity." 

(Davis, 1948) 

• The gradual indoctrination of pilots into "heavy" missions 
lets one adapt to operating in stressful environments, to 
knew what combat stress feels like and t v at one can perform 
in spite of it. 

Any resulting incomplete or inaccurate weapons delivery on a given 
mission could be a combination of attrition management, workload, and pilot 
factors. The relative influences of each would be mission-and-pilot specific, 
but the biggest contributor would seem to be attrition management practices, 
followed by workload stress in and around the target area, and pilot factors. 


19 






REFERENCES 


Baddeley, A. D. (1972). Selective attention and performance in dangerous 
environments. British Journal of Psychology . 63(4) . 537-546. 

Baddeley, A., & Idzikcwski, C. (1985). Anxiety, manual dexterity and diver 
performance. Ergonomics . 28(10) . 1475-1482. 

Basel, G. I. (1982). Pak Six . New York.: Berkley Publishing Group. 

Bell, H. (1987). Personal communication, November, Human Resources 
Laboratory, Williams Air Force Base, AZ. 

Berkun, M. M. (1964). Performance decrement under psychological stress. 
Human Factors . 6, 21-30. 

Bourne, P. G. (1970). Psychological aspects of combat. In H. S. Abram 
(Bd.), Psychological Aspects of Stress . Springfield, IL: Charles C. 
Thomas. 


Burchfield, S. R. (1979). The stress response: A new perspective. 
Psychosomatic Medicine . 41(8) . 661-672. 

Burton, R. R., Storm, W. F., Johnson, L. W., & Leverett, S. D. (1977). 

Stress responses of pilots flying high performance aircraft during aerial 
combat maneuvers. Aviation. Space, and Environmental Medicine . 48(4) . 
301-307. 

Cheever, H. L. (1986). The guest to Quantify virtual attrition . (Working 
Paper). Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD: US Army Materiel Systems Analysis 
Activity. 

Chermol, B. H. (1983). Psychiatric casualties in combat. Military Review . 
July, 26-32. 

Cox, D., Hallam, R., O'Connor, K., & Rachman, S. (1983). An experimental 
analysis of fearlessness and courage. British Journal of Psychology . 74, 
107-117. 

Damos, D. L., & Lintem, G. (1981). A comparison of single-and dual-task 
measures to predict simulator performance of beginning student pilots. 
Ergonomics . 24(9) . 673-684. 

Davis, D. R. (1948). Pilot error: Seme laboratory experiments (AP 3139A). 
In E. J. Deamaley & P. B. Warr (Eds.) (1979), Aircrew Stress in Wartime 
Operations . New York: Academic Press. 

Department of the Army. (1975). Report of the Army Scientific Advisory Panel 
Ad Hoc Group on Fire Suppression . Washington, D.C.: Department of the 
Army, Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Research, Development and 
Acquisition. AD A017784. 

Dorsey, J. M. (1987). Soviets obtain the specifications for U.S. Stinger 
missiles. Washington Times . October 29, 10. 


21 










Dupuy, T. (1987). Understanding War. History and Theory of Combat . New 
York: Peragon House. 

Egbert, R. L., Meeland, T. C., Cline, V. B., Forgy, E. W., Spickler, M. W., & 
Brown, C. (1958). FIGHTER I: A study of effective and ineffective combat 
performers (HurnRRQ Special Report 13) . Washington, D.C.: George Washington 
University Hunan Resources Research Office. 

Fenz, W. D. (1975). Strategies for coping with stress. In I. G. Sarason & 

C. D. Spielberger (Eds.), Stress and Anxiety . Vol. 2. New York: Wiley. 

Flanagan, W. A. (1981). The fighter force: Hew many seats? Air University 
Review . 32(4) . 2-21. 

Fulbrook, J. E. (1986a). IAMSON 719. Part II: The battle. US Army 
Aviation Digest . July, 34-45. 

Fulbrook, J. E. (1986b). IAMSON 719. Part III: Reflections and values. US 
Army Aviation Digest . August, 3-13. 

Futrell, R. F. (1983). The United States Air Force in Korea 1950—1953 . 
Washington, D. C.: US Government Printing Office. 

Gal, R. (1988). Psychological aspects of combat stress: A model derived 
from Israeli and other combat experiences. Proceedings. Sixth Users* 
Workshop on Combat Stress (Nov-Dee, 1987), US Army Health Care Studies and 
Clinical Investigation Activity, Health Services Command, Fort Sam Houston, 
TX. 

Gilman, A. W. D. (1990). An alternative to "suppression": Modeling 
methodology for assessing indirect effects of weapons and human performance 
degradation . (Technical Report BRL-TR-3131). Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD: 
Ballistic Research Laboratory. AD A226518. 

Glass, A. J. (1969). Introduction. In P. G. Bourne (Ed.), The Psychology 
and Physiology of Stress with Reference to Special Studies of the Viet Nam 
War . New York: Academic Press. 

Grinker, R. R., & Spiegel, J. P. (1945). Men Under Stress . Philadelphia: 
Blakiston. 

Gunston, J. (1984). Su-24s, Tu-16s support Soviet ground forces. Aviation 

Week & Space Technology . October 29, 40-43. 

Gunston, J. (1988). Stingers used by Afghan rebels stymie Soviet air force 
tactics. Aviation Week & Space Technology . April 4, 46-48. 

Haering, G. (1986). Naw attrition in Vietnam . Presentation at Forward Air 
Defense System Virtual Attrition Meeting (March, 1986), U. S. Army Materiel 
Systems Analysis Activity, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD. 

Hanmerton, M. & Tickner, A. H. (1969). An investigation into the effects of 
stress upon skilled performance. Ergonomics . 12(6) . 851-855. 


22 










Harris, W., Mackie, R. R., & Wilson, C. L. (1956). Performance under stress; 
A review and critique of recent steadies . (Technical Report 6). Washington, 
D.C.: Office of Naval Research. AD491193. 

Hastings, M., & Jenkins, S. (1983). The Battle for the Falklands . New York: 
W. W. Norton & Company. 

Hockey, R. (1979). Stress and the cognitive components of skilled 

performance. In V. Hamilton & D. M. War burton (Eds.), Human Stress and 
Cognition: An Information Processing Approach . New York: Wiley. 

Hockey, R., & Hamilton, P. (1983). The cognitive patterning of stress 
states. In R. Hockey (Ed.), Stress and Fatigue in Human Performance . 

New York: Wiley. 

Hughes Aircraft Company. (1977). Crew size evaluation for tactical 
all-weather strike aircraft . Technical Report AFAL TR-76-79. 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH: Air Force Avionics Laboratory. 

Idzikowski, C., & Baddeley, A. D. (1983). Fear and dangerous environments. 

In G. R. J. Hockey (Ed.), Stress and Fatigue in Human Performance . New 
York: Wiley. 

Idzikowski, C., & Baddeley, A. (1985). Waiting in the wings: Apprehension, 
public speaking and performance. Ergonomics . 26(6) . 575-583. 

Ingraham, L. H., & Manning, F. J. (1980). Psychiatric battle casualties: 

The missing column in a war without replacements. Military Review . August, 
19-29. 

Kantor, J. E., & Bordelon, V. P. (1985). The USAF pilot selection and 
classification research program. Aviation. Space, and Environmental 
Medicine . 56(3) . 258-261. 

Kantor, J. E., & Ideen, D. R. (1980). The impact of stress in the air combat 
environment: Models for predicting performance. Toronto, Canada: 22nd 
Annual Conference of the Military Testing Association . 

Kern, R. P. (1966). A conceptual model of behavior under stress, with 
implications for ccmbat training (HumRRO Technical Report 66-12). 
Washington, D. C.: George Washington University Human Resources Research 
Office. AD 637312. 

Kitfield, J. (1989). Danger inside the cockpit. Military Forum . 34-35, 37- 
39, 64. 

Kubala, A. L., & Wamick, W. L. (1979). A review of selected literature on 
stresses affecting soldiers in combat . (ARI Technical Report 79-A14). 
Alexandria, VA.: US Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social 
Sciences. AD A071115. 

Labuc, S. (1981). Psychological stress and combat efficiency: A review of 
the literature . (Report 81R005). Farnborough, UK: Army Personnel Research 
Establishment. AD C951243. 


23 






Lovell, C. C., & Walker, N. K. (1972). The effect of pilot stress on 
delivery accuracy . Eglin Air Faroe Base, FL: Air Force Armament 
laboratory. AD 904518. 

Marshall, S. L. A. (1947). Men Against Fire . New York: William Morrow & 
Company. 

Marshall, S. L. A. (1952). Commentary on infantry operations and weapons 
usage in Korea Winter of 1950-51 . Chevy Chase, MD.: Operations Research 
Office (The Johns Hopkins University). AD 342. 

McGrath, J. E. (1982). Methodological problems in research on stress. In H. 
W. Krchne & L. Laux (Eds.), Achievement, Stress, and Anxiety . New York: 
Hemisphere Publishing Corp. 

Michel, R. R., & Solick, R. E. (1983). Review of literature on the effects 
of selected human performance variables on combat performance (Working Paper 
83-4). Fort Leavenworth, KS.: US Army Research Institute Fort Leavenworth 
Field unit. 

Miller, R. G., Rubin, R. T., Clark, B. R., Crawford, W. R., & Arthur, R. J. 
(1970). The stress of aircraft carrier landings. I. Corticosteroid 
responses in Naval aviators. Psychosomatic Medicine . 32f6) . 581-588. 

Mcmyer, W. W. (1979). Air Power in Three Wars . Salem, NH. W. Ayer Co. 

Nordeen, L. O. (1985). Air Warfare in the Missile Age . Washington, D.C.: 
Smithsonian Institution Press. 

North, D. M. (1986). U.S. will stress development of air launoed standoff 
weapons. Aviation Week & Space Technology . August 11, 16-18. 

North, R. A., & Griffin, G. R. (1977). Aviator selection 1919-1977 . 

(Special Report 77-2). Pensacola, FL.: Naval Aerospace Medical Research 
laboratory. AD A048105. 

O'Mar a, K. P. (1979). Past performance and mission dictate that the Corps 
use a two-seat fighter. Marine Corps Gazette . August, 62. 

Payne, W., & Cheever, H.L. (Eds.) (1987). Virtual Attrition. Chapter 6. 
Final Report of the Forward Area Air Defense Special Study Group . Fort 
Bliss, TX.: US Army Air Defense Artillery School. 

Rachman, S. J. (1978). Fear and courage . San Francisco: W. H. Freeman and 
Company. 

Rachman, S. (1982). Fear and Courage: Some military aspects. Journal of 
the Royal Army Medical Corps . 128, 100-104. 

Randal, J. C. (1987). Chadian troops pursue Libyans to border strip. 
Washington Post . April 2, A27-A28. 


24 







Reid, D. D. (1945). Fluctuations in navigator performance during operational 
sorties (FFRC Report 615). In E. J. Deamaley & P. B. Warr (Eds.) (1979), 
Aircrew Stress in Wartime Operations . New York: Academic Press. 

Peid, D. D. (1979). The historical background to wartime research in 
psychology and psychiatry in the Royal Air Force. In E. J. Deamaley & P. 

B. Warr (Eds.), Aircrew Stress in Wartime Operations . New York: Academic 
Press. 

Rowland, D. (1986). Assessments of combat degradation. Journal of the 
Roval United Services Institute for Defence Studies . 131(2) . 33-43. 

Sanders, A. F. (1983). Towards a model of stress and human performance. 

Acta Psychological . 53(1) . 61-97. 

Schecter, G., Richards, J. C., & Romberg, H. A. (1989). Tactical deterrent 
effects model. In S. A. Murtaugh. (Ed.), Mini-Svmposium Proceedings: Human 
Behavior and Performance as Essential Ingredients in Realistic Modeling of 
Combat - MORIMOC II . Volume 2. Military Operations Research Society, Inc., 
Alexandria, VA. AD A227842. 

Shaffer, L. F. (1947). Fear and courage in aerial cembat. Journal of 
Consulting Psychology . 11 . 137-143. 

Squire, P. (1983). Biggest threat: AA and small arms. Astronautics & 
Aeronautics . May, 99-100. 

Stauffer, S. A., Lumsdaine, A. A., Lumsdaine, M. H., Williams, R. M., Smith, M 
B., Janis, I. L., Star, S. A., & Cottrell, L. S. (1949). The American 
Soldier: Combat and its Aftermath . Volume II. Princeton, N. J.: 

Princeton University Press. 

Symonds, C. P., & Williams, D. J. (1943). Clinical and statistical study of 
neurosis precipitated by flying duties (FPRC Report 547). In E. J. 

Deamaley & p. B. Warr (Eds.) (1979), Aircrew stress in Wartime Operations . 
New York: Academic Press. 

Thompson, D., Robillard, R., Wylie, D., Mackie, R., Djpuy, T., Shepard, R., 
Payne, W., Cherry, W. P., & Pokomy, A. (1990). Suppression effects study . 
Volume I - Main Report; Volume II - Annexes. Technical Memorandum 10-90. 
Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD: U.S. Army Human Engineering Laboratory. AD 
B150155 (Vol. I); AD B150775 (Vol. II). 

Thompson, S. L. (1987). A new era for man and machine. Washington Post . May 
10, B3. 

Tischler, G. L. (1969). Patterns of psychiatric attrition and of behavior in 
a ccmbat zone. In P. G. Bourne (Ed.), The Psychology and Physiology of 
Stress with Reference to Special Studies of the Viet Nam War . New York: 
Academic Press. 

Tcmpkins, V. H. (1959). Stress in aviation. In Society for Psychosomatic 
Research. The Nature of Stress Disorder . Springfield, IL: Charles C. 
Themes. 


25 






US Army Field Artillery School. (1979). Fire Suppression Symposium . US Army 
Field Artillery School. Fort Sill, CK. AD A081134. 

Walker, N. K., & Burkhardt, J. F. (1966). Combat effectiveness of human 
operator control systems. Proceedings of the 17th Military Operations 
Research Symposium . Monterey, CA (May). AD 373246 

Wickens, C. D. (1980). The structure of attentional resources. In R. 
Nickerson (Ed.), Attention and Performance . Vol. VIII. Englewood Cliffs, 

N. J.: Erlbaum. 

Wickens, C. D., Sandry, D. L., & Vidulich, M. (1983). Compatibility and 
resource competition between modalities of input, central processing, and 
output. Human Factors . 25X21, 227-248. 

Widkens, C. D., & Flach, J. M. (1988). Information processing. In E. L. 
Wiener, & D. C. Nagel. Human Factors in Aviation . San Diego, CA.: 

Academic Press. 

Widkens, C. D., Barnett, B., Stokes, A., Davis, T., & Hyman, F. (1989). 
Expertise, stress, and pilot judgment. In Human Behaviour in High Stress 
Situations in Aerospace Operations . AGARD Conference Proceedings No.458. 
Advisory Group for Aerospace Research & Development, NATO. AD A212884. 

Wine, J. D. (1982). Evaluation anxiety: A cognitive attentional construct. 
In H. W. Krohne & L. Laux, Achievement. Stress, and Anxiety . New York: 
Hemisphere Publishing Corp. 

Youngling, E. W., Levine, S. H., Mocharnuk, J. B., & Weston, L. M. (1977). 
Feasibility study to predict combat effectiveness for selected military 
roles: Fighter pilot effectiveness . McDonnell-Douglas Astronautics 
Company. AD A041650. 


26 







APPENDIX A 


SUMMARY OF IHE-STRESS-AND-PERFORMANCE LTTERATORE 
Types Of Studies 

A large body of laboratory literature exists on the psychology of stress, 
generally defined. Such studies have been categorized (Harris, Mackie, & 
Wilson, 1956; see also McGrath, 1982) as those involving (1) failure stress 
(e.g., test anxiety; contrived experimental situations such as difficult 
tasks, unreasonable time limitations), (2) distraction stress (acoustic and 
visual noise stimuli), (3) fear stress (electric shock; observation of gory 
movie scenes), (4) physical discomfort stress (high-intensity noise; induced 
muscular tension; extreme temperatures, as e.g., hand or foot in cold water), 
and (5) pacing or speed stress (high rates of responding per unit of time). 

Of interest for the present application is performance in real-life 
stressful environments, that is, situations in which external stressors 
present a perceived threat of physical or psychological harm. For obvious 
ethical reasons, this topic has not been widely studied. Information is 
available from such naturalistic settings as (1) public speaking (Idzikowski & 
Baddeley, 1985), (2) examination taking (Wine, 1982), (3) sport deep sea 
diving (Baddeley & Idzikowski, 1985), (4) sport parachuting (Fenz, 1975), and 
(5) hazardous duty occupations: (a) Explosive ordnance disposal operators 
(Rachman, 1982; Cox, Hallam, O'Connor, & Rachman, 1983); (b) military deep sea 
diving and submarine duty; (c) military parachuting (Hammerton & Tickner, 
1969); (d) true combat studies and contrived combat scenarios. 

Widely cited examples of contrived military situations are studies 
conducted by Berkun and collegues (Berkun, 1964). Deceptions included: (1) 

A "ditching" experiment in which basic trainees were led to believe their 
aircraft would have to make an emergency landing. Performance measures were 
collected on the accuracy of completing an Emergency Data Form which had 
difficult-to follow instructions, and on retention of a recently read SOP for 
ditching; (2) an "artillery" situation in which basic trainees, tested 
individually, underwent a supposed military exercise in a remote area; the 
subject was led to believe both by radio transmission and by preplanted nearby 
charges that he was in danger from inaccurately fired artillery rounds. The 
performance measure was the speed with which the subject could follow 
instructions and convert his radio to an emergency-transmission mode so that 
his position could be identified for a rescue effort; and (3) a "demolitions" 
experiment in which the subject was led to believe he has inadvertently 
injured a fellcw worker because of his improper wiring of a demolition 
switchbox. The performance test was the speed and accuracy with which he 
could follow instructions to fix a malfunctioning field telephone to call for 
medical help. All experiments used control groups, and the three scenarios 
shewed significant performance decrements between the stressed and unstressed 
subjects. 

An example of a study dealing with ground combat is the FIGHTER project 
which attempted to characterize effective versus noneffective combat 
infantrymen in the Korean War (Egbert, et al., 1958). A psychological 
battery was given to 310 soldiers. It consisted of questionnaires and 
inventories, and 60 objective tests which measured personality, intelligence. 


A-l 





aptitude, motivational, interest, and background variables. Classification by 
the experimenters of a soldier into either a "fighter" or a "nonfighter" group 
was based on ratings by fellow unit soldiers. A fighter tended to be more 
intelligent, masculine, socially mature, and a doer, was preferred socially 
and in combat by his peers, had more leadership potential and a greater amount 
of military knowledge, better emotional stability, health and vitality, a more 
stable home life, and shewed greater speed and accuracy in manual and physical 
performance. 

It should be mentioned that a straightforward interpretation and 
application of most of the stress data to efficiency of behavior in real-life 
dangerous settings is difficult for the reasons listed below (these points are 
adapted from Harris et el., 1956, Labuc, 1981, & McGrath, 1982): 

• Variation in individual response to stress: In part a 
function of motivation, intellect, and trait anxiety 
(as related to efficiency of coping behaviors) 

• Situational and stress validity: Realism of the 
ethically acceptable stress situation — does each 
subject perceive the setting and intensity of stimuli 
as stressful; has the true meaning of the 
experimental question been kept from him; do the 
experimental stress conditions adequately mimic real- 
life serious threat situations, or are they too 
artifical for applicability 

• Task validity: For example, does a laboratory 
psychcmotor test "map" well to the applied situation 
of operating specific equipment under stress 

• Temporal relationship of stress and performance 
tasks: In many settings it is necessary for the 
tasks to be measured before (i.e., during the 
anticipation interval) the subjects enter or 
after they exit from the dangerous environment; 
stress level may well be lower than that during the 
operational period and measures might not relate to 
behaviors which directly interact with the stressful 
environment 

• Wide variation in duration of stressors from study to 
study 

• Variety of methodological conditions and stressor 
parameters 

• Confounding of combat data with fatigue, therefore 
making it difficult to attribute performance decrements 
to fear alone 


A-2 







• Use of subjective ratings on combat situations: Caution 
is required, because subjects may not want to state that 
they were afraid, and that indeed their performance was 
affected. Hew accurate will their statements be when 
gathered after the fact? 

Psychiatric Battle Casualties 

Another source of data on stress and performance, although non- 
experimental in nature, is from the psychiatric casualty literature. A 
severe farm of degradation of performance under stress is manifested in the 
signs and symptoms of combat psychiatric casualties. The phenomenon has been 
given many descriptors (for reviews, see Bourne, 1970; Chermol, 1983; Glass, 
1969; Ingraham & Manning, 1980; Kubala & Wamick, 1979; Labuc, 1981; Michel & 
Solick, 1983; and Tischler, 1969): 

• "Nostalgia” in the Civil War 

• "Shell shock" in WWI (termed "war neurosis" at end of War) 

• "Psychoneurotic anxiety", "exhaustion", "operational 
fatigue" during WWII 

• "Combat exhaustion", "combat fatigue" in the Korean 
War 

• "Combat reaction", "stress reaction" in the 1973 

Middle East War 

• "Neurcpsychiatric casualties", "psychiatric battle 
casualties" today 

Of the many behavioral forms that the severe stress reaction could take 
on the battlefield, some of the ones most important frem a performance point 
of view during an engagement are freezing, severe shaking, frequent lapses in 
attention, problems with concentration and judgment, excessive verbal 
preoccupation with the danger of the battlefield, or otherwise inappropriate 
responses (e.g., constantly lagging behind the unit). Reference was made to 
WWII infantrymen who may have been so overwhelmed by the sights and sounds of 
combat that they did not fire their weapons (Marshall, 1947). It is 
noteworthy that individual participation increased during the 
Korean War, supposedly a function of troop perception that firing was 
essential to survival, to better training, and to a more active mingling 
amongst the troops by leaders during engagements (Marshall, 1952). 

Not all abnormal behavior during combat need necessarily warrant the 
"label" of psychiatric battle casualty. Occasional episodes of nonproductive 
combat behavior are generally considered a natural response within the context 
of battle. However, when syirptcms persist even after withdrawal from the 
stressors, or when clearly inappropriate, non goal-directed behavior is 
frequently exhibited during combat, the label of psychiatric battle casualty 
is more apt to be appropriate. 

Incidence of combat psychiatric casualties is generally considered to be 


A-3 





an interaction of the following variables: The intensity, duration, and type 
of conflict, number of battle casualties, time in a combat setting, type of 
weather, type of unit one is in and its amount of idleness, battle 
anticipation, uncertainty concerning the nature of the battle, ability to 
retaliate, cohesion and leadership, and personality factors of the individual 
soldiers (Bourne, 1970; Gal, 1988; Kubala & Wamidk, 1979; and Michel & 
Solick, 1983). The lcwer incidence rates during the Vietnam War as compared 
to other wars has been attributed to the 12 month tour of combat duty, a good 
support system (phone calls, mail), rest and recuperation opportunities, air 
support of ground troops, and engagements which were reduced in duration, 
intensity, and lethality (Bourne, 1970; Chermol, 1983). 


A-4 





APPENDIX B 


ROLES OF OCMBAT AIRCRAFT, CREW SIZE, AND WORKLOAD IMPLICATIONS 
Missions 

In the current decade, the term "multi-mission aircraft" is becoming 
increasingly common. The foremost reason for such aircraft is the prohibitive 
cost of developing dedicated interceptor, air superiority, and ground attack 
aircraft. Another reason is that the distinction between "fighter" and 
"attack" aircraft has become blurred in today's threat-intensive combat 
scenario. A pilot may fly combat air patrol one day and close air support the 
next. This lesson was learned in Viet Nam where the F-4 Phantom distinguished 
itself as a true multi-role aircraft, delivering a variety of weapons loads 
and holding its own against the MiG-21 (a dedicated point-defense interceptor) 
in air-to-air combat. An example of a multi-mission combat aircraft of the 
current generation is the McDonnell-Douglas F-15E Strike Eagle, which is 
capable of extremely fast (above 900 mph), lew level (below 500 feet), lew- 
profile penetration missions, and can carry a variety of weapons. It is also 
highly capable in the role of air-to-air combat. 

One Versus Two Crewmen 

The trade off for an aircraft's multi-mission capability is that it may 
require a two-man crew (the aircraft mentioned above are two-seaters). There 
are a few notable exceptions, for example the single-seat F-16C and the FA-18, 
but these are not true all-weather aircraft in that they cannot bomb a target 
"blind." There are also seme salient questions about the ability of a single 
pilot to deliver weapons accurately in a threat-rich environment. The Air 
Force has taken a firm stand requiring the two-man cockpit for all-weather, 
multi-mission capability; the Navy has been somewhat equivocal on the issue, 
citing the FA-18 as an example of lew observability (the aircraft is hard to 
see) being traded off for the added capability afforded by a two-place 
aircraft. Even so, the Navy still maintains and operates the two-place, 
subsonic A-6 series which can operate under poor weather conditions and at 
night, and it has considered adding another cremember to the next generation 
of FA-18s. 

Although experts tend to agree on the advantages of a two seat 
configuration, there are only a few definitive simulator studies which cite 
empirical support for this position. A study conducted by Hughes Aircraft 
(1977) is a notable example. In this study, single and two-seat-configured 
cockpits were compared as pilots flew simulated air-to-ground strike missions. 
The central finding of this study was that as threat density increased, the 
performance difference between the one and two-man crews became greater, with 
the latter consistently demonstrating superior performance. The rationale 
explaining this difference is predicated upon the effects of multiple threats 
(such as SAMs, AAA, and aircraft) on single pilot workload. The Hughes (1977) 
report added that the presence of the additional crewman freed the pilot from 
defensive tasks, such as monitoring Rear Warning Radar (RWR) and other 
displays, to allcw him to scan visually outside of the cockpit for ground and 
air threats. In aerial combat especially, the unseen threats are the most 
dangerous (Flanagan, 1981). For example, in Vietnam, unseen MiGs accounted 
for 80 percent of US air-to-air losses (O'Mara, 1979). Marine Corps records 

B-l 






shew that roost threats were spotted fay the back-seater in the F-4 (O'Mara, 
1979). Flanagan's (1981) position that the Navy F-4's low loss rate per 
sortie was due to the ability of the back-seat pilot to handle defensive 
functions against MiGs and SAMs and the pilot to concentrate on offensive 
functions gives further support to the contention that the two-place 
configuration is optimal for the multi-mission aircraft. 

Workload Implications 

Consider the duties of a fighter-bonber pilot on a ground attack mission: 
He will have to enploy countermeasures against aircraft and SAMs, scan his 
radar for detected threats and AAA radar lock-ons, search the world outside 
the cockpit for undetected aircraft and flakbursts, and at the same time go 
through the tasks necessary to navigate, designate, and bomb the target, which 
is likely to be heavily defended. In addition, he may be transmitting and 
receiving messages regarding incoming threats. He is required to make many 
important, split-second decisions. The workload of the pilot can quickly 
become task saturated (see e.g., Kitfield, 1989; and Thompson, 1987). 

There is anecdotal evidence of pilots resolving the competition between 
concurrent tasks by actually turning seme systems off so as to minimize the 
"distraction" from other tasks which they considered more critical to the 
mission. But it is also common for a pilot to overlook seme routine but 
critical tasks because of the severe strain imposed on his information 
processing and task time-sharing abilities. Thus, even if ADA is not able to 
kill an aircraft, its use might be able to overtax the pilot's workload to the 
point where he simply cannot be vigilant to all threats and press heme his 
attack at the same time. 

Many F-15E crews will be drawn from the F-lll and F-4 communities. Since 
the F-15E is several generations removed from its predecessors, one would 
expect that the crew workload has been reduced through the use of automation 
and nulti-function displays. Such is not the case. Seme maintain (e.g., 

Bell, 1987) that the transition from earlier systems to the Strike Eagle will 
result in a much heavier workload, primarily because there is so much more to 
do in the F-15E. The principal reason for the workload increase is the 
enhanced multi-mission capability of the F-15E and the host of sensors that 
are integral to the system (Bell, 1987). Because of the complexity and 
capability of the system, the US Air Force's Human Resource Laboratory 
(Williams Air Force Base, Arizona) is currently investigating the allocation 
of responsibility between the pilot and Weapons Officer (WO). The WO's 
typical duties new involve navigation and timing of the mission as well as 
weapons release and electronic countermeasures. Some of these duties can be 
traded off between crewmen if this becomes necessary. A F-15E simulator study 
(Bell, 1987) found that if one crewman is injured or incapacitated on a 
simulated mission, the degradation in performance can be large. This result 
seems consistent with the Hughes simulator study, and presents a cogent 
argument for the advantages of a two-place cockpit in the multi-mission 
aircraft. 

A large number of studies has invesitgated the relationship between task 
loading (number of discrete tasks; difficulty of individual tasks) and 
performance (see Danes & Lintem, 1981; Wickens, Sandry, & Vidulich, 1983). 


B-2 





1 


A generalization from these studies is that when a pilot in a simulator is 
confronted with multiple tasks the effects of task loading on degree of 
performance degradation tend to be multiplicative. This degradation is 
partially due to the demands which are imposed upon the pilot’s information 
processing resources. 

the demands of multiple tasks are especially severe when the input and 
output channels are mediated by opposite hemispheres of the brain. Such is 
true in the case of visual input, motor output tasks, which comprise a large 
number of those performed by pilots. Wickens (1980) has found that the 
ability to time-share concurrent tasks declines as the degree of overlap 
between input and output channels mediating these tasks increases. Thus two 
tasks that share the same information processing resources will be in 
caipetition with one another, and hence the amount of degradation may be 
significant. For example, a pilot must center the target in his head up 
display, designate it by pressing a button cm the throttle or joystick, at the 
same time monitor his altitude and airspeed, and track incoming SAMs and AAA 
radar lock-on shewing up on his FWR display. In the foregoing example, all 
inputs were visual and all outputs called for were motor. Ihe intervening 
cognitive processes related to controlling the aircraft are predominantly 
spatial. When information processing channels become saturated, performance 
likely will decrease. Thus, even if ADA does not achieve a kill, an increased 
workload due to its presence could be enough to degrade weapons delivery 
accuracy. 


B-3 





