Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter 
Wrapper Script 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena , California 


The MRO OLVM wrapper script soft- 
ware allows Mars Reconnaissance Or- 
biter (MRO) sequence and spacecraft 
engineers to rapidly simulate a space- 
craft command product through a tool 
that simulates the onboard sequence 
management software (OLVM). This 
script parses sequence files to determine 
the appropriate time boundaries for the 
sequence, and constructs the script file 
to be executed by OLVM to span the en- 
tirety of the designated sequence. It 
then constructs script files to be exe- 
cuted by OLVM, constructs the appro- 
priate file directories, populates these 
directories with needed input files, initi- 


ates OLVM to simulate the actual com- 
mand product that will be sent to the 
spacecraft, and captures the results of 
the simulation run to an external file for 
later review. Additionally, the tool allows 
a user to manually construct the script, if 
desired, and then execute the script with 
a simple command line. 

This work was done by Roy Gladden, For- 
est Fisher, and Teerapat Khanampornpan of 
Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-45242. 



Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter on the launch pad. 


Service-Oriented Architecture for NVO and TeraGrid 
Computing 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena , California 



In this Model, the application server is Web-service container that accepts HTTP connections that may 
be SOAP messages and may have a certificate attached. 


The National Virtual Observatory 
(NVO) Extensible Secure Scalable 
Service Infrastructure (NESSSI) is a 
Web service architecture and software 
framework (see figure) that enables 
Web-based astronomical data publish- 
ing and processing on grid computers 
such as the National Science Foun- 
dation’s TeraGrid. Characteristics of 
this architecture include the follow- 
ing: 

• Services are created, managed, and 
upgraded by their developers, who 
are trusted users of computing plat- 
forms on which the services are de- 
ployed. 

• Service jobs can be initiated by 
means of Java or Python client pro- 
grams run on a command line or 
with Web portals. 

• Access is granted within a graduated 
security scheme in which the size of a 
job that can be initiated depends on 
the level of authentication of the user. 
A “small” service request may be sub- 
mitted anonymously. A “medium” re- 
quest may be submitted with a “weak” 
certificate issued by the NVO or another 
certificate authority not associated with 
an official grid computing organization 
like TeraGrid or the Department of En- 
ergy (DOE). A “large” request must be 
accompanied by a “strong” certificate is- 


sued by the TeraGrid or DOE certificate 
authority. User certificates are managed 
by the Clarens Grid-Enabled Web Serv- 
ices Framework (http://clarens. 
sourceforge.net/) . 

This work was done by Joseph Jacob, Craig 
Miller, Roy Williams, Conrad Steenberg, and 


Matthew Graham of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further information 
is contained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-45067. 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2008 


63 



