



International Journal of Trend in Scientific 
Research and Development (IJTSRD) 
International Open Access Journal 



ISSN No: 2456 - 6470 | www.ijtsrd.com | Volume - 2 | Issue - 3 


♦ 

♦ 


Department Management Application 


Vijendra Choudhary 

MCA Student, Department of Computer Science, 
Jain University, 

Bangalore, Karnataka, India 

INTRODUCTION 

Managing a department is very hard job and taking so 
much time it may be school department or university 
department. Using department management 
application any department can easily handle work 
related to department like that managing faculty data 
or student data or store student record like attendance, 
assignment, university calendar, time-table or can 
deployed final semester result. Student can using 
student panel can able to access our profde, 
attendance, assignment marks or final semester result. 
So that using department management application 
easily handle department job and in less time. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Today’s cloud computing is very popular service. 
Anyone can access cloud services using internet from 
anywhere, anytime, using a device it may be laptop, 
tablet or mobile. Department management application 
is very useful to deploy on cloud. 

Department management all the department process, 
Internal work flow procedure of a University or 
College. 

Department as well as interaction with the student and 
the instructors. 

Department management application is useful for 
department and faculty as well as students. This 
application is useful to store faculty and students 
records on cloud, students result, attendance report, 
exam report and any announcement for students as 
well as for faculty. 


Prof. Rajesh S Budihal 

Assistant Professor, Department of Computer 
Science, Jain University 
Bangalore, Karnataka, India 


College or university department can handle easily 
department work from outside. And easily handle 
students and faculty work using department 
management application. Department head can having 
all authority to access account and able to do any 
modification in faculty panel or student panel. Faculty 
can add everyday student record like that student 
attendance, activity report and other works related to 
student. Using student panel student can able to see 
any announcement his attendance report or result. So 
that department management application deploye on 
cloud department, faculty and student can do work 
any time and easily. 

2. BACK END LANGUAGE : 

In this application I used python programing language 
because python is one of the most popular language 
today, used for a wide range of fields from web 
programing, to data science, to robotics with a strong 
foundation. And general purpose high level language. 
It was mainly developed for emphasis on code 
readability, and its syntax allows programmers to 
express concepts in fewer lines of code. 

MySQL data base used in this application for stored 
data about department. MySQL the most popular open 
source. MySQL is a database management system. A 
database is a structured collection of data. 

i. Version : Python 3.4 

ii. Database : MySQL Database 


@ IJTSRD | Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com | Volume - 2 | Issue - 3 | Mar-Apr 2018 


Page: 2500 







International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


DEPLOYMENT PLATFORM: 

For deploy this application I used amazon web 
services. Amazon web services provide servers on 
rent to deploy application. Amazon web services is 
the one of the popular cloud based platform that 
provide on-demand cloud computing platforms to 
individuals, companies and governments, on a paid 
subscription basis. 

Platform: amazon web services (Ec2 instance - 
Ubuntu 16.4 servers) 

3. RELATED WORK: 

This mainly used for school department or university 
department. This project I use many operations for 
keeping department faculty records as well as 
student’s records. In this application faculty have to 
fill student’s information like students profile, 
attendance report, activity report or exam related 
information. Department head can see any 
information related to faculty or student anytime so 
using this application can save time. Department can 
send any important announcement to faculty or 
students any time. 

4. EXISTING SYSTEM AND PROBLEM 
STATEMENT 

In the existing scenario the head of the department 
should enter everything in excel sheets and registers 
papers so it’s very hard work and taking so much 
time. Then staff enters corresponding subject’s 
attendance, activity report, exam report and result of 
students entered in the excel sheets and validations are 
to be done by the user itself. So there will be a lot of 
work to be done and must be more conscious during 
the entrance of details, it requires a lot of laborious 
work. And maintain these record is very hard job and 
more risk is involved. 

5.1 PROBLEM STATEMENT : 

In earlier time, the college was using the manual 
system, which was based on the entries on the 
registers and excel sheet so that handle these records 
is very hard task and challenging there is so risk 
involved. So that using department management 
application can store these records on cloud and 
access any time and no need to do all work manually. 
On cloud departments all information is kept securely. 
This application making easy department’s work. 


iii. Handle volume of information 

iv. Complexity of data processing. 

v. Processing time constant. 

vi. Computational demand. 

vii. Instantaneous queries. 

viii. Security features. 

THERE ARE FOUR PANEL. 

I. DEPARTMENT HEAD /ADMIN PANEL: 

This panel handle by department head that can access 
information about faculty and students. Department 
head having authority to assign account to faculty and 
students. If faculty and students want to login account 
then first time have to send request to department 
head then department head assign user id or password 
to login account. In this panel department head can 
send important announcement to faculty and students. 

ADMIN LOGIN: 

Department management application service provider 
provide user id or password to department head for 
admin panel. 

Description: Authorization screen: Admin must enter 
username and password for authentication. 

Input: Username and Password. 

Processing: Validate username and password 
Output: user id and password is correct then will get 
welcome panel otherwise error: invalid credentials 
please try again 

Boundary: Username: [A-Z] [a-z] [0-9] & minimum 
of 6, maximum of 20 characters. 

Password: [A-Z] [a-z] [0-9], 

ADMIN HOME SCREEN: Admin is allowed to 
select one of the following operations: 

ANNOUNCEMENT MESSAGE: Department head 
can send important announcement to faculty portal 
and students portal. 

Faculty report: in this tab department head can able to 
see all information about faculty. This is especially 
for faculty information like faculty profile and salary 
management operation. 

STUDENT REPORT: In this tab department head 
can access students report like that students profile 
attendance report, activity report and exam marks. 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 | Issue-3 |Mar-Apr2018 


Page: 2501 



International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


EXAM REPORT: In this tab department head can 
access exam result, all classes student’s exam related 
information using students roll number or name. 


exam marks using student panel. If students having 
any query then can send any message to department 
head using students panel. 


II. FACULTY PANEL : 

Faculty can access faculty panel using user id and 
password that provide by admin or department head. 
Faculty work is fill students profile, daily base 
attendance, activity report, assignment report and 
exam marks. Faculty can send message to student 
panel related to class, assignment, marks and 
university holidays. 

III. STUDENT PANEL ; 

Student can access student panel using USN- 
NUMBER and password (password provide by 
department head or admin). Students can able to see 
his profile, his attendance report, activity report and 

FLOW CHART: 


OTHER PANEL: 

This panel can be use by guest user without login. 
Guest user can be get information of college 
infrastructure, admission process, academics, 
department, and available course and branches. And 
guest user can be get information of university 
course’s details, fees structure and university 
information. Guest student can download admission 
form from this panel. 

ix. Information of course and branch. 

x. Download the registration, admission form. 

xi. Information for requirement of faculty. 


!~r^ partmsnt 





m 






rvn tji mjhi; 


Add ii. 


Add -S. 


AttandiincB.. 

■ tud Sri-Ill +7- 




ri»rnnv« atu 



faeijilcv 


^Lu dw ri I ,. 


dwu details 


u tJllvHy 

p-**r*d 


Vacuity 




report 


/ 




ftcsult, 

Access 



purtul 


a nctftwjos £ m 

s~i c. svisa 


Department management application 


LOGIN PAGE: 

5. IMPLEMENTATION Which involves login form of user and admin by 

entering their username and password after entering 

The implementation involves the experimental results submit button it goes to their respective home page, 
of the proposed scenarios, in this report experimental 
result shown in snapshot of each module. The 
implementation of proposed methodology done with 
the user interface by creating the web pages as a user 
interface which satisfies the theoretical analytics into 
practical. 



@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 | Issue-3 |Mar-Apr2018 


Page: 2502 



































International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 

6.1 DEPARTMENT HEAD PANEL: 


6.1.1 ADMIN HOME PAGE: 

• MuMKVWScniMl > ' S4227H5 A1 'ij. • , Viwnj Wj btm > AMMyKnffyW •' k 

«■ CO loatKHtiWWi tckcm 

B-tm 6 MsBa.rci- 0 link 4i ■niSMSMCMb a fcKOMMelmo • {UlApMSp*! gw 


STUDENT PROFILE: 



After successful login by admin page redirects to the 
admin home page which involves navigation menus 
such as Manage User, User Permission. Admin home 
page is use for department head that have all 
permission of the department management 
application. In this panel department head can able to 
see information about student report, staff report, and 
exam report. Using this panel department head can 
send any announcement to student panel as well as 
staff panel and having permission to assign account to 
student and faculty. 

6.1.2 STUDENT PROFILE: 

Admin can able to see student profile, result, 
attendence, all information about student using usn 
number or name. 



• UJit tU4) > I 0 tor'VMC'MgrdWk . MOT* t*» M 


Student Profile 

Jain Umveresy 


vijendra 

USN NO : 16mca 10050 


STUDENT ATTENDENCE: 


o • o 

Edu Solution lOQOUT 


Student Profile 

Jain University 

Me 

Result j ! 

hello 



t ”*° 

| Attendance J 




total attendence : 50 


| Activity Retxxi | 

present attendence : 47 



percentage: 94.0 



6.1.3 FACULTY REPORT: In this panel admin can 
see information about staff faculty like that staff 
member profile, salary related report. 


.* *!*>■»• Gw-'it 


Edu Solution 


Faculty Profile 

Jain University 



Name: 

Faculty Id NO 1001 


locator MVt .DatU Fund Road Jayanogar 9h Beck BahntSg Bazaar Baogahrj KatrwUta MOWS Hwna 0® 46#5 Old 




* a & 

■ ® 


6.1.4 RESULT REPORT: using student usn number 
or name admin can able to see students result. 


@ IJTSRD | Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com | Volume-2 | Issue-3 |Mar-Apr2018 


Page: 2503 



















































1 * • ' % 


International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 

FACULTY PORTAL: ADDING STUDENT 
PROFILE - In this panel faculty can add new student 
profile and can update, delete existing student profile. 

* • ' % 


Exam Result 


Students result using USN Number 



PLEASE ENTER STUDENT DATAILS 


r= 

f^r 


h*lk> hello hello 


3 HOMM 

f C OtoftWS! ' •• • 

“ trn ft - 0 


| NWcrtnj n»<w & CTtGwWaOw: ■ >); fck % - O 


* 6 B q, ; 

o hiTCT trojurrn 



ED3XE33 


* “iHW. * 


6.2 FACULTY PANEL: faculty panel is use for 
department faculty. Using user id and password 
faculty can access this portal that user id or password 
provided by admin or department head. In this portal 
faculty have to add information about student like that 
student profile, result, attendance and activity report. 
Using this panel faculty can able to send any 
announcement message to student portal. 


FACULTY PORTAL: ADDING STUDENT 
ATTENDENCE - In this panel faculty can add new 
student attendence. 



■a 

«- C 0 toaMw*-' 

S b W4n»-f* 


A ► o ® % : 




WELCOME IN LOGIN PAGE 


LOGIN FOR FACULTY 


hello hello hello 


Attendence Report Submit Portal 


ENTER DETAILS 


Enter T« Attendance , w 
Enter Pre Anendence: [w 


a e i i § • r B i 


So that in faculty portal all details add to faculty 
manualy to his subject wise and class wise. 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 | Issue-3 |Mar-Apr2018 


Page: 2504 
























































































International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


6.3 STUDENT PORTAL: In this portal student have 
to login with his USN Number and password that 
provide by admin. Using this portal student can able 
to see his profile, result, attendence report and can see 
announcement from department head. 

• <nacfi<MS(mn • ■ SUT'BW I . J • flatfRIMunml - • k ^ 0 9 X 

<r a Oloc*«VftV'U»Ttorj| 4 * © ■ % 

•F *K« 6 WOrtftln. OaM*.mminr (tnwuytoiw ;* iDflOmtoSM © MowMi fa Dn. 0 tyMw-pcgnmx 



CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

The overall speedup is considerably higher than 
manual work. The department management system 
enhances the functionalities of the routine works of 
the department in a number of ways. The 
computerization helps the users a lot to minimize the 
working time with ease and handle complex process 
easily. The department staff get information in desired 
manner. And student will get information easily. Data 
retrieval is also easy and fast. This also restricts the 
users to enter invalid data and reduces the burden on 
the department. The data maintaining has been made 
quite simple such as searching of records and records 
maintenance. The error rate reduced dramatically with 
the use of department management system. 

According to feature need I will do work on this 
application. In feature I want to implement some other 
things that will make this application easy and more 
useful. 


REFERENCES 

1. Muhammad Baqer Mollah, Kazi Reazul Islam, 
“Next Generation of Computing through 
CloudComputing Technology” 2011 IJC. 

2. Igor Ruiz-Agundez, Yoseba K. Penya and Pablo 
G. Bringas, “A Flexible Accounting Model for 
Cloud Computing” 2009 IJCER. 

3. Xing Wu and Dou wanchan, “Pricing as a Service: 
Personalized Pricing Strategy in Cloud 
Computing” 2012 IEEE. 

4. Hao Lu, ,Xing Wu, Wu Zhang, “Optimal Pricing 
of Multi-model Hybrid system for PaaS Cloud 
computing” 2012 IEEE. 

5. Atsuo Yoshitaka and Tadao Ichikawa, ASurvey 
on Content-based Retrieval forMultimedia 
Databases, IEEE Transactions onKnowledge and 
Data Engineering, 11(1999)81-93.8) 

6. W,Qi, L. Gu, H. Jiang, X. Chen, and H.Zhang, 
Integrating Visual, Audio, and TextAnalysis for 
News Video, Proc. of IEEEIntemational 
Conference on ImageProcessing, 2000, pp. 10- 
13.9) 

7. D.Wactlar, T. Kanade, M. A. Smith, and S. 

M. Stevens, Intelligent Access to Digital 

Video:The Informedia Project, IEEE Computer, 
29(5) (1996) 46-52.10) 

8. H. Rein-Lien, M. Abdel-Mottaleb, A. K. Jain,Face 
Detection in Color Images, IEEETransactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machinelntelligence, 24 (5) 
(2002) 696-706 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 | Issue-3 |Mar-Apr2018 


Page: 2505 













