m Software 


(Jg) Software for Viewing Landsat 
Mosaic Images 

A Windows-based computer program 
has been written to enable novice users 
(especially educators and students) to view 
images of large areas of the Earth (e.g., the 
continental United States) generated from 
image data acquired in the Landsat obser- 
vations performed circa the year 1990. 
The large-area images are constructed as 
mosaics from the original Landsat images, 
which were acquired in several wavelength 
bands and each of which spans an area (in 
effect, one tile of a mosaic) of -5° in lati- 
tude by =6° in longitude. Whereas the 
original Landsat data are registered on a 
universal transverse Mercator (UTM) grid, 
the program converts the UTM coordi- 
nates of a mouse pointer in the image to 
latitude and longitude, which are continu- 
ously updated and displayed as the pointer 
is moved. The mosaic image currently on 
display can be exported as a Windows bit- 
map file. Other images (e.g., of state 
boundaries or interstate highways) can be 
overlaid on Landsat mosaics. The program 
interacts with the user via standard toolbar, 
keyboard, and mouse user interfaces. The 
program is supplied on a compact disk 
along with tutorial and educational infor- 
mation. 

This program was written by Zac.k Watts, 
Catharine L. Faroe, and Craig Harvey of 
PixSell, Inc., for Stennis Space Center. 

In accordance with Public Law 96-51 7, the 
contractor has elected to retain title to this in- 
vention. Inquiries concerning rights for its com- 
mercial use should be addressed to 

PixSell, Inc. 

Building 2105 

Stennis Space Center, MS 39529 

Refer to SSC-00148, volume and number 
of this NASA Tech Briefs issue, and the 
page number. 


Updated Integrated Mission 
Program 

Integrated Mission Program (IMP) is a 
computer program for simulating space- 
craft missions around the Earth, Moon, 
Mars, and/or other large bodies. IMP 
solves the differential equations of motion 
by use of a Runge-Kutta numerical-inte- 
gration algorithm. Users control missions 
through selection from a large menu of 
events and maneuvers. Mission profiles, 


time lines, propellant requirements, feasi- 
bility analyses, and perturbation analyses 
can be computed quickly and accurately. A 
prior version of IMP, written in FORTRAN 
77, was reported in “Program Simulates 
Spacecraft Missions” (MFS-28606), NASA 
Tech Briefs, Vol . 17, No. 4 (April 1993), page 
60. The present version, written in double- 
precision Lahey™ FORTRAN 90, incorpo- 
rates a number of improvements over the 
prior version. Some of the improvements 
modernize the code to take advantage of 
today’s greater central-processing-unit 
speeds. Other improvements render the 
code more modular; provide additional 
input, output, and debugging capabilities; 
and add to the variety of maneuvers, 
events, and means of propulsion that can 
be simulated. The IMP user manuals (of 
which there are now ten, each addressing 
a different aspect of the code and its use) 
have been updated accordingly. 

This program was written by Vincent A. 
Dauro, Sr., of Alpha Technology, Inc,, for Mar- 
shall Space Flight Center. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (seepage 1). 
MFS-31 695 


fs Software for Sharing and 
Management of Information 

DIAMS is a set of computer programs 
that implements a system of collaborative 
agents that serve multiple, geographically 
distr ibuted users communicating via the 
Internet. DIAMS provides a user interface 
as a Java applet that runs on each user’s 
computer and that works within the con- 
text of the user’s Internet-browser soft- 
ware. DIAMS helps all its users to manage, 
gain access to, share, and exchange infor- 
mation in databases that they maintain on 
their computers. One of the DIAMS 
agents is a personal agent that helps its 
owner find information most relevant to 
current needs. It provides software tools 
and utilities for users to manage their in- 
formation repositories with dynamic orga- 
nization and virtual views. Capabilities for 
generating flexible hierarchical displays 
are integrated with capabilities for in- 
dexed-query searching to support effective 
access to information. Automatic indexing 
methods are employed to support users’ 
queries and communication between 
agents. The catalog of a repository is kept 
in object-oriented storage to facilitate shar- 
ing of information. Collaboration between 


users is aided by matchmaker agents and 
by automated exchange of information. 
The matchmaker agents are designed to 
establish connections between users who 
have similar interests and expertise. 

This program was written by James R Chen 
of Ames Research Center and Shawn R 
Wolfe and Stephen D. Wragg of Caelum Re- 
search. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). 

ARC-14654 


Update on Integrated 
Optical Design Analyzer 

Updated information on the Inte- 
grated Optical Design Analyzer (IODA) 
computer program has become available. 
IODA was described in “Software for Mul- 
tidisciplinary Concurrent Optical Design” 
(MFS-31452), NASA Tech Briefs, Vol. 25, 
No. 10 (October 2001), page 8a. To reca- 
pitulate: IODA facilitates multidiscipli- 
nary concurrent engineering of highly 
precise optical instruments. The architec- 
ture of IODA was developed by reviewing 
design processes and software in an effort 
to automate design procedures. IODA 
significantly reduces design iteration 
cycle time and eliminates many potential 
sources of error. IODA integrates the 
modeling efforts of a team of experts in 
different disciplines (e.g., optics, struc- 
tural analysis, and heat transfer) working 
at different locations and provides seam- 
less fusion of data among thermal, struc- 
tural, and optical models used to design 
an instrument. IODA is compatible with 
data files generated by the NASTRAN™ 
structural-analysis program and the Code 
V® optical-analysis program, and can be 
used to couple analyses performed by 
these two programs. IODA supports mul- 
tiple-load-case analysis for quickly accom- 
plishing trade studies. IODA can also 
model the transient response of an in- 
strument under the influence of dynamic 
loads and disturbances. 

This progam was written by James D. Moore, 
Jr., and Ed Troy of SRS Technologies for Mar- 
shall Space Flight Center. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 
MFS-31 809 


NASA Tech Briefs, April 2003 


15 


