

N94- 25353 


A PROTOTYPE TO AUTOMATE 
THE VIDEO SUBSYSTEM ROUTING FOR 
THE VIDEO DISTRIBUTION SUBSYSTEM 
OF SPACE STATION FREEDOM 

Final Report 

NASA/ASEE Summer Faculty Fellowship Program— 1993 

Johnson Space Center 


Prepared By: 

Academic Rank: 
University & Department: 

NASA/JSC 

Directorate: 

Division: 

Branch: 

JSC Colleague: 

Date Submitted: 

Contract Number: 


Jessie M. Bethly Betz, M.S. 

Assistant Professor 

Southern University 
& A&M College 

Department of Computer Science 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70813 

Engineering 

Communications and Tracking 
Systems Engineering 
Sally D. Stokes, E.E. 

August 6, 1993 
NGT-44-00 1-800 


5-1 



ABSTRACT 


The Video Distribution Subsystem (VDS) for Space Station Freedom 
provides onboard video communications. The VDS includes three 
major functions: external video switching; internal video switching; 
and sync and control generation. 

The Video Subsystem Routing (VSR) is a part of the VDS Manager 
Computer Software Configuration Item (VSM/CSCI). The VSM/CSCI is 
the software which controls and monitors the VDS equipment. VSR 
activates, terminates, and modifies video services in response to 
Tier-1 commands to connect video sources to video destinations. 

VSR selects connection paths based on availability of resources and 
updates the video routing lookup tables. This project involves 
investigating the current methodology to automate the Video 
Subsystem Routing, and developing and testing a prototype as “proof 
of concept” for designers. 


5-2 



INTRODUCTION 


The Johnson Space Center (JSC) is responsible for providing, 
maintaining, and operating a safe, reliable, and effective National 
Space Transportation System (NSTS). Further, JSC has significant 
responsibility for achieving a permanent manned presence in space. 
This involves creating and operating the Space Station Freedom(SSF) 
and satisfying a myriad of complex requirements involved in its 
concept, design and developmental] The conceptual phase of SSF is 
complete along with the design and redesign phase, but the total 
requirements have not been produced for the Video Distribution 
Subsystem VSR software . VDS provides onboard video 
communications to SSF. The VDS includes three major functions: 

1. External video switching; 

2. internal video switching; and 

3. sync and control generation. 

The external video switching will locate four external video cameras 
to fourteen locations, controlled remotely through sync and control 
interface output. The internal video switching will provide viewing 
for one fixed camera that can be attached to seven internal fixed 
assemblies. The external camera status is read by status reader in 
the external switches, and internal camera status by internal switch 
readers. The internal sync and control generation will allow for a 
video camera command and status based on the NSTS camera 
concept. 

The VDS Subsystem Manager Computer Software Configuration Item 
(VSM/CSCI) is the software which controls and monitors the VDS 
equipment. It executes in the Standard Data Processor (SDP) and 
utilizes standard Data Management System (DMS) networking 
hardware and software. VSM/CSCI operates in conjunction with 
other customer furnished CSCIs (See Figure 1). 


5-3 




Figure 1.- SDP Overview 

NOS: Network Operating System 

OS/RTE: Operating System/ Ada Runtime Environment 

STSV: Standard Service 

SM: System Management 

DSAR: Data Storage and Retrieval 

The VSM/CSCI has three major subcapabilities operating under it: 
VDS Subsystem Routing (VSR), 

External Video ORU Management (EVM), and 

Camera Control Input Management (CCIM). (See Figure 2) 



Figure 2 - VSM/CSCI Overview 


5-4 









The Video Subsystem Routing is a part of the VDS Manager Computer 
software Configuration Item (VSM/CSCI). It is the responsibility of 
VSIl'to'acdvate^ 'terminate, and modify video semces in response to 
Tier-1 commands to connect video sources to video destinations. 
tZ-1 [s ™omprehensive term for the coordinated operational 
command^control, and management of the Space Station. Tier-1 is 

comnosed of three nisjor portions. , 

P 1. the on-board Integration Station Executive (ISE), 

2. the Crew Interface, and 

3. the Space Station Control Center . [ZJ. 

VSR has the responsibilities of calculating * e n ^^°^Xwe 
pams- u&Tbiffis"«t the latest selection; and issuing 

Tlm^^lc^abiSy'utilftes^e'fotov^igsubc^a^ties^oi^^md 

and Video Table Update (VTU). (See Figure 3). 



Figure 3.- Video Subsystem Routing (VSR) Capabilities Overview 


5-5 










rv'mmanrf Validation fCVf is the initial f^vt* for all ^e° 
commands issued by Tier-1. Each command is checked for syntactic 
and semantic correctness, then forwarded to the appropriate 
subcapability to ensure that requested video service is provided. 
Manual External Video Switch commands are handled exclusively y 

CV. 

Video Servirp Activation (VSA1 accepts Tier-1 initiated 
Activate Video Service commands from the CV and determines the 
availability of the requested resources to avoid any conflict. VSA 
notifies such conflict to Tier-1 by generating a caution and warning 
advisory message. Once the VSA verifies the resource availabfiity, it 
creates new video routing paths. If a camera is used ^ J^eo 
signal source, the VSA will initiate a sync connection between the 
camera and a VSW equipment that hosts the camera. Upon receipt of 
change of the RODB-based VSW Tnmkline tables, the 

VSA updates RODB-based Video Routing Lookup tables. 

video Tinp AddirionfVLAL supports Tier-1 initiated and CV 
validated Modify Video Service command (Modification Type: Add) 
which adds another video destination device to an on-gomg video 
service without terminating. The Modify Video Service command is 
passed by CV after validating its semantics and syntactic correctnes . 

Vi deo Tinp DPlPtion(VLD) supports Tier-1 initiated and CV 
validated Modify Video Service command (Modification T>T>e: Ddete) 
which deletes a video destination device (e.g., video momtor) from an 
on-going video service without terminating. 

Virion SPiwe Termination (VSTl. accepts Tler-1 initiated and 
CV validated Terminate Video Service command to terminate a video 
service. 

TahlP T indate (VTLD. updates the RODB-based Video 
Rou ting lookup mble^wMch nmintains the source-to-destinahon 
video routing path status, by examining the toteraai. External or 
Inter VSW Trunkline tables. VTU also updates the Inter VSW 
Trunkline table to maintain the VSW trunkline availability status 


5-6 



between any Internal and External VSW Orbital Replaceable Unit 
(ORU) pair. 

A prototype to automate the VSR was investigated ^*.^ asis °“ 

the Ada programming language and the top- o ^ 

approach to verify the requiremen s s (TCD) of JSC as found 

Communications and Tracking Sys emm™^) ^ 

VSM/CSCI complies with its requirements. I J. 

^^SSSsSSssaara — 

usable software components 

for large real-time systems as with VSR. 

Ada satisfies the 

SSK SSte TZJZre life cycle may be 

summarizedasfoUows^ beWeen software devdopersand 

users may identified as the system functions are demonstrated. 

2. Missing user services may be detected. 

3. Difficult- to-use or confusing user services y 

identified and refined. find incomplete and/ or 

4 Software development staff may tina mcump 

,»kly ,o a.moo.lT... .» fc»MW »>» °' “ 

application to management. 


5-7 



6. The prototype may serve as a specification for the 
development of a production quality system. [5] 

DISCUSSION: 

The system development life cycle "?e*odology ^appUed to the 
investigation of the prototype was divided into two phases. 

- traditional: designing hierarchy charts and pseudocode; and 

- non-traditional: utilizing the state-of-the-art method of 

software engineering (computer aided 
software engineering tool). 

In both methods, the top-down structured methodology was applied 
MdTer^chy charts were developed from the requu-em^nts 
document (FSSR). From these design tectauques the tradhmna^ 
ncMidnrode was written to be translated, after NASA reaesign, into 
Ada code for a Unix Sun Workstation. In the non-traditional metho , 
atoftJare engineering package [6] was reviewdto dwelop models 
of Ada application systems using graphic icons that may 
con^rt me model to the semantics of the Ada progr^mmg 
language utilizing the Ada Structure Graph Editor. The 
teamwork/ Ada notation is derived from the graphic n ° ta tion 
SnedforAda by Dr. R. J. A. Buhr. Buhr supports the structured 
Hocifn feature where the notation provides a one-to-oner^ppmg 
a set of graphic elements and the co^n^gf^tures o 
the Ada language. Buhr uses Ada structure graphs (ASGs) rnsteaa oi 
c*nventi3 program structure charts to model relationships that 
are specific to Ada systems. 

The analvsis of the requirements design for both methods of the 
Usorirhmhelp m modify the subcapabilities. The subcapabdines 
included such things as, repetition of functions in more than one 
Z £apabm£ as*well a^ some modules with only one or two hues of 

instructions. 

RECOMMENDATIONS: 

The redesign of SSF to Space Station Alpha (SSA) has begun : ^ d ^ 
dS software interface) has been eliminated, as well as other 


5-8 



software interfaces, thereby causing necessary modificauo 
redesign of VSR. Once SSA requirements have been released, 1 
suggested another requirements analysis and prototype be 
considered. It is imperative that there exist cameras on the Space 
Station but how many, how and where they will be located shll 
needs to be addressed. It is suggested that a softw^e^gmewmg^ 
nackaee be considered for prototyping versus using the tradi 
method of coding. This will reduce the amount of Mespenton 
tedious work versus productivity. It is alsosuggestedthat Cadre 
Technologies, Inc. be considered because of the versatility m 
software Lgineering. Cadre Technologies lnc^also 
creation of real-time system matrices m the "3 |L' 
State/Event MatrixfSEM) and Process Activation Table (PAT). TOe 
SEM maps states to the events which cause a transition from that 
Tf.-\ Thp PAT is a matrix that presents the rules, or 
combinatorial logic, by which events enable and/or .tat^flow 

diaerams(DFD) [6] These two processes can also be utilized in tne 
orotoCtag of the Video routing mappings, video routing status 
mbSd various other tasks to activate the video services. 


SUMMARY: 


Although a working prototype was not compieteck muA a^lyg and 
rpHPsion has been done to enhance the redesign efforts of the bbA 
team ®A draft of the redesign was provide with modifications to the 
necessary capabilities. The VSR is one of the most important piece o 
software^or SSF and careful consideration should be given to it 


design and functions. 


5-9 



REFERENCES: 

[1] "Johnson Space Center and the University Community: 
Teamwork for Space Exploration", 1993, page Z, 

g>. gga wsa^ . 

s? isssss ****■ «* » 

Revision A. January 8, 1993. Page 1.4. 

[3] Flight- Svst *™ Software PeniiiremPntS (FSSRJ. page 3. 2.5-5 SSP 
300606, Volume II Revision B. 

fui Pfippppr Shari and Lawrence. Software EQ8lfl££mS* ThS 

Macmillan Publishing Company. 

1991. 2nd edition, pages 191-192. 

[5] Sommerville, I., Software Engineering, 2nd edition, p.36 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. 

[6] rocmwnrk/Adfl - Ikete Cmide . Release 4.0 , 1990 Cadre 
Technologies, Inc. Providence, Rhode Island, pages - . 


5-10 


