N89- 15578 

A Knowledge-based Decision Support System 
for Payload Scheduling 

Rajesh Tyagi 
Fan T. Tseng 
Department of MIS/MSC 
University of Alabama in Huntsville 
Huntsville, AL 35899 
(205) 895-6510 


ABSTRACT 

This paper presents the development of a prototype Knowledge based Decision Support 
System, currently under development, for scheduling payloads/experiments on space station 
missions. The DSS is being built on Symbolics, a lisp machine, using KEE, a commercial 
knowledge engineering tool. 

INTRODUCTION 

The task of payload scheduling is rather complicated. It not only involves using 
algorithms to generate a schedule, it is also very dynamic in nature since the schedule 
frequently needs to be revised, often at short notices, due to unpredictable and uncontrollable 
features like equipment failure, power failure, and other emergencies involving a mission. 

The traditional approach taken in solving such problems is to develop a decision support 
system using conventional programming tools. The purpose of this research is to use artificial 
intelligence/expert system techniques, both hardware and software, to develop a knowledge- 
based decision support system for this space station scheduling problem. 

The DSS should be able to generate a payload/experiments schedule based on the needs 
and the objectives of the user. It should also be able to update/modify the schedule as those 
needs and objectives change over the course of the mission. 

THE DSS 

The knowledge-based DSS is comprised of three components as shown in Figure 1. 
These components are: a knowledge base, a models base, and a user interface. The knowledge 
base possesses information on various attributes of the experiments (like power and experiment 
run time), and the available resources (like power supply). The models base contains analytical 
and heuristic models that may be used to develop the experiment schedule. And the user 
interface provides the dialog between the user and the knowledge and models base. 

The Knowledge Base 

The knowledge base is organized in the form of frames. Each experiment is represented 
by a frame, the slots of the frame representing different attributes of the experiment. Figure 2 
shows the frame corresponding to experiment 'Crystal Growth". The experiment, which is 
sponsored by NASA, is to be run only once, the run requiring a power supply of 500 
kilowatts over 50 hours, the duration of the experiment. This data is inputted by the user 
before the schedule is generated. The starting and ending times for the experiment are 
determined by the analytical model used to generate the schedules, and are automatically placed 
in their respective slots. The resources are also similarly represented by frames in the 

PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 207 



knowledge base, one frame for each resource. Figure 3 illustrates the overall structure of the 
knowledge base. 


FIGURE 1. 


THE DSS ARCHITECTURE 



FIGURE 2 


Frame for Crystal Growth 


SLOT 

VALUE 

Agency 

NASA 

Duration 

20 hrs 

Power 

1200 kw 

Runs 

1 

Starting Time 

41 

Ending Time 

60 


208 




FIGURE 3. 


THE KNOWLEDGE BASE 


Experiment 



CFES 

Crystal Growth 
DOD Payload 


Silicon Wafer Prod. 


Resources 


Crew 

-Power 

"Time-window 


The Models Base 

The models base contains a set of analytical models that may be used to determine a 
schedule, based on the objectives and/or requirements of the user. The user may specify the 
criteria that is to be used for scheduling. These criteria include: (1) minimizing the total time 
needed to schedule a given set of experiments, and (2) leveling the power consumed given that 
a set of experiments are to be scheduled within a specified amount of time. 

As mentioned earlier, the space station scheduling problem is very complicated, given the 
set of constraints imposed by the experiments. Most of the current literature deals with 
developing heuristics to generate the schedule, since the schedules need to be generated in 
relatively short amount of time, often at short notices, which makes it impractical to use 
optimizing algorithms which often require a lot of execution time to generate a solution. 
However, this may not always be a good approach to take since time needed to generate a 
schedule is not always of the highest concern. In fact, the scheduling task may be broken 
down into two different phases: (1) constructing an initial schedule, and (2) dynamically 
modifying the schedule during the mission as needed due to equipment failures etc. The initial 
schedule, whose planning horizon is spread over a period of weeks/months, could be 
generated using optimizing algorithms since execution time is not a major concern during this 
phase. The disadvantage of longer processing times of optimizing algorithms is outweighed by 
the payoff from a far better schedule that may be generated. It is only during the second 
phase, when schedules must be modified expediently, that heuristics may be preferable to 
optimizing algorithms. Thus it is desirable to have a full spectrum of scheduling models 
ranging from highly optimizing algorithms to 'quick and dirty' heuristics. 


209 


The User Interface 

The user interface provides the dialog between the user and the DSS in the form of 
windows, menus, and graphical displays. The user controls the execution of the system by 
specifyirig the criteria to be used in determining the schedule, and using menus to update the 
knowledge base, and updating/modifying the schedule. The output of the DSS is in the form 
of updated knowledge base and/or graphical displays of the schedule generated. Figure 4 
shows an example schedule. 


FIGURE 4 

EXAMPLE SCHEDULE 



o ao <0 to to too 


CONCLUSION 

This paper has presented an overview of a knowledge -based DSS, currently under 
development, for experiment scheduling on space station missions. The DSS utilizes artificial 
intelligence/expert system techniques to build the knowledge base and the user interface. 

REFERENCES 

1. Baker, K. R., Introduction to Sequencing and Scheduling. New York: John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc. 1974. 

2. KEE User’s Manual, Intellicorp Inc. 

3. Lawler, E. L., Lenstra J. K., and Kan, A. H. G. Rinooy, "Recent Developments in 
Deterministic Sequencing ans Scheduling: A Survey," in M. A. H. Dempster et. al. 
(Eds.), Deterministic and Stochastic Scheduling, Reidel, Dordrecht, 1982, 35-72. 

4. Symbolics software. Report, Symbolics, Inc., 21 150 Califa Street, Woodland Hills, 
California, 1981. 

5 . Waterman, Donald A., A guide to Expert Systems. Reading, Massachussets: Addison 
Wesley Publishing Company. 

6. Winston, Patrick H., Artificial Intelligence. (2nd ed.), Reading, Massachussets: Addison 
Wesley Publishing Company, 1984. 


210 



