@ Master Metadata Repository and Metadata-Management System 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena , California 



An Overview of the GHRSST-PP is shown and the JPL Global Data Assembly Center (GDAC). Note NRT 
is near real time. 


A master metadata repository (MMR) 
software system manages the storage 
and searching of metadata pertaining 
to data from national and international 
satellite sources of the Global Ocean 
Data Assimilation Experiment 
(GODAE) High Resolution Sea Surface 
Temperature Pilot Project [GHRSST- 
PP]. These sources (see figure) pro- 
duce a total of hundreds of data files 
daily, each file classified as one of more 
than ten data products representing 
global sea-surface temperatures. The 
MMR is a relational database wherein 
the metadata are divided into granule- 
level records [denoted file records 
(FRs)] for individual satellite files and 
collection-level records [denoted data 
set descriptions (DSDs)] that describe 
metadata common to all the files from 
a specific data product. FRs and DSDs 
adhere to the NASA Directory Inter- 
change Format (DIF). The FRs and 
DSDs are contained in separate sub- 
databases linked by a common field. 

The MMR is configured in MySQL 
database software with custom Practical 
Extraction and Reporting Language 
(PERL) programs to validate and ingest 
the metadata records. The database con- 
tents are converted into the Federal Ge- 
ographic Data Committee (FGDC) stan- 
dard format by use of the Extensible 


Markup Language (XML) . A Web inter- 
face enables users to search for availabil- 
ity of data from all sources. 

This software was written by Edward Arm- 
strong of Caltech and Nate Reed and Wen 
Zhang of Raytheon ITSS for NASA’s Jet 


Propulsion Laboratory. Further information 
is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-44552. 


@ Collaborative Resource Allocation 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Collaborative Resource Allocation 
Networking Environment (CRANE) 
Version 0.5 is a prototype created to 
prove the newest concept of using a 
distributed environment to schedule 
Deep Space Network (DSN) antenna 
times in a collaborative fashion. This 
program is for all space-flight and ter- 
restrial science project users and DSN 
schedulers to perform scheduling ac- 
tivities and conflict resolution, both 
synchronously and asynchronously. 
Project schedulers can, for the first 
time, participate directly in scheduling 
their tracking times into the official 
DSN schedule, and negotiate directly 
with other projects in an integrated 
scheduling system. 

A master schedule covers long-range, 


mid-range, near-real-time, and real-time 
scheduling time frames all in one, rather 
than the current method of separate 
functions that are supported by different 
processes and tools. CRANE also pro- 
vides private workspaces (both dynamic 
and static), data sharing, scenario man- 
agement, user control, rapid messaging 
(based on Java Message Service), 
data/ time synchronization, workflow 
management, notification (including e- 
mails), conflict checking, and a linkage 
to a schedule generation engine. 

The data structure with correspon- 
ding database design combines object 
trees with multiple associated mortal in- 
stances and relational database to pro- 
vide unprecedented traceability and sim- 
plify the existing DSN XML schedule 


representation. These technologies are 
used to provide traceability, schedule ne- 
gotiation, conflict resolution, and load 
forecasting from real-time operations to 
long-range loading analysis up to 20 
years in the future. CRANE includes a 
database, a stored procedure layer, an 
agent-based middle tier, a Web service 
wrapper, a Windows Integrated Analysis 
Environment (LAE), a Java application, 
and a Web page interface. 

This program was written by Yeou-Fang 
Wang, Allan Wax, Raymond Lam, John 
Baldwin, and Chester Borden of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-44053. 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2007 


69 











