and complements formal testing by 
being comprehensive (all displays can 
be checked) and by revealing errors 
that are difficult to detect via test. In 
addition, the Suite can be run early in 
the development cycle to find and cor- 
rect errors in advance of testing. 

T his software suite was developed by Chris 
Land of The Boeing Company and Kathryn 
Moye of the Dynacs Co. for Johnson Space 
Center. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). M SC-23630-1 


Q MRO DKF Post-Processing 
Tool 

This software tool saves time and re- 
duces risk by automating two labor-in- 
tensive and error-prone post-processing 
steps required for every DKF [DSN 
(Deep Space Network) Keyword File] 
that MRO (Mars Reconnaissance Or- 
biter) produces, and is being extended 
to post-process the corresponding 
TSOE (Text Sequence Of Events) as 
well. The need for this post-processing 
step stems from limitations in the seq- 
gen modeling resulting in incorrect 
DKF generation that isthen cleaned up 
in post-processing. 

This work was done by Shanti Ayap of 
LMCO, and Forest Fisher, Roy Gladden, and 
Teerapat Khanampornpan of NASA's Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. 

T his software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO -45481. 


Q Rig Diagnostic Tools 

Rig Diagnostic Tools is a suite of ap- 
plications designed to allow an opera- 
tor to monitor the status and health of 
complex networked systems using a 
unique interface between Java applica- 
tions and UNIX scripts. The suite con - 
sistsof Java applications, C scripts, Vx- 
Works applications, UNIX utilities, C 
programs, and configuration files. 
The UNIX scripts retrieve data from 
the system and write them to a certain 
set of files. The Java side monitors 
these files and presents the data in 
user-friendly formats for operators to 
use in making troubleshooting deci- 
sions. This design allows for rapid pro- 
totyping and expansion of higher-level 
displays without affecting the basic 
data-gathering applications. The suite 
is designed to be extensible, with the 
ability to add new system components 


in building block fashion without af- 
fecting existing system applications. 
Thisallowsfor monitoring of complex 
systems for which unplanned shut- 
down time comes at a prohibitive cost. 

This program was written by Kerry M. 
Soileau of Johnson SpaceCenter and John I/I/. 
BaicyofTheBoeing Co. Further information 
is contained in a TSP (see page 1). M SC- 
24158-1 


Qi MRO Sequence Checking 
Tool 

The MRO Sequence Checking Tool 
program, mro_check, automates signifi- 
cant portions of the M RO (Mars Recon- 
naissance Orbiter) sequence checking 
procedure. Though MRO has similar 
checks to the ODY's (Mars Odyssey) 
Mega Check tool, the checks needed for 
M RO are unique to the M RO spacecraft. 

The MRO sequence checking tool 
automates the majority of the sequence 
validation procedure and check lists 
that are used to validate the sequences 
generated by MRO MPST (mission 
planning and sequencing team). The 
tool performs more than 50 different 
checks on the sequence. The automa- 
tion varies from summarizing data 
about the sequence needed for visual 
verification of the sequence, to per- 
forming automated checks on the se- 
quence and providing a report for each 
step. To allow for the addition of new 
checks as needed, this tool is built in a 
modular fashion. 

This work was done by Forest Fisher, Roy 
Gladden, and Teerapat Khanampornpan of 
Caltech for NASA's] et Propulsion Laboratory. 

T his software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO -45480. 


Qi Science Activity Planner for 
the ME R Mission 

The Maestro Science Activity Planner 
is a computer program that assists hu- 
man usersin planning operations of the 
Mars Explorer Rover (MER) mission 
and visualizing scientific data returned 
from the MER rovers. Relative to its 
predecessors, this program is more pow- 
erful and easier to use. This program is 
built on the Java Eclipse open-source 
platform around a Web-browser-based 
user-interface paradigm to provide an 
intuitive user interface to Mars rovers 
and landers. 


This program affords a combina- 
tion of advanced display and simula- 
tion capabilities. For example, a map 
view of terrain can be generated from 
images acquired by the High Resolu- 
tion Imaging Science Explorer instru- 
ment aboard the Mars Recon- 
naissance Orbiter spacecraft and 
overlaid with images from a naviga- 
tion camera (more precisely, a stereo- 
scopic pair of cameras) aboard a 
rover, and an interactive, annotated 
rover traverse path can be incorpo- 
rated into the overlay. It is also possi- 
ble to construct an overhead perspec- 
tive mosaic image of terrain from 
navigation -cam era images. 

This program can be adapted to simi- 
lar use on other outer-space missions 
and is potentially adaptable to numer- 
ous terrestrial applications involving 
analysis of data, operations of robots, 
and planning of such operations for ac- 
quisition of scientific data. 

T his program was written by Jeffry S. Nor- 
ris, Thomas M. Crock&t, Jason M. Fox, 
Joseph C. Joswig, M ark 1/1/. Powell, Khawaja 
S. Shams, Recaredo J. Torres, Michael N. 
Wallick, and David S. Mittman of Caltech 
for NASA's Jet Propulsion L aboratory. 

T his softwareis available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to N PO-45871. 


UAVSAR Flight-Planning 
System 

A system of software partly automates 
planning of a flight of the U ninhabited 
Aerial Vehicle Synthetic Aperture 
Radar (UAVSAR) — a polarimetric syn- 
thetic-aperture radar system aboard an 
unpiloted or minimally piloted air- 
plane. The software constructs a flight 
plan that specifies not only the in- 
tended flight path but also the setup of 
the radar system at each point along 
the path. 

A user first specifies the desired 
image swath by specifying certain geo- 
graphic and geometric features of the 
swath or the desired flight path. Using 
an input digital elevation map (DEM), 
the software predicts the image swath 
and sets such variables as a data window 
position (DWP). A raster backscatter 
classification file co-registered with the 
input DEM can be used to estimate 
radar attenuation settings. The software 
determines whether such radar con- 
straints as those pertaining to duty cy- 
cles and data rates are obeyed, and de- 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs, November 2008 


