
Software 


Data-Driven Software 
Framework for Web-Based 
ISS Telescience 

Software that enables authorized 
users to monitor and control scientific 
payloads aboard the International 
Space Station (ISS) from diverse terres- 
trial locations equipped with Internet 
connections is undergoing develop- 
ment. This software reflects a data- 
driven approach to distributed opera- 
tions. A Web-based software framework 
leverages prior developments in Java 
and Extensible Markup Language 
(XML) to create portable code and 
portable data, to which one can gain 
access via Web-browser software on al- 
most any common computer. Open- 
source software is used extensively to 
minimize cost; the framework also ac- 
commodates enterprise-class server 
software to satisfy needs for high per- 
formance and security. To accommo- 
date the diversity of ISS experiments 
and users, the framework emphasizes 
openness and extensibility. Users can 
take advantage of available viewer soft- 
ware to create their own client pro- 
grams according to their particular 
preferences, and can upload these pro- 
grams for custom processing of data, 
generation of views, and planning of 
experiments. The same software sys- 
tem, possibly augmented with a subset 
of data and additional software tools, 
could be used for public outreach by 
enabling public users to replay tele- 
science experiments, conduct their ex- 
periments with simulated payloads, and 
create their own client programs and 
other custom software. 

This program was written by Kam S. Tso of 
IA Tech, Inc. for Marshall Space Flight 
Center. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1). 

MFS-31 848 


& Software for Secondary- 
School Learning About 
Robotics 

The ROVer Ranch is an interactive 
computer program designed to help 
secondary-school students learn about 
space-program robotics and related 
basic scientific concepts by involving 
the students in simplified design and 
programming tasks that exercise skills 
in mathematics and science. The tasks 


involve building simulated robots and 
then observing how they behave. The 
program furnishes (1) programming 
tools that a student can use to assemble 
and program a simulated robot and (2) 
a virtual three-dimensional mission 
simulator for testing the robot. First, 
the ROVer Ranch presents fundamen- 
tal information about robotics, mission 
goals, and facts about the mission envi- 
ronment. On the basis of this informa- 
tion, and using the aforementioned 
tools, the student assembles a robot by 
selecting parts from such subsystems as 
propulsion, navigation, and scientific 
tools, the student builds a simulated 
robot to accomplish its mission. Once 
the robot is built, it is programmed and 
then placed in a three-dimensional 
simulated environment. Success or fail- 
ure in the simulation depends on the 
planning and design of the robot. Data 
and results of the mission are available 
in a summary log once the mission is 
concluded. 

This program was written by Robert O. Shel- 
ton of Johnson Space Center, Stephanie L. 
Smith of LinCom, and Dat Truong and Terry 
R Hodgson of Science Applications Interna- 
tional Corp. For further information, contact the 
fohnson Commercial Technology Office at (281) 
483-3809. 

MSC-23595 


Fuzzy Logic Engine 

The Fuzzy Logic Engine is a software 
package that enables users to embed 
fuzzy-logic modules into their applica- 
tion programs. Fuzzy logic is useful as a 
means of formulating human expert 
knowledge and translating it into soft- 
ware to solve problems. Fuzzy logic pro- 
vides flexibility for modeling relation- 
ships between input and output 
information and is distinguished by its 
robustness with respect to noise and vari- 
ations in system parameters. In addition, 
linguistic fuzzy sets and conditional 
statements allow systems to make deci- 
sions based on imprecise and incom- 
plete information. The user of the Fuzzy 
Logic Engine need not be an expert in 
fuzzy logic: it suffices to have a basic un- 
derstanding of how linguistic rules can 
be applied to the user's problem. The 
Fuzzy Logic Engine is divided into two 
modules: (1) a graphical-interface soft- 
ware tool for creating linguistic fuzzy sets 
and conditional statements and (2) a 


fuzzy-logic software library for embed- 
ding fuzzy processing capability into cur- 
rent application programs. The graphi- 
cal-interface tool was developed using 
the Tcl/Tk programming language. The 
fuzzy-logic software library was written in 
the C programming language. 

This program was written by Ayanna 
Howard of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propul- 
sion Laboratory. Further information is 
contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-40461. ' 


fr* Telephone-Directory Program 

eDirectory is a computer program 
that makes it possible to view entries in 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) tele- 
phone directory by use of PalmPilot™ 
(or equivalent) personal digital assis- 
tants. When one uses eDirectory, a single 
click causes the downloading of a cur- 
rent copy of the directory (which is up- 
dated nighdy) from a server. The down- 
loaded directory data can be sorted and 
searched. The program can append a 
‘JPL” category and save directory infor- 
mation in a file that can be imported 
into the Palm Desktop™ software. 

This program was written by William Vla- 
hos of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30427. ' 


Simulating a Direction- 
Finder Search for an ELT 

A computer program simulates the 
operation of direction-finding equip- 
ment engaged in a search for an emer- 
gency locator transmitter (ELT) aboard 
an aircraft that has crashed. The simu- 
lated equipment is patterned after the 
equipment used by the Civil Air Patrol to 
search for missing aircraft. The program 
is designed to be used for training in 
radio direction-finding and/or search- 
ing for missing aircraft without incur- 
ring the expense and risk of using real 
aircraft and ground search resources. 
The program places a hidden ELT on a 
map and enables the user to search for 
the location of the ELT by moving a 


NASA Tech Briefs, March 2005 


13 


