N92-16592 

CLIPS APPLICATION USER INTERFACE FOR THE PC 


Jim Jenkins, Rebecca Holbrook, Mark Shewhart, Joey Crouse, and 
Capt Stuart Yarost 

Air Force Logistics Command (AFLC) 

Acquisition Logistics Division, Joint Technology Applications Office (ALD/JTI) 
Artificial Intelligence Support Center (AISQ 
Wright Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio 45433 


Abstract. The majority of applications that utilize expert system development programs for their 
knowledge representation and inferencing capability require some form of interface with the end user. 
This interface is more than likely an interaction through the computer screen. When building an 
application the user interface can prove to be the most difficult and time consuming aspect to program. 
Commercial products currently exist which address this issue. To keep pace CLIPS will need to find a 
solution for their lack of an easy-to-use Application User Interface (AUI). This paper represents a survey 
of the DoD CLIPS* user community and provides the backbone of a possible solution. 


INTRODUCTION 

A transparent, easy to use, and more visually pleasing end-user interface for applications 
developed in CLIPS is needed. Bernard Engel of Purdue University clearly presented this point 
in the paper he gave at the First CLIPS Conference Proceedings concerning their in-house 
expert system development. Reference [1]. In addition, McDonnell Douglas’ MCAIR Artificial 
Intelligence Center is developing a similar product. Reference [2]. At MCAIR, they developed 
the CLIPS Advanced Development Enhancement (CADE) as part of the Technical Expert 
Aircraft Maintenance System (TEAMS) project. At the same time we were developing our own 
enhancements to CLIPS and researched the above contacts concerning the simililarities and 
differences. Given this activity and our own in-house requirement for a more palatable user 
interface, we established the following initial requirements for a CLIPS AUI: 

(1) The interface should consist of simple function calls from within CLIPS. 

(2) The interface should not over burden the CLIPS applications programmer with 
excessive control of the interface screens. 

(3) The interface must provide easy to use window-like Input and Output functions with 
the following minimal capabilities: 

(a) Display blocks of text. 

(b) Allow users to input single or multiple responses to multiple choice questions 

via arrow keys. 

(c) Obtain user input through the keyboard. 

(4) The text, questions, and menu options associated with an application can be read 
from a flat ASCII text file. That is, the text is neither compiled nor entered as part of the 
CLIPS knowledge base. The CLIPS applications programmer must have the ability to use 
multiple ASCH files for this purpose. 


253 


The prototype of the CLIPS AUI developed at Purdue University meets requirements 1 througl 
3 above. However, the Purdue implementation places all the text within the CLIPS knowledgi 
base. We found that separating the text from the knowledge base allows easy review/editini 
by the expert and improves memory management. The product developed by MCAIR meet 
all of the above requirements and includes some additional features such as rule-chaining ani 
a pseudo-nonmonotonic reasoning capability. Our own in-house product, INTCLIPS, als< 
meets all of the above requirements and was developed for use on current and future projects 
All these efforts address the same AUI issues and approached the problem in similar ways. T< 
avoid further duplication of effort, and to support the CLIPS community, we present this paper 

This paper provides a technical survey of the user requirements for a more effective applicatioi 
user interface to CLIPS. To begm with, a detailed description of the AUI prototype 
INTCLIPS, is presented. Second, an outline of the AUI customer feedback is given followe< 
by the technical issues concerning the implementation issues of the feedback. Finally, a survej 
is presented of the commercial products which may provide an alternative solution for building 
the end-user interface. 


AUI PROTOTYPE 

We have developed a set of AUI functions that can be embedded within the CLIPS source code. 
These functions provide the developer of an expert system application with the basics required 
for an AUI, thereby facilitating the process of rapid prototyping and development. We designed 
this set of functions to provide a friendly window-like environment for the end user. The basis 
of the AUI is the capability to retrieve data from either a standard ASCII text file or the 
keyboard and the capability to display data to the terminal. 

The function write values is used to access and display the contents of the facts list. 
The following will describe in detail the utility of each function. 

Init_clips_display 

The user defined function, init_clips_display, is used to initialize each paragraph and question 
display routine. The function call is required to initialize the pointers to the flat ASCII files 
which contain the questions and text. See Table 1 for an example. 

Usage : (init_clips_display arg_l arg_2 arg_3) 

argJL : Name of the flat ASCII file that contains the questions or text. Arg_l may not be 
omitted. 

arg_2 : Name of the file that will be created to hold the index information for the flat 
ASCH file named in arg_l. Arg_2 may not be omitted. 

arg_3 : Either "paragraph" or "question" depending upon the contents of arg_l. ARG 3 
may not be omitted. 


254 


(defrule Initialize 
(initial-fact) 

= > 

(init_clips_display "pgh.txt" "pgh.idx" "paragraph") 
(init_clips_display "ques.txt" "ques.idx" "question") 
(banner "on" "Engine Diagnostic Expert System") 
(assert (ready))) 


Table 1. Example of Rule Using Init_clips_display and Banner 
Clearscreen 

The user defined function, clear_screen, is used to clear the contents of the video screen. See 
Table 2 for an example. 

Usage : (clear_screen) 

Banner 

The user defined function, banner, is used for aesthetic purposes to add a title or banner to the 
expert system screen. See Table 1 for an example. 

Usage : (banner arg_l arg_2) 

arg_l : The argument takes on two values either "on" or "off". Arg_l may not be omitted. 

arg_2 : The title which is to be placed within the banner at the top of the screen 
(ie. "My program title"). Arg_2 may be omitted. 


Write_paragraph 

The user defined output function, write_paragraph, is used to display a paragraph of text within 
a specified paragraph block. This function uses formatted or unformatted paragraphs and 
displays a block of text associated with a key-word on the screen in a window-like format. 
See Table 2 for an example. 

Usage: (write_paragraph arg_l arg_2 ) 

arg_l : Name of the file that holds the index information for the flat ASCII file which 
contains the textual information associated with the key-word in arg_2. Arg_l may not be 
omitted. 

argJ2 : The key-word or "paragraph name" which identifies the block of text to be 
retrieved. Arg_2 may not be omitted. 


255 





(defrule print-repair "" 

(list-repairs) 

(name name) 

= > 

(clearscreen) 

(writevalues "pgh.idx" "repair_title" "repair" ?name) 
(clearscreen) 

(writejpara graph "pgh.idx" "final_statement" ?name) 
(system "els") 

(exit)) 


Table 2. Example of Rule Using Clear_screen, Write_paragraph, and Write_values 


Askmenuquestion 

The user defined input function, ask_menu_question, is used when a question is asked an< 
multiple responses are presented in a menu selection block. This function displays the questioi 
text and list of possible answers for the question associated with a key- word. The user select 
an answer using the arrow keys. Single and multiple answers are both permitted. See Tablt 
3 for an example. 

Usage: (ask menu question arg_l arg_2 arg_3 argjf) 

arg_l : Name of the file that holds the index information for the flat ASCII file whicl 
contains the textual information associated with the key-word in arg_2. Arg_l may not b< 
omitted. 

arg_2 : The key-word or "question name" which identifies the block of text to be retrieve* 
for the question. Arg_2 may not be omitted. 

arg_3 : A string that is to be associated with the selected answer(s) in the CLIPS fact list 
Arg_3 may not be omitted. 

arg_4 : Either "single" or "multiple". "Multiple" allows one or more answers to b< 
selected from the menu. If arg_4 is omitted, the default is "single". 


256 



(defrule determine-engine-state "" 

?rem < - (query phase) 

(not (working-state engine ?)) 

= > 

(retract ?rem) 

(clear_screen) 

(askjmenuquestion "ques.idx" "determine_engine_state" 

"working-state engine")) 


Table 3. Example of Rule Using Ask_menu_question 


Typed_in_question 

The user defined input function, typed_in_question, is used when there is a need for input 
from the keyboard. The function displays the text of a question associated with a key-word and 
the user enters the answer from the keyboard. Only single answers are permitted. See Table 
4 for an example. 

Usage : (typed_in_question arg_l arg_2 arg_3 argjf) 

arg_l : Name of the file that holds the index information for the flat ASCII file which 
contains the textual information associated with the key-word in arg_2. Arg_l may not be 
omitted. 

arg_2 : The key-word or "paragraph name" which identifies the block of text to be retrieved 
for the question. Arg_2 may not be omitted. 

arg_3 : A string that is to be associated with the selected answer(s) in the CLIPS fact list. 
Arg_3 may not be omitted. 

arg_4 : Either "int", "float", "string", or "word". This indicates the type of answer 
expected. Type checking is done. If the type check fails, the user is prompted to re-enter 
the response. If arg_4 is omitted, the default is "string". 


(defrule get-user-name 
(need name) 

= > 

(clear_screen) 

(typedinquestion "pgh.idx" "get-name" "name")) 


Table 4. Example of Rule Using Typed_in_question 


257 






Writevalues 

The user defined function, write_values, displays the contents of the CLIPS fact list whose firs 
entry matches a particular attribute name. Above this attribute list a text block will display th 
text associated with the key-word found in the question file. 

This function can include the values of CLIPS variables (string or float) within the body o 
a paragraph. This format option requires the inclusion of a corresponding number of additions 
arguments within the function call ,write_values, to provide the ability to create formatter 
paragraphs. See Table 2 for an example? Table 5 illustrates an ASCII file that contains ; 
format character, %s, therefore the function call to write_values would require one additions 
argument in order for this format character to be utilized. 

Usage : (write_values arg_l arg_2 arg_3 argji) 

arg_l : Name of the file that holds the index information for the flat ASCII file whicl 
contains the textual information associated with the key- word in arg_2. Arg_l may not b< 
omitted. 

argJ2 : The key-word or "paragraph name" which identifies the block of text to b< 
retrieved. Arg_2 may not be omitted. 

arg_3 : A string that represents an attribute name. Each element in the CLIPS fact list tha 
has arg_3 as its first element is displayed without that element. 

arg_4 : The variable name, ?var, which corresponds to a valid variable name defined withii 
the INTCLIPS knowledge base. Arg_4 through argji may be omitted. 

argji : The variable name, ?var, which corresponds to a valid variable name defined withir 
the INTCLIPS knowledge base. Arg_4 through argji may be omitted. 


COMMENTS 

ASCH FILE 

Delimiter between text blocks 


Identifier for text block 

repair_title 

Line #1 with format character 

The repairs for %s are listed below. 

Delimiter between text blocks 



Table 5. Sample ASCII FUe with the Format Character, %s, Included 


ASCn File Format 

Table 6 and Table 7 provide examples of the INTCLIPS ASCII text files that would be 
used for a typical application. The format of a paragraph file is different than the format ol 
a question file. Separating the two file formats was implemented in order to provide a more 
organized method of developing the knowledge base. 


258 





_ COMMFNT^ 

A^PTT PTT P 

VlylKIiKIdYi J 

Delimiter between text blocks 

/kuvii, r 1 1 - 

@ 

Identifier for text block 

system banner 

line #1 for text block 

The Engine Diagnostic Expert System 

Delimiter between text blocks 

@ 

Identifier for text block 

ask-users-name 

line HI for text block 

What is your name? 

Delimiter between text blocks 

@ 

Identifier for text block 

suggested-repairs 

line HI for text block 

The Engine Diagnostic Expert System 

line H2 for text block 

is now complete. 

Delimiter between text blocks 

@ 


TABLE 6. Sample ASCII File for Paragraph Text 


COMMENTS 

ASCII FILE 

Delimiter between question blocks 

® 

Identifier for question block 

determine engine state 

Number of responses in menu 

3 * 

Response HI 

normal 

Response H2 

unsatisfactory 

Response H3 

does-not-start 

Line HI for question text 

What is the working state of the 

Line H2 for question text 

engine? 

Delimiter for explanatory text 

H 

Line HI of explanatory text 

- Optional Explanatory Text - 

Delimiter between question blocks 

@ 

Identifier for question block 

determine rotation state 

Number of responses in menu 

2 

Response HI 

yes 

Response H2 

no 

Line HI for question text 

Does the engine rotate? 

Delimiter for explanatory text 

H 

Delimiter between question blocks 

@ 

Identifier for question block 

determine sluggishness 

Number of responses in menu 

2 

Response HI 

yes 

Response H2 

no 

Line HI for question text 

Is the engine sluggish? 

Delimiter for explanatory text 

H 

Delimiter between question blocks 

@ 


TABLE 7. Sample ASCII File for Questions 


259 







AUI CUSTOMER FEEDBACK 

The CLIPS Help Desk provided the names of DoD CLIPS’ users. Users requested a total ol 
83 copies of INTCLIPS for review. As a result of the accompanying INTCLIPS survey (see 
Attachment), we defined the following additional requirements for the CLIPS AUI. 

(a) Allow retrieval of answers from a pre-processed ASCII file. 

(b) Add the ability to size and move windows around. 

(c) Make tool portable across multiple platforms. 

(d) Adapt AUI to CLIPS version 5.0. 

(e) Make CLIPS AUI MS-windows 3.0 compatible. 

(f) Add mouse support. 

(g) Add hypertext capability. 

(h) Add on-screen form fill capability. 

(i) Allow multiple text windows per screen. 

0) Allow scrollable text. 

(k) Add graphics import capability. 

(l) Add sufficient error trapping. 


TECHNICAL ISSUES 

We developed the AUI functions using Turbo C and embedded them within CLIPS as user 
defined functions that we then recompiled and renamed as INTCLIPS. The development of an 
expert system from within CLIPS and INTCLIPS is identical except that the knowledge base 
developed from within INTCLIPS now can call upon the user defined functions. 

The AUI consists of a keyword based text retrieval system and a character based windowing 
and menu system - both of which are very basic in their underlying concepts. Certainly the 
functionality in our AUI prototype is basic. Our customer feedback indicates that the CLIPS 
user community is interested in more functionality than our AUI currently provides. Each 
suggested enhancement has direct impact on both the AUI developer as well as the CLIPS 
developer who will use the CLIPS AUI. Based upon our experience, we address the impact 
of several suggested AUI improvements below. 

Portability of AUI Code 

The only compiler specific code in the AUI involves the functions used to manipulate the 
screen. Generic screen manipulation functions could be used in the AUI code and would 
depend on designated compiler options set by the user. Such changes would have no impact 
upon the CLIPS application developer. Development of this capability would require familiarity 
with a variety of compilers and their screen manipulation or graphics functions. 


260 


Graphical Based Interface 

We can address this issue the same way the portability of AUI code is addressed above. Such 
a change would have no impact upon the CLIPS application developer. Due to the finer 
resolution of the graphics screens, the construction of screens may be more tedious. 

Mouse Support 

Basic mouse support that replicates the functions of the arrow keys is a simple process to 
implement. On the other hand, advanced mouse support that allows window resizing and 
scrolling of text would be a more complicated matter. 

CLIPS 5.0 Upgrade 

Only slight modifications would be required for this implementation since only the names of a 
few external function calls have been modified for CLIPS version 5.0. 

Ability To Move Windows 

Many CLIPS AUI users would like the ability to place the windows of text anywhere on the 
screen as opposed to the default centered window. We can accomplish this feature by adding 
arguments to the CLIPS functions to indicate the location of the window. This feature would 
provide no major complications for the AUI developer. 

Multiple Window Overlays 

This capability is similar to the ability to move the location of a window. A toggle key must 
be present for switching back and forth from one window to the next. Mouse interaction also 
could accomplish toggling from one window to the next . 

Scrollable Windows 

Experience and customer feedback indicated that scrollable windows are a basic requirement 
that any AUI should meet. Scrollable windows would add no complications for the CLIPS 
application developer, but implementing this feature would add a bit more complexity to the 
AUI code. 

Ability To Size Windows 

An additional screen control feature that some CLIPS AUI users have requested is the ability 
to size windows. While on the surface this looks comparable to adding the ability to move the 
window about the screen, there are some fundamental issues involved when choosing to 
implement this option. The underlying text retrieval system implemented in the AUI prototype 
is WYSIWYG - What You See Is What You Get. That is, the text is displayed on the screen 
as it appears in the ASCII file. The implementation sizable windows would require 
manipulation of the text in a wrap around fashion and the use of scrollable windows. The only 
advantage this would provide is the ability to display the same paragraph in various sized 
windows. 

Hypertext Capability 

One key motivation behind the development of the AUI prototype was the large number of 
expert system applications that are "information intensive. " Many applications simply ask a few 
questions and then display large amounts of information. The most basic method of displaying 


261 


information is the block of text in a window as implemented with the INTCLIPS function 
write_paragraph. Hypertext offers a more sophisticated method of information display. A very 
basic hypertext feature can be implemented using the existing AUI keyword text retrieval 
functions. In fact, the implementation would involve simple modifications to the existing 
write paragraph function. Words surrounded by special symbols could be placed in the ASCII 
text files to be used as links to other blocks of hypertext. These words would simply be 
keywords to other blocks of text in that ASCII text file. In this way, the function implementing 
write_paragraph would be recursively called each time the user selected a highlighted "hot link" 
in the displayed text. 

Form Fill Capability 

We could develop a form fill capability with the same technique of utilizing a flat ASCII file 
and special characters to identify the various input sections of the form. The development could 
become somewhat complicated due to the variability and number of parameters that it may 
require to use. 

Ability To Import Graphics 

Some applications may require the ability to display graphic images. One such application that 
is being developed by the Department of the Army’s Environmental Lab. Reference [3]. There 
project consists mainly of graphic presentations and therefore user defined graphic display 
functions were recompiled into an enhanced version of CLIPS named GCLIPS. The most direct 
way to implement this is with some of the freeware applications that can display graphic images 
saved in an appropriate file format. Since (1) there are many such freeware and commercial 
products available, (2) the implementation would involve simply a system call, and (3) CLIPS 
currently supports system calls, therefore by default this feature is available in the AUI 
prototype. 

MS-Windows Interface 

Several customers indicated a strong desire for MS-Windows compatibility. While MS- 
Windows compatibility has advantages, there are three major drawbacks to implementing such 
a feature: (1) A large amount of time and effort would be required, (2) the entire CLIPS 
application would probably have to be modified, and (3) potential users would be limited to 
MS-Windows users. 


COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS 
User Interface Management Systems 

The following is a sampling of the companies that provide user interface management systems. 
These products are tools mat can be used to develop a CLIPS AUI but involve integration 
issues and runtime costs. They offer a variety of functions for developing windows, menus, 
data entry screens, importing graphics, help functions, mouse support, scrollable windows, text 
editors, key input validation, etc. In addition, many of these products offer interactive screen 
designers and code generators. These products also support libraries of functions over a wide 
variety of platforms. References [4,5]. 

Creative Programming Consultants Inc. 

Box 112097 

Carrollton, Texas 75011 
(214)416-6447 


262 



Product: VitaminC 3.2 and 4.0 with VCscreen 3.2 

Vermont Creative Software 
Pinnacle Meadows 
Richford, VT 05476 
1-800-848-1248 

Product: Vermont Views with Designer v2.0 and GraphEx 

Solution Systems 
372 Washington Street 
Wellesley, MA 02181 
1-800-677-0001 
Product: C-Worthy 2.0 

Copia International LTD. 

Roundhill Computer Systems 
1342 Avalon Court 
Wheaton, IL 60187 
(706)682-8898 
Product: Panel Plus II 

Oakland Group Inc. 

(Subsidiary of Liant Software Corp.) 

Cambridge, Mass 

1-800-233-3733 

(617)491-7311 

Product: C-scape 3.2 with Look & Feel 3.2 
Expert System Development Environments 

The following is a sampling of some of the companies that provide expert system development 
environments that assist with the development of the AUI. 

Information Builders, Inc. 

503 Fifth Avenue 
Indialantic, Florida 32903 
1-800-444-4303 
Product: Level 5 

Neuron Data Systems 
156 University Avenue 
Palo Alto, CA 94301 
1-800-876-4900 
Product: Nexpert Object 

AI Corp, Inc. 

1700 Rockville Pike 
Suite 400 

Rockville, MD 20852 
(301)881-8100 

Product: KBMS and 1st Class 


263 



CONCLUSION 


After completing a comprehensive survey of the DoD CLIPS’ user community we have fount 
that there is a great need to enhance CLIPS with an AUI development tool. We recommenc 
the results of this survey be utilized as a basis for such a tool development, and the next version 
of CLIPS should carefully weigh the importance of implementing such a tool. The user defined 
functions that we offer to share with the CLIPS community unfortunately, provide only the 
first step in meeting the customer needs. The more important contribution is the user contacts 
and the corresponding feedback acquired. Copies of INTCLIPS and reprints of this paper are 
available to government agencies upon request. 


REFERENCES 

[1] Engel, Bernard A., et al, "CLIPS Interface Development Tools and Their Applications", 
First CLIPS Conference Proceedings, Vol II, August 1990, p. 458 - 469. 

[2] Blankenship, Keith and Reichart, Rick, McDonnell Douglas, MCAIR Artificial Intelligence 
Center, Mail Code: 1065205. 

[3] Smith, Craig, Research Biologist, Department of the Army, Environmental Laboratory, 
Waterways Experiment Station, Corps of Engineers, 3909 Halls ferry Road, Vicksburg, 
Mississippi 39180-6199. 

[4] Mirecki, Ted, "Interface Tools Smooth Transition to OS/2", PC Week Reviews, May 20, 
1991, p. 125 - 129. 

[5] Robie, Jonathan, "Three C Language Screen-Utility Packages for PCs", Byte, October 
1987, p. 223 - 229. 


264 



CLIPS Application 
User Interface 
Feedback Questionnaire 

ALD/JTI 

ATTN: Rebecca Holbrook 
Wright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433 
DSN: 785-3303 COMM: (513) 255-3303 



All CLIPS Application User Interface (AUI) testers/users: 

Please complete this feedback questionnaire to provide us with an opportunity to make CLIPS AUI a better product. We 
hope to compile the survey results in July, so please return this questionnaire to the address above by 30 JlinC 1991. 


NAME: DATE: 

ADDRESS: COMM: L_l 

DSN: 


MY JOB IS: _ Engineer Scientist _ Equipment Specialist _ Senior Mngt 

_ System Manager _ Item Manager _ Middle Mngt 

_ Maint Technician _ Logistician . Other: 

PLEASE ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS. CIRCLE ALL APPROPRIATE ANSWERS WHERE 
APPLICABLE, ADDING YOUR COMMENTS WHENEVER POSSIBLE. 

GENERAL: 

1-1. Were you able to test the CLIPS AUI software as planned? If not, please explain. 

1-2. What computer configuration did you use? 

CPU: Z-248 Desktop III Other: 

monitor: EGA VGA Other: 

mouse: Yes No 

1-3. What are your overall impressions of CLIPS AUI? 

1-4. Specifically, what did you like? 

1-5. Specifically, what did you dislike? 

1-6. Of what relative value did you find the following: 

(Range from 1 (no value) to 10 (highest value), 0 - did not use) Comments 

_ CLIPS AUI User's Manual 

_ CLIPS AUI Application Color Custimization Program (MODCFG.EXE) 

_ CLIPS AUI Source Code 


265 



CLIPS AUI SPECIFIC: 

2-1. Of what relative value did you find the following: 

[Range from 1 (no value) to 10 (higheat value), 0 - did not uee] Comments 

_ CLIPS AUI cJearscreen function 


CLIPS AUI write paragraph function 


CLIPS AUI askjnenujjuestion function 


CLIPS AUI typed in jquestion function 


CLIPS AUI write_values function 


CLIPS AUI banner function 


2-2 Do you have any recommendations for additional CLIPS AUI functions? 


2-3 What level of expertise do you have as a CLIPS programmer? 

None Novice Journeyman Expert 

2-4 If you were planning to develop an expert system in CLIPS, would you use CLIPS AUI? 

yes no unsure 

2-5 Do you intend to make run-time versions of your CLIPS applications? 

yes no unsure 


266 



