NASA/TM— 2006-214327 AIAA-2005-0722 




Motion of Air Bubbles in Water Subjected 
to Microgravity Accelerations 



Richard DeLombard 

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 

Eric M. Kelly and Kenneth Hrovat 

ZIN Technologies, Inc., Brook Park, Ohio 

Emily S. Nelson 

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 

Donald R. Pettit 

Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 



May 2006 



NASA STI Program ... in Profile 



Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the 
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The 
NASA Scientific and Technical Information (STI) 
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain 
this important role. 

The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices 
of the Agency Chief Information Officer. It collects, 
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates 
NASA's STI. The NASA STI program provides access 
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and its 
public interface, the NASA Technical Reports Server, 
thus providing one of the largest collections of 
aeronautical and space science STI in the world. 
Results are published in both non-NASA channels and 
by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which 
includes the following report types: 

• TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of 
completed research or a major significant phase 
of research that present the results of NASA 
programs and include extensive data or theoretical 
analysis. Includes compilations of significant 
scientific and technical data and information 
deemed to be of continuing reference value. 
NASA counterpart of peer-reviewed formal 
professional papers but has less stringent 
limitations on manuscript length and extent of 
graphic presentations. 

• TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific 
and technical findings that are preliminary or 
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release 
reports, working papers, and bibliographies that 
contain minimal annotation. Does not contain 
extensive analysis. 

• CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and 
technical findings by NASA-sponsored 
contractors and grantees. 



• CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected 
papers from scientific and technical 
conferences, symposia, seminars, or other 
meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA. 

• SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific, 
technical, or historical information from 
NASA programs, projects, and missions, often 
concerned with subjects having substantial 
public interest. 

• TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English- 
language translations of foreign scientific and 
technical material pertinent to NASA's mission. 

Specialized services also include creating custom 
thesauri, building customized databases, organizing 
and publishing research results. 

For more information about the NASA STI 
program, see the following: 

• Access the NASA STI program home page at 
http://www.sti. nasa.gov 

• E-mail your question via the Internet to 
help@sti. nasa.gov 

• Fax your question to the NASA STI Help Desk 
at 301-621-0134 

• Telephone the NASA STI Help Desk at 
301-621-0390 

• Write to: 

NASA STI Help Desk 

NASA Center for AeroSpace Information 

7121 Standard Drive 

Hanover, MD 21076-1320 



NASA/TM— 2006-214327 AIAA-2005-0722 




Motion of Air Bubbles in Water Subjected 
to Microgravity Accelerations 



Richard DeLombard 

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 

Eric M. Kelly and Kenneth Hrovat 

ZIN Technologies, Inc., Brook Park, Ohio 

Emily S. Nelson 

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 

Donald R. Pettit 

Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 



Prepared for the 

43rd Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit 

sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

Reno, Nevada, January 10-13, 2005 



National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 

Glenn Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 



May 2006 



Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identification 

only. Their usage does not constitute an official endorsement, 

either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and 

Space Administration. 



Level of Review. This material has been technically reviewed by technical management. 



Available from 



NASA Center for Aerospace Information 
7121 Standard Drive 
Hanover, MD 21076-1320 



National Technical Information Service 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, VA 22161 



Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov 



Motion of Air Bubbles in Water Subjected 
to Microgravity Accelerations 

Richard DeLombard 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Glenn Research Center 

Cleveland, Ohio 44135 

Eric M. Kelly and Kenneth Hrovat 
ZIN Technologies, Inc. 
Brook Park, Ohio 44142 

Emily S. Nelson 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Glenn Research Center 

Cleveland, Ohio 44135 

Donald R. Pettit 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Johnson Space Center 

Houston, Texas 77058 



The International Space Station (ISS) serves as a platform for microgravity research for 
the foreseeable future. A microgravity environment is one in which the effects of gravity are 
drastically reduced which then allows physical experiments to be conducted without the 
overpowering effects of gravity. During his six month stay on the ISS, astronaut Donald R. 
Pettit performed many informal / impromptu science experiments with available equipment. 
One such experiment focused on the motion of air bubbles in a rectangular container nearly 
filled with de-ionized water. Bubbles were introduced by shaking and then the container was 
secured in place for several hours while motion of the bubbles were recorded using time- 
lapse photography. This paper shows correlation between bubble motion and quasi-steady 
acceleration levels during one such experiment operation. The quasi-steady acceleration 
vectors were measured by the Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System. Essentially 
linear motion was observed in the condition considered here. Dr. Pettit also created other 
conditions which produced linear and circulating motion, which are the subjects of further 
study. Initial observations of this bubble motion agree with calculations from many 
microgravity physical science experiments conducted on Shuttle microgravity science 
missions. Many crystal-growth furnaces involve heavy metals and high temperatures in 
which undesired acceleration-driven convection during solidification can adversely affect the 
crystal. Presented in this paper will be results showing correlation between bubble motion 
and the quasi-steady acceleration vector. 



NASA/TM^2006-2 14327 



Nomenclature 

AADSF = Advanced Automated Directional Solidification Furnace 

CGF = Crystal Growth Furnace 

g = nominal gravitational acceleration at the Earth's surface (~ 9.8 m/s^) 

GMT = Greenwich Mean Time 

ISS = International Space Station 

MAMS = Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System 

OSS = Orbital Acceleration Research Experiment Sensor System 

Px, Py, Pz = Orthogonal position variables 

PAS = Passive Accelerometer System 

PIMS = Principal Investigator Microgravity Services 

STS = Space Transportation System 

US Lab = United States laboratory module 

USML = United States Microgravity Laboratory 

USMP = United States Microgravity Payload 

Xa, Ya, Za = ISS Analysis coordinate system 

XPOP = X-axis perpendicular to orbital plane 

I. Background & Related Work 

A. ISS quasi-steady microgravity environment 

The microgravity environment of an orbiting spacecraft such as the International Space Station (ISS) is not 
simply "zero G" as is popularly assumed. Although not ideal, the closest to "zero G" on the ISS would be 
experienced by an article floating in mid- air at the center of mass of the ISS. Any other article attached to the 
vehicle will experience vibrations (accelerations) from a variety of sources, such as pumps, fans, ISS attitude 
control, atmospheric drag, gravity gradient, and others. These disturbances are transmitted mechanically through the 
vehicle structure and acoustically through the air in the habitable modules. The spectrum of vibrations is comprised 
of a variety of frequencies from steady to 300 Hz across the range which can disturb physical science experiments. 
The magnitude of these vibrations varies with frequency ranging from 1x10'^ m/s^ at low-frequencies to 1x10'^ m/s^ 
at higher frequencies. Since the lower acceleration levels are approximately one-millionth of Earth's 1-g (~ 9.8 
m/s^), this environment is referred to as "microgravity." 

The ISS quasi-steady microgravity environment is comprised of those accelerations at or below a frequency of 
0.01 Hz or with a period greater than 100 seconds. These accelerations are caused primarily by atmospheric drag, 
gravity gradient forces, vehicle motions, and venting.^' ^' ^' ^ The magnitudes of accelerations in this low- frequency 
regime generally do not exceed 2x10'^ m/s^ under normal operations during which physical science experiments are 
conducted.^ These quasi-steady accelerations are, in general, unique for different locations on a vehicle since the 
quasi-steady acceleration levels depend on the direction and distance from the vehicle's center of mass. 

B. ISS attitude and orientation affect on the acceleration environment 

The quasi-steady acceleration experienced at a particular location on an orbital vehicle is dependent on many 
factors including atmospheric drag (and its myriad of subordinate factors, such as atmospheric density and vehicle 
altitude), the vehicle attitude relative to its flight path, and the distance of that location from the center of mass of the 
vehicle. For a treatment of this topic relative to quasi-steady (and other) accelerations, see reference 4. 

The ISS flight attitude is defined according to the attitude control reference system. While the subject bubble 
motion experiments were conducted, the ISS vehicle was oriented with its X axis perpendicular to the orbital plane 
(XPOP) with the Z-axis aligned at orbital noon.^ This attitude develops a nearly sinusoidal time- varying acceleration 
signature in the quasi-steady frequency regime illustrated in Figure 1 . These time-varying accelerations arise from 
the vehicle's rotation and the variable atmospheric drag through the day/night cycle of the orbit. The rotation of the 
vehicle relative to its orbital path causes centripetal acceleration and varies the gravity gradient acceleration levels. 
The sinusoidal signals of the Y-axis and Z-axis accelerations are approximately 90 degrees apart which, with the 
relatively constant X-axis acceleration, creates a spiral pattern of three-dimensional acceleration. Plotting the 
measured acceleration levels as three two-dimensional histograms. Figure 2, illustrates the circular nature of the 
acceleration.^ 



NASA/TM^2006-2 14327 



C. Related past investigations 

Companion projects for measuring the microgravity environment and analyzing the resultant data have been 
operating in the NASA physical science program for over fifteen years. The Space Acceleration Measurement 
System, the Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS), and the Principal Investigator Microgravity 
Services (PIMS) and their antecedent projects have been providing principal investigators with information about 
the microgravity environment before, during, and after the principal investigators' experiment operations. 

The direction of the quasi-steady acceleration and its dependence on vehicle attitude have been utilized for 
materials science experiments on several Space Transportation System (STS) missions. Several of the samples 
processed in the Crystal Growth Furnace (CGF) for investigations on the first United States Microgravity 
Laboratory (USML-1) on the STS-50 mission in 1992 required the Orbiter to maintain a specific attitude to 
maximize the alignment of the quasi-steady acceleration vector with the cylindrical-sample orientation.^ The 
mission planning incorporated three time intervals with the Orbiter in specific orientations while the samples were 
processed in the CGF to minimize disturbances by the quasi-steady acceleration levels. 

On the STS-50 mission, a Passive Accelerometer System (PAS) measured the quasi-steady acceleration levels on 
the Orbiter.^ The PAS hardware consisted of a cylinder filled with water and a single steel ball. Using initial trials, 
the crew members were able to align the cylinder with the average quasi-steady acceleration so the steel ball would 
traverse the cylinder. Measurement of the steel ball's position over time gave a measure of the g-level at that 
location and Orbital attitude. Unfortunately, the acceleration vector does not have a constant direction for long and 
the steel ball was observed to 'run into the wall.' This adversely affected the ball's speed along the cylinder and 
therefore the measurement of the acceleration magnitude. 

The acceleration direction dependence on Orbiter attitude was also utilized in 1996 during the STS-75 mission 
with a materials science investigation within the third United States Microgravity Payload (USMP-3). The 
investigation Compound Semiconductor Growth in a Low-g Environment was conducted in the Advanced 
Automated Directional Solidification Furnace (AADSF), a multi-zone directional solidification furnace.^ The 
investigation's purpose was to "determine how gravity- driven convection affects the composition of alloys where 
convection is driven by both thermal and compositional gradients." This investigation included three experiment 
samples in order to grow three separate crystals under differing microgravity acceleration environment conditions. 
One sample would be processed with the quasi-steady acceleration vector aligned with the direction of growth along 
the length of the sample, one sample would be processed with the quasi-steady acceleration vector aligned opposite 
to the direction of growth, and one would be processed with the quasi-steady acceleration vector aligned 
perpendicular to the direction of growth. Extensive modeling calculations^ were done before and after the mission to 
ensure the Orbiter attitude was properly defined to result in the desired acceleration vector direction. 

Since these investigators were primarily interested in the direction of the quasi-steady acceleration vector as 
opposed to the specific magnitude, a novel acceleration direction indicator was proposed. ^^ This indicator utilizes a 
bubble or particle (or both) suspended in a liquid to visually indicate the direction of the quasi-steady acceleration 
vector. This device was envisioned to provide a simple, low-cost, and direct measurement of the acceleration vector 
direction in support of users. 

II. Experiment Setup 

Astronaut Dr. Donald Pettit began a series of informal activities he called Saturday Morning Science while he 
was on-board the ISS as the ISS Science Officer from November 23, 2002 to May 3, 2003. In the Saturday Morning 
Science activities ^\ Dr. Pettit used equipment and supplies available on-board the ISS such as food, wire, water, 
shampoo, locking plastic bags, soldering irons, bolts, compact disk players, and cameras. 

Dr. Pettit had studied particle motion^ in microgravity and conferred with Dr. J. Iwan Alexander several times 
about the PAS which has flown twice on microgravity Shuttle missions. In preparation for his work on ISS during 
Increment 6, Dr. Pettit brought several plastic culture flasks in his personal kit specifically to do experiments 
without knowing how he might use them. It was fortuitous that he included a 250 ml polycarbonate culture flask 
with plane-parallel walls of optical quality. On orbit, all these ideas came together and the bubble motion experiment 
using time lapsed video was possible. 

The 250 ml flask was 120 mm long x 70 mm wide x 29.5 mm thick. The flask was filled with 200 ml of ISS 
drinking water and 0.1 ml of shampoo^^ from the crew supplies. The shampoo was added to help keep the bubbles 
from coalescing. The flask was manually agitated to produce a variety of bubbles inside. The flask was then 
mounted on an adjustable camera arm in front of a dark blue cloth (crew tee shirt) to enhance visibility by the video 



No-Rinse shampoo, N/R Laboratories, Centerville, Ohio 



NASA/TM^2006-2 14327 



camera in the normal lighting of the United States laboratory (US Lab) module. The digital video camera was 
adjusted for slow motion photography to acquire one-half second (fifteen frames) of video every thirty seconds. This 
apparatus was then left in place for several hours to enable the bubble motion to be observed over one or two orbits 
of the ISS. 

Dr. Pettit performed these operations over several days in the rack locations and ISS orbital attitudes listed in 
Table 1 . Acceleration data was collected for nearly all of these intervals of experimentation. Unfortunately, the data 
for the ISS vehicle motions is not acquired continuously and therefore the coverage is 'spotty' for these time 
intervals. The best conditions of interesting bubble motion, continuous MAMS data, and adequate vehicle data was 
for the experiment done on December 19, 2002 from Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) 00:32 to 03:32. GMT is the 
standard time used by the ISS Program for mission events. 

III. Analysis Methods 

Motion of the bubbles in the digital video frames were digitized with Spotlight, a NASA Glenn-developed, 
image-analysis software tool^^. The position data in pixels were then related to ISS mission time according to the 
time recorded on the digital video tape. The bubble position in pixels for the experiment was converted to 
millimeters using on-orbit calibration video as explained above. 

The quasi-steady acceleration data were obtained from the MAMS - Orbital Acceleration Research Experiment 
Sensor System (MAMS-OSS). These low-frequency acceleration data are most often used for long spans of time, 
namely days or weeks. Vehicle motions (rotations and/or translations) introduce low-frequency accelerations which 
are dependent on the distance and direction from the vehicle center of mass and the nature of the vehicle motion. In 
the present case, the MAMS instrument was approximately two meters from the bubble motion experiment sites. 
The MAMS-OSS data was transformed from the MAMS location to the experiment sites using standard PIMS 
processes (see Appendix E.2.2 of Reference 3 for more details). The processed MAMS data is oriented according to 
the ISS Analysis coordinate system. 

IV. Bubble motion and acceleration levels on GMT day 353, 2002 

Figure 3 illustrates the bottle orientation for this experiment in relation to the right-handed ISS Analysis 
coordinate system (Xa, Ya, Za). The position of three bubbles labeled A, B, and C were tracked through video 
frames spanning three hours with the resultant bubble motion tracks shown in Figure 4. The X and Z components of 
this motion compared with the corresponding MAMS-OSS quasi-steady accelerations are shown in Figure 5. The Z 
axis position decreases when the Z axis acceleration is greatest (e.g. t = 0.4 hr) and that motion essentially stops 
when the acceleration approaches zero (e.g. t = 0.7 hr). 

The X axis motion is primarily a steady movement driven by the nearly constant X axis acceleration component 
and limited by the terminal velocity of the bubble in water. The estimated terminal velocity of air bubble A, of 
diameter 2.4 mm +/-0.2 mm, is roughly 13 mm/hr. This compares well with the measured velocity of 11.2 mm/hr 
for the first 2.5 hours of Figure 5. The theoretical terminal velocity includes a correction term for small Reynolds 
number, but does not reflect the effect of bulk fluid flow in the system, nor the interaction of the bubble with 
boundaries and other bubbles. 

Motion in the Y axis direction is difficult to interpret from these video segments, since this motion would need to 
be measured by the change in apparent size of the bubble as it moved closer to and farther from the camera. These 
small bubbles measure about 10 pixels in diameter which makes accurate measurements of the changing bubble size 
essentially impossible. Bubble C (Figure 3) was chosen for observation because of its actions when it moves 
adjacent to the large bubble in the corner. At t = 2.1 hr, the Y axis acceleration forces the small bubble away from 
the camera but motion in that direction is blocked by the large bubble. The resultant motion of the small bubble is 
then along the periphery of the large bubble and is seen here as motion in the -X and -Z directions. When the Y axis 
acceleration reverses at t = 2.4 hr, this motion of the small bubble along the periphery of the large bubble is reversed 
and the small bubble goes in the +X direction again. 

Figure 5 shows the X-Z plane acceleration levels superimposed on the motion of the bubbles. This illustrates the 
correlation between the acceleration and the bubble motion except for bubble C when the Y axis acceleration 
influences its motion near the large bubble (as explained above). 

V. Further study 

Dr. Pettit acquired interesting video of bubble motions in microgravity, not all of which has been analyzed to 
date. Attempts will be made to further correlate other video sequences with acceleration and vehicle data in the 
future. Difficulties exist in the aforementioned lack of vehicle orientation data and occasional missing MAMS-OSS 



NASA/TM^2006-2 14327 



data. Of particular interest is one video segment showing a circular motion of bubbles which, apparently, is due to 
the spiral motion of the acceleration vector during XPOP. Another interesting sequence shows bubbles moving 
vertically (transverse to the direction reported here). 

VI. Summary 

Scientists have long expressed concerns for the influence the low-level, low-frequency quasi-steady acceleration 
may have on experiments which contain a density difference. This informal experiment video has shown the direct 
correlation between air bubble motion in a container of water when influenced by acceleration levels of less than 
one-millionth of 1-g. This illustrates the effects which occur in high temperature materials experiments (for 
example) where these low-level, low-frequency accelerations cause motion due to the fluid density differences. 



References 

1. Hakimzadeh, R., McPherson, K. M., Matisak, B. P., and Wagar, W. O., "Effects of Experiment Location and 
Orbiter Attitude on the Residual Acceleration On-Board STS-73 (USML-2), June 1997," NASA TM-107483, 
Prepared for the Materials Research in Low Gravity Conference sponsored by the Society of Photo-Optical 
Instrumentation Engineers, San Diego, California, July 27-August 1, 1997. 

2. Alexander, J, I, D. and Lundquist, C. A., "Residual Motions Caused by Micro-Gravitational Accelerations," 
Jour. Astro. ScL, Vol (35), no. 2, pp 193-211, 1987 

3. Jules, K., Hrovat, K., Kelly, E., McPherson, K., and Reckart, T., "International Space Station Increment-4/5 
Microgravity Environment Summary Report, December 2001 to December 2002," NASA/TM-2003-2 12460, 
July 2003. 

4. Hamacher, H., Spacecraft Low-Frequency Residual Acceleration. Spac. Rock, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 324-327, 
1995. 

5. DeLombard, R.; McPherson, K., Moskowitz, M., and Hrovat, K., "Comparison Tools for Assessing the 
Microgravity Environment of Missions, Carriers and Conditions," NASA TM- 107446, 1997. 

6. Wiedemeier, H., "Vapor Transport Crystal Growth of Mercury-Cadmium-Telluride in Microgravity," 
Proceedings of the Joint Launch + One Year Science Review of USML-1 and USMP-1 with the Microgravity 
Measurement Group, Ramachandran, N., Frazier, D.O., Lehoczky, S.L., and Baugher, C.R., eds., NASA 
Conference Publication 3272, pp. 263-270, 1994. 

7. Matisak, B. P., Rogers, M. J. B., and Alexander, J. I. D.. "Analysis of the Passive Accelerometer System 
Measurements during USML-1," 32nd Aerospace Sciences Meeting, January 10- 13, Reno NV, AAIA 94-0434, 
1994. 

8. Fripp, A. L., Debnam, W. J., Woodell, G. A., Rosch, W. R., Narayanan, R., "The effect of microgravity 
direction on the growth of PbSnTe," 35th Aerospace Sci. Meeting, AIAA 97-0676, 1997. 

9. Kassemi, M., Kaforey, M., and Matthiesen, D., "Effect of Void Generated Thermocapillary Convection on 
Dopant Segregation in Microgravity Solidification Experiments," J. of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer, 
Vol.15, No.l, January 2001. 

10. DeLombard, R., Nelson, E. S. and Jules, K., "Quasi-Steady Acceleration Direction Indicator in Three 
Dimensions," NASA/TM— 2000-20993 1 / AIAA-2000-0570, 38th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, 
Reno, Nevada, January 10-13, 2000. 

1 1 . Don Pettit Space Chronicles web page URL: http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp6/spacechronicles.html, 
last accessed November 17 2004. 

12. Spotlight Image Analysis and Object Tracking software, Robert Klimek and Dr. Ted Wright, NASA Glenn 
Research Center: http://microgravity.grc.nasa.gov/spotlight/, last accessed October 2004. 

13. NASA Johnson Space Center, Space Station Interior and Exterior Operational Location Coding System, 
International Space Station Program document SSP 30575, Rev. C, September 1997. 



Table 1. Rack location and ISS attitude during bubble motion experiments in the US Laboratory mod ule 



Date 


Location ^^ 


ISS Attitude 


December 18, 2002 


Rack P4 High 


XPOP +ZNN TEA 


December 19, 2002 


Rack P4 High 


XPOP +ZNN TEA 


December 20, 2002 


Rack P2 Low 


XPOP +ZNN TEA 


December 21, 2002 


Rack P2 Low 


XPOP +ZNN TEA 


December 22, 2002 


Rack P2 Low 


XPOP +ZNN TEA 



NASA/TM^2006-2 14327 



o 



0.0 



0.5 



Acceleration Levels 
GMT 2002/ 353/ 00:32:51 



MAMS-OSS data 

Dec. 19, 2002/00:32-03:32 



o\^ 


-_ .^3?^"v-v_ «^-^ -~ 


"^■^.^ - 


-'^ ""4_J ■1^''^ » --.^ 




^GT 
















^^ ^H ^^ 




j/^V V^^W y^ r/^X^ 


5* 4 


V V ^^^^ ^' A Z 5 


\ / 


A / 1 A \ / \ ^ / 


K / 


/^^ ^ r \\ f f^^ / / 


\U\ T 


" f "^x/ /^ \, \ r 7 \// / 


A^ v'^ 


-J V A tX? ^ \ ^ 


\K 


/ vv VV^ / %/ 




''^Lz ^ y 


v/ 





















1.0 



1.5 
Time (hours) 



2.0 



2.5 



3.0 



Figure 1. Acceleration levels at bubble experiment site on ISS from GMT time 00:32 to 03:32 (hr:min) 
on December 19, 2002 



btmf at LABio2,ERi, Lockers 3,4:[i35.28 -10.68 132.12] Start GMT 1 9-December-2002, 353/00:33:00.687 
rsZ;"!.^ Attitude B 




X-Axis Accel. (|ig) 



N -1 



-1 



1 



Y-Axis Accel, (^g) 
Centrold: 
Xct= +1.781 (lag) 
Yet = -0.033 (ng) 
Zct = -0.368 (iig) 
Magnitude = +1.819 (|a.g) 

Percentage of Data Visible: 
XY-Plane: 100.00% 
XZ-Plane: 100.00% 
YZ-Plane: 100.00% 



B, Flight: 11 A 
SSAnalysis[ 0.0 0.0 0.0] 
Resolution = 0.04 ng 






Figure 2. The acceleration levels plotted in a three-dimensional histogram (Ref. 5). 



NASA/TM^2006-2 14327 




Figure 3. Axis orientation and initial bubble locations 



Bubble Motion by Microgravity Acceleration 

Bubble motion 

Dec. 19. 2002 / 00:32:51 - 03:35:51 Position (mm) 

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 



20 
30 
40 
50 

-§ 60 

I ^° 

"35 

I 80 

90 

100 

110 

120 







/ 
















^ 
























'""-. 




/ 












/ 






•^ \ 












/r 


+Y 




BubbI 


eA . 


^^* 


t^03:: 


15:51 




/ 












U 


f 






ta^^ ' 


*'\^ 


.. 




'-' 












\ 




t 


= 00:3r 


i:oi 






/ 


1?J 


*^V 












\ 








iubble B 


Bi 


bbleC 




■^ 


/ 












\ 








-/- 






N 


'^ — 


■>y 







































































Figure 4. Bubble motion over a three hour period and relative to interior bottle walls and large, 
stationary bubbles. 



NASA/TM^2006-2 14327 



Bubble Position & Acceleration Levels 



90 1 




















GMT 2002/ 353/ 00:32:51 










Dec 


.19 


MAMS-OJ 
, 2002 / 00:32 


3S data 
- 03:32 
































III 
























Bubble A 1 










































^ 








or. 




















































^ 




^ 












































,>A 


^ 


^ 


^ 




































n 










__^ 




-^ 


•r^ 


































A 




■ 




f*i 






^ 










































60 i 








3^ 














































•i^ 






^ 






^r^ 






Pv 










50 


■^ 




























1 


\ 





































_ 


Av 














> 






































"^ 




Ax 








■\ 








^ 




^-«x 


S^ 








^ 






X^ 


-v^ Ay 


^ 


h- 


-^ 








^ 






^ 




< 






y 


^ 




^ 


^ 


^ 




X 


A^ ' 


Ny^ 




^ 


^^.;^^ 


<: 


s/^ 


y 






1 1 -T 


1 


1 1 


1 




A2 











1.5 

Time (hours) 



Figure 5. Correlation between bubble position (Px and Py) within the bottle and the three components 
(Ax, Ay, and Az) of the MAMS-OSS acceleration vector. Changes in the vertical bubble 
position (Pz) are correlated to the Z-axis acceleration (Az). The nearly constant slope of Px is 
correlated to the nearly constant Ax. 



NASA/TM^2006-2 14327 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 



Form Approved 
OMBNo. 0704-0188 



Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503. 



1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave ib/an/c) 



2. REPORT DATE 

May 2006 



3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Technical Memorandum 



4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 



Motion of Air Bubbles in Water Subjected to Microgravity Accelerations 



6. AUTHOR(S) 

Richard DeLombard, Eric M. Kelly, Kenneth Hrovat, Emily S. Nelson, and 
Donald R. Pettit 



5. FUNDING NUMBERS 



WBS 825080.01.02 



7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191 



8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 



E-14985-1 



9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, DC 20546-0001 



10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

NASATM-2006-214327 
AIAA-2005-0722 



11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Prepared for the 43rd Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics, Reno, Nevada, January 10-13, 2005. Richard DeLombard and Emily S. Nelson, NASA Glenn Research 
Center; Eric M. Kelly and Kenneth Hrovat, ZIN Technologies, Inc., Brook Park, Ohio, and Donald R. Pettit, Johnson 
Space Center, Houston, Texas. Responsible person, Richard DeLombard, organization code PTH, 216-433-5285. 



12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Unclassified - Unlimited 
Subject Category: 29 

Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov 

This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 301-621-0390. 



12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 



13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

The International Space Station (ISS) serves as a platform for microgravity research for the foreseeable future. A 
microgravity environment is one in which the effects of gravity are drastically reduced which then allows physical experi- 
ments to be conducted without the over powering effects of gravity. During his 6-month stay on the ISS, astronaut Donald 
R. Pettit performed many informal/impromptu science experiments with available equipment. One such experiment 
focused on the motion of air bubbles in a rectangular container nearly filled with de-ionized water. Bubbles were intro- 
duced by shaking and then the container was secured in place for several hours while motion of the bubbles was recorded 
using time-lapse photography. This paper shows correlation between bubble motion and quasi-steady acceleration levels 
during one such experiment operation. The quasi-steady acceleration vectors were measured by the Microgravity Accelera- 
tion Measurement System (MAMS). Essentially linear motion was observed in the condition considered here. Dr. Pettit 
also created other conditions which produced linear and circulating motion, which are the subjects of further study. Initial 
observations of this bubble motion agree with calculations from many microgravity physical science experiments con- 
ducted on shuttle microgravity science missions. Many crystal-growth furnaces involve heavy metals and high tempera- 
tures in which undesired acceleration-driven convection during solidification can adversely affect the crystal. Presented in 
this paper will be results showing correlation between bubble motion and the quasi-steady acceleration vector. 



14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Microgravity; Fluid mechanics; Bubbles 



15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

14 



16. PRICE CODE 



17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 



18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 



19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 



20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 



NSN 7540-01 -280-5500 



Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 
298-102 



