NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 


AD-A241 037 



Monterey, California 



THESIS 

A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF U.S. ARMY AIR DEFENSE 
ARTILLERY STRATEGIES USING THE JOINT THEATER 
LEVEL SIMULATION MODEL 

by 

David M. Savage 
September, 1990 

Thesis Advisor: Samuel H. Parry 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


91-12229 







Unclassified _ 

security classification of this page 


REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


la Report Security Classification Unclassified 

lb Restrictive Markings 

2a Security Classification Authority 

3 Distribution,'Availability of Repou 

Approved for public release; distiibution is unlimited. 

2b Declassification Downgrading Schedule 

4 Performing Organization Report Humberts) 

S Monitoring Organization Rcpoil Humberts) 

6a Name of Perfonning Oiganization 

Naval Postgraduate School 

6b Office Symbol 
(if applicable) OR 

7a Name of Monitoring Organization 

Naval Postgraduate School 

6c Address (city, state, and ZIP code) 

Monterey, CA 93043-5000 

7b Address feiy. stale, and ZIP code) 

Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

Sa Name of Funding Sponsomig Oigamzaiion 

8b Office Symbol 
(if applicable ) 

9 Procuiemcnt Instrument Identification Numbci 

Sc Addiess (city, state, and ZIP code) 

10 Souiec of 1-'uniting Numbers 

Program Rlcmcnt No | Project No | tack No | Uoik Unit Accession No 


II title (include sr..-mit ) classification) A COMPARA ITVU ANALYSIS OF U. S. ARMY AIR DU LNSL AR I 1LLLRY 
STRATEGIES USING HIE JOINT THEATER LEVEL SIMULATION MODEL 


12 Personal Auibnr(s) David M. SavatiC 


13a '1 ype of Report 

Ub I line Covered 

l<! Oalc-of Report (year, month, day) 

15 Page Count 

Master's Thesis 

Prom To 

September 1990 

67 


16 Supplementary Nuuttun 1 lie views exptessed in litis thesis arc Utose of tlic author and do not reflect the ollicial policy or po- 
sition of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. _ 


17 Cosati Codes 

IS Subject I erms (continue on tetetsc if necessary and identify by block number) 

Field 

Giotip 

Subgroup 

.1 i LS, ADA strategy, point defense, bell defense 


19 Abstract (continue on rnrr.sr if accessory and identify by block number) 

This thesis seeks to delta mine if US At my Ait Defense Atlilicrv (ADA) units positioned in a belt defense petfotm bcttci 
than tiic point defense that the US Ann> cuncntly uses. It docs this Ihtough a compaiison of thiec ADA defense stiatcgics. 


1, Forward Concentration (belt defense) 

2, Balanced Concentration (point defense) 

3, Rear Area Concentration (point defense) 

The Joint Thcatu Let cl Simulation, a computer combat simulation model, is used as a tool fot analy sis to compate the three 
stiatcgics in a Fulda Gap scenatio against a vaiicty of Soviet attack options, kite JTLS model is used because of its ability 
to simulate huge fotecs and also to dcmonstiatc the value of .111.5 as an analytical tool, in addition to a linining and evalu¬ 
ation tool. Using the following measutes of effectiveness. Soviet aitplancs shot down by US ADA, peiccntagc of successful 
Soviet bombing missions, and number of US giound-taigcls dcstioycd, the forward conccntiation defense ptoves to have a 
significant advantage over the other two stiatcgics, rcgatdlcss of the weighting of the measutes of effectiveness. 


20 DiUiibution/Availability ol Absliact 

(3 unclassified‘unlimited G same as report G DPIC users 

21 Absliact Security Classification 

Unclassified 

22a Name of Responsible Individual 

Samuel II. Patrv 

22b Iclcphone (include Atca code) 

(408) 646-2779 

22e Office Symbol 

OR/I’v 


DO FORM 1473,8*1 WAR 8.1 APR edition may be used until exhausted sccumv classification or this page 

All other editions aie obsolete _ 


Unclassified 




































Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

A Comparative Analysis of U. S. Army Air Defense Artillery 
Strategies Using the Joint Theater Level Simulation Model 

by 

David M. Savage 
Captain, United States Army 
B.S., United States Military Academy, 1981 

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN OPERATIONS RESEARCH 

from the 

NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
September 1990 


Author: 


Approved by: 




Peter Purdue, Chairman, 
Department of Operations Analysis 






ABSTRACT 


This thesis seeks to determine if US Army Air Defense Artillery’ (ADA) units posi¬ 
tioned in a belt defense perform better than the point defense that the US Army cur¬ 
rently uses. It does this through a comparison of three ADA defense strategies: 

1. Forward Concentration (belt defense) 

2. Balanced Concentration (point defense) 

3. Rear Area Concentration (point defense) 

The Joint Theater Level Simulation, a computer combat simulation model, is used as a 
tool for analysis to compare the three strategies in a Fulda Gap scenario against a vari¬ 
ety of Soviet attack options. The JTLS model is used because of its ability to simulate 
large forces and also to demonstrate the value of JTLS as an analytical tool, in addition 
to a training and evaluation tool. Using the following measures of effectiveness: Soviet 
airplanes shot down b\ US ADA, percentage of successful Soviet bombing missions, and 
number of US ground-targets destroyed, the forward concentration defense proves to 
ha\e a significant adtantage o\er the other two strategies, regardless of the weighting 
of the measures of effectiveness. 


nugebiun ror 


NTIS CRA&I 
DT.'C TAB 
U..announced 
Justification 


t 

□ 

□ 



Availability Codes 


Dist 

A-1 


Mvan and/or 
Special 



a 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION .1 

A. BACKGROUND .1 

B. FORMULATION OF PROBLEM . 2 

1. Means of Comparing Strategies.2 

2. Choosing a War .2 

3. Structure of Problem .4 

a. Balanced Defense.4 

b. Forward Concentrated Defense .5 

c. Rear Area Concentrated Defense .6 

C. DESIRED MEASURES OF EFFECTIVENESS .6 

1. Number of Successful Enemy Air Attacks .7 

2. Amount of Damage Inflicted by Enemy Air Attacks .8 

3. Number of Enemy Planes Shot Down .8 

4. Amount of Damage Sustained by ADA Units .8 

5. Amount of Missiles,'Ammunition Expended by ADA Units .8 


II. THE MODEL .9 

A. SELECTING AN APPROBATE MODEL .9 

B. JTLS BACKGROUND .9 

C. JTLS DESCRIPTION .10 

1. System Support Hardware .10 

2. JTLS Software .10 

3. JTLS Game Phases.10 

a. Initialization .10 

b. Preparation .11 

c. Execution .11 

d. Analysis .11 

4. JTLS Staffing .12 

e 


III. SCENARIO DEVELOPMENT 
A. GENERAL DESIGN . 




i j 


13 


IV 































1. Independent Variables .",.13 

2. Available MOEs .14 

a. Number of Enemy Planes Shot Down .14 

b. Number of Successful Enemy Air Attacks .14 

c. Amount of Damage Inflicted by Enemy Air Attacks .14 

d. Amount of Damage Sustained by ADA Units ..15 

e. Amount of Missiles/Ammunition Expended by ADA Units .16 

3. Scenario Limitations . 16 

a. Logistics .16 

b. US Air Force.....16 

c. Number of JTLS Runs. 16 

B. DESCRIPTION OF GROUND FORCES.16 

C. DESCRIPTION OF ADA UNITS . 17 

D. DESCRIPTION OF AIR FORCES .17 

1. Maximum Escort Raid . 17 

2. Minimum Escort Raid .17 

3. Attack Areas .21 

IV. MODEL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS .24 

A. MOE SI: SOVIET AIRPLANES SHOT DOWN BY US ADA .24 

1. Soviet attack upon the FEBA .25 

2. Soviet attack upon the Rear Area .27 

B. MOE *2: PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL SOVIET BOMBING 

MISSIONS .29 

C. MOE =3: NUMBER OF US GROUND-TARGETS DESTROYED .34 

D. MODEL EXCURSION .36 

E. SUMMARY . 3S 

V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .42 

A. CONCLUSIONS .42 

B. RECOMMENDATIONS .43 

APPENDIX A. UNIT LOCATIONS AT BEGINNING OF SCENARIO.44 

A. US FORCES . 44 

B. SOVIET FORCES .45 





































APPENDIX B. LOCATIONS OF ADA UNITS .46 

A. BALANCED DEFENSE .46 

B. FORWARD CONCENTRATION DEFENSE . 46 

C. REAR AREA CONCENTRATION DEFENSE .47 

D. REDUCED FORWARD CONCENTRATION DEFENSE .47 

APPENDIX C. DESCRIPTION OF SOVIET AIR MISSIONS ____4S 

A. MAXIMUM ESCORT MISSIONS . 4S 

B. MINIMUM ESCORT MISSIONS .49 

APPENDIX D. EXPLANATION OF BOX PLOTS .53 

APPENDIX E. WILCOXON SIGNED RANK TEST RESULTS.54 

A. MOE =1 .54 

B. MOE £2 .55 

C. MOE =3 .55 

LIST OF REFERENCES .56 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST .57 


















LIST OF TABLES 


Tabic 1. SIMULATION RESULTS FOR MOE #1 .24 

Tabic 2 . SIMULATION RESULTS FOR MOE §2 . 29 

Tabic 3. SIMULATION RESULTS FOR MOE #3 .34 

Table 4. SIMULATION RESULTS FOR MODEL EXCURSION.37 












LIST OF FIGURES 


Figure 1. Map of Europe showing location of Fulda Gap ..3 

Figure 2. Balanced Defense .4 

Figure 3. Forward Concentrated Defense .5 

Figure 4. Rear Area Concentrated Defense.7 

Figure 5. Three-Dimensional Scenario Design Matrix .... .15 

Figure 6. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation with Forward Concentration De¬ 
fense .IS 

Figure 7. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation with Balanced Defense .19 

Figure S. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation with Rear Area Concentration 

Defense .20 

Figure 9. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation with FEBA Attack .22 

Figure 10. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation with Rear Area Attack .23 

Figure 11. Box Plot Showing MOE #1 Results for Large Escort Attack on FEBA . 25 

Figure 12. Box Plot Showing MOE #1 Results for Small Escort Attack on FEBA . 26 

Figure 13. Box Plot Showing MOE #1 Results for Soviet Attack on Rear Area ... 2S 

Figure 14. Overall Comparison of Options with MOE #1 Results .29 

Figure 15. Box Plots Showing MOE #2 Results for Soviet Attack on FEBA .31 

Figure 16. Box Plots Showing MOE #'2 Results for Soviet Attack on Rear Area .. 32 

Figure 17. Overall Comparison of Options with MOE §2 Results .33 

Figure IS. Box Plots Showing MOE =3 Results for Soviet Attack on Rear Area .. 35 

Figure 19. Overall Comparison of Rear Area Attack Options with MOE #3 Results 36 

Figure 20. Box Plots Showing Model Excursion Results for MOE =1 .39 

Figure 21. Box Plots Showing Model Excursion Results for MOE #2 .40 

Figure 22. Box Plots Showing Model Excursion Results for MOE =3 .41 


VIII 





















I. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION 

A. BACKGROUND 

The mission of the United States Army Air Defense Artillery (ADA) is: 

To nullify or reduce the effectiveness of attack or surveillance by hostile aircraft or 
missiles after they are airborne .... (Ref. 1: p. 1-1] 

or, more succinctly, to shoot down enemy airplanes. 

Where should ground-based ADA units be positioned to best accomplish this 
mission? The US Army has answered this question by placing ADA units under the 
command of brigade and larger-sized combat units. The combat unit commander des¬ 
ignates and prioritizes specific assets to be protected and the ADA units are positioned 
to protect the assets (Ref. 2: p. 52). In this type of ADA defense, called point defense 
(Ref. 1: p. 4-5J. there are often not enough ADA units to adequately protect all the assets 
a commander desires. An enemy aircraft could be flying around in his opponents rear 
area and, as long as it avoids those assets that arc protected, it could escape being fired 
upon.l 

In contrast to the characteristics of a point defense, a belt defense utilizes ADA 
units in a "... linear configuration to proside early attrition of the enemy as he attempts 
penetration to rear areas.” (Ref. I: p. 4-5] A belt defense is much like an invisible wall 
on the battlcficlJ, and any aggressor who attempts to pass through the wall will be fired 
upon. Although a belt defense is impractical, indeed undefined for battalion, brigade, 
and division-sized fronts, it can be used for corps and larger size fronts. Belt defenses 
are criticized because they use a large amount of ADA resources and few commanders 
want an ADA unit protecting an open gap containing no assets when it could be pro¬ 
viding increased coverage to one of their high-priority assets. Also, some belt defenses 
can be defeated by flying around cither end (Ref. 1: p, 4-5]. 

If a belt defense were constructed in such a way that these criticisms were invalid, 
would it provide a better defense than the point defense currently in use? This thesis 
seeks to answer this question in the limited context of a conventional war in Central 
Europe against Soviet forces. 

I Tfiis presupposes that the opponent's air force docs not send an interceptor tip after it. 


I 





B. FORMULATION OF PROBLEM 

1. Means of Comparing Strategies 

In order to compare strategies, such as what type of ADA defense to use, a 
means of comparison must be established. The ultimate means of comparison to use for 
this problem is to analyze the data front a real war, or several wars. Unless there exists 
an historical record of wars which includes data upon which a comparison can be made, 
the use of real w ar as a means of comparing strategies is infeasible. Another means of 
comparison is through the use of a military exercise. This method is appealing because 
numerous variables that might otherwise affect the results can be held constant. 

A different means of comparing strategies, and the one that will be used in this 
thesis, is to use a computer model to simulate war. There are several advantages gained 
by using a computer mode! as a means of comparing strategies: 

• A great degree of control can be obtained using a computer model; it allows the 
researcher to isolate variables of interest. 

• It allows the analyst control over the amount and type of data to be collected. 

• Using a computer model allows verification of results, due to the ability to replicate 
the model. 

• Lastly , and perhaps the most important, is the ability for one person to use a 
computer model to simulate dozens of wars in a short amount of time for relatively 
littie expense. 

It is for these reasons that the means of comparison for ADA defense strategics in this 
thesis is a computer model of war. 

2. Choosing a War 

What war should be simulated on the computer? The answer to this question 
should be based primarily on the ADA strategies to be compared. First, the war should 
not be a contrived, fictitious, 'sterile' war: it should be fought in a specific, reasonable 
location against an identified foe. The fca ibiiity and realness of a computer simulated 
war gives a measure of credence and validity to the results that cannot be obtained by 
a contrived war. Second, the war needs to be one in which each type of ADA defense 
strategy could be feasibly used. It would make little sense to compare point defense to 
belt defense in a war in which no commander would even consider using a belt defense. 
One war scenario which meets the above prerequisites is the Fulda Gap scenario. 

The Fulda Gap is a 70 kilometer wide salient that lies along the border contig¬ 
uous to C. Germany and W. Germany near the W. German town of Fulda (see 
figure 1 on page 3). This gap has historically been the route of choice for invasion into 


Germany and Trance, at.d it might well be the choice of Warsaw Pact forces [Ref. 3: p. 
124]. The modern Hilda Gap scenario is a well-known scenario among military 
modelers, ft pits US (or NATO) forces against Soviet (w Warsaw Pact) forces in the 
Hilda Gap. This scenario is excellent for purposes of comp King ADA strategics. The 
Soviet Union possesses a large number of advanced fighter aid bomber aircraft and is 
perhaps our most formidable foe. An air attack from Soviet foiccs would be a genuine 
test of US Army ADA strategics. 



Figure 1. Map of Europe showing location of Fulda Gap 


In light of recent events concerning the reunification of Germany, it could be 
argued that the Fulda Gap scenario is no longer a valid option for potential conflict. 
The following responses arc offered: 

1. Notwithstanding the reunification of Germany, history has shown the Fulda Gap 
to be a likely route of invasion, independent of whether the government controlling 
it was friendly or belligerent. 

2. It is not wise to throw away war plans or discount possible scenarios after over 
three decades of a military standoff due to the events of one or uvo years. 

















3. For comparing ADA strategies, the actuallocation of the war or the name of the 
opponent is not as important as the number and type of aircraft that are attacking. 
The actual business of air defense, after all, takes place several thousand feet abo\e 
the ground. 

3. Structure of Problem 

The thesis problem of comparing ADA strategies is structured as a comparison 
of three different defenses: balanced, forward concentration, and rear area concen¬ 
tration. 

a. Balanced Defense 

The balanced defense is the name given to the air defense strategy that the 
US Arm\ currently uses (discussed on page 1). Figure 2 depicts a simplified version of 
the balanced defense. 



4 




In the figure, the dark lines running across the top and bottom of the figure 
indicate a battle sector, or boundary. The line running between the two circles labeled 
FEBA is the Forward Edge of the Battle Area, or the dividing line between the friendly 
and enemy ground combat units. The term ASSET is used to depict resources that the 
commander wants protected from an enemy air attack. These assets could be maneuver 
units, support units, headquarters, fuel depots, or nuclear storage sites. The shaded 
circles enclosing some of the assets indicate the engagement envelope, or coverage pro¬ 
vided by ADA units. Enemy aircraft would attack from right to left; if they fly into a 
shaded area they face a high probability of being fired upon. Notice that some of the 
assets are not covered. This is one of the consequences of having limited ADA re¬ 
sources. 


b. Forward Concentrated Defense 

The second strategy being analyzed in this thesis is the forward concen¬ 
trated defense shown in Figure 3. 



Figure 3. Forward Concentrated Defense 







In this figure, the concept of belt defense is easily demonstrated. There are 
the same number of ADA units as shown in Figure 2 on page 4, but the majority of the 
units are concentrated near the FEBA. This creates a 'belt' of ADA coverage that an 
enemy plane must fly through in order to reach an asset. The advantage is that all of 
the assets are indirectly protected. The main criticism of the belt defense (that they can 
be defeated by flying around either end) can now be addressed. Imagine that the battle 
sectors above and below the one in Figure 3 also use a forward concentrated defense 
and that this goes on until such a location that there is no threat of an air attack. Ob¬ 
viously, the forward concentrated defense would not be viable on a small front such as 
Panama, or when invading the shores of enemy territory by sea; but, if effective, it could 
be used on a large land mass when the battle front is several hundred miles wide, 
c. Rear Area Concentrated Defense 

The third, and final strategy to be analyzed and compared is the rear area 
concentrated defense. In this defense, a point defense is used; however, the ADA units 
are predominantly located around assets well away from the FEBA. As shown in 
Figure 4 on page 7, this type of strategy looks very risky; the front-line assets are pro¬ 
vided only minimum protection. This type of defense might be feasible if the rear area 
assets w ere of such vital importance that the additional coverage was justified. Justifia¬ 
ble situations could include a nuclear stockpile that a nation was preparing to use, or 
perhaps a nation defending a major metropolitan area, its own capitol, or strategic oil 
processing sites. In any case the rear area defense provides a strategy that should per¬ 
form well against an air attack into the rear area. 

C. DESIRED MEASURES OF EFFECTIVENESS 

Before deciding which particular computer simulation will be used to model the 
problem, measures of effectiveness (MOEs) should be discussed. Measures of effective¬ 
ness are quantitative values that allow- model results to be evaluated to answer specific 
questions. In this thesis, MOEs will provide measures by which the three ADA defense 
strategies can be compared. As an air defender, the ultimate measure of success is to 
be able to answer "yes" to the following question: Did I adequately protect those assets 
that the ground forces commander wanted me to protect, thereby enabling him to ac¬ 
complish- his mission? There are, however, various degrees of success which can be 
quantified into the following desired measures of effectiveness: 


6 






Figure 4. Rear Area Concentrated Defense 

• Number of successful enemy air attacks. 

• Amount of damage inflicted by enemy air attacks. 

« Number of enemy planes shot down. 

• Amount of damage sustained by ADA units. 

• Amount of missiles/ammunition expended by ADA units. 

1. Number of Successful Enemy Air Attacks 

Using the number of successful enemy air attacks as an MOE captures the ex¬ 
tent to which the enemy has air superiority. For purposes of this thesis, a successful air 
attack is achieved when an enemy aircraft releases his ordnance on an assigned target. 
If the number of air attacks varies daily, the percentage of successful enemy air attacks 
is a more useful figure. If the percentage is high, it means that either the enemy is at- 


7 













tacking priorities that arc not covered by ADA, or that the ADA coverage is not-very 
effective. 

2. Amount of Damage Inflicted by Enemy Air Attacks 

This MOE is a more direct measurement of the effects of enemy air attacks, al¬ 
though it is much more difficult to quantify. Some sort of value must be agreed upon 
and placed on various kinds of personnel and equipment. Although this MOD and the 
previous one may appear to measure the same thing, a subtle difference exists. The en¬ 
emy could have a high percentage of successful air attacks, but they could be inflicting 
minimum damage because they were bombing something which had a ver\ low value, 
or because their ordnance was not very accurate or lethal. 

3. Number of Enemy Planes Shot Down 

This MOE is the all-time favorite, number one MOE for air defenders because once an 
enenn plane goes down in flames, it is virtual!} impossible for it to come back and at¬ 
tack in the future. Although the utility of this MOE can be questioned for a one-dav 
war or for kamikaze air attacks by religious zealots, it is an excellent MOE for use in 
any scenario in which an\ aircraft is expected to make more than one attack. Once 
again, if the number of air attacks varies from day to day, this MOE would best be ex¬ 
pressed as a percentage of planes launched or planes in inventory. 

4. Amount of Damage Sustained by ADA Units 

The amount of damage sustained by friendly ADA units is the polar opposite of the 
numbci of planes shot down. As ADA units arc a major hurdle in the enemy's quest for 
a successful air attack, the cncm\ goes to great lengths to neutralize and destroy ADA 
sites. Their efforts range from air-to-surface missiles that home in on the ADA units 
radar signals, to air attacks designed specifically to locate and destroy ADA units (wild 
weasel missions). While an ADA unit is expected to repel enemy air attacks, it is also 
expected to survive so it can repel attacks the next day. 

5. Amount of Missiles/Ammunition Expended by ADA Units 

This MOE is meant to capture those ADA units that may not be damaged, but 
are unable to perform their mission due to a lack of missiles or ammunition. An ADA 
unit is expected to use its missiles efficiently. Possibly the most efficient use of a missile 
is to destro} a formation of attacking aircraft before they release their ordnance. In 
concert with the other MOEs, this MOE can measure efficiency, it can also be used to 
analyze and compare the strategics from a logistical point of view. 


8 



II. THE MODEL 


A. SELECTING AN APPROPIATE MODEL 

Because the battle scenario and the desired measures of effectiveness have already- 
been determined, the process of selecting a particular computer simulation model with 
which to conduct the comparison of ADA strategies has been made easier. One model 
which seemed well-suited for this thesis is the Joint Theater-Level Simulation (JTLS). 
Described in detail later in this chapter, JTLS has one overwhelming advantage over all 
other computer simulation models similarly equipped: availability. JTLS is readily 
available for use in the Navy Wargaming Laboratory at the Naval Postgraduate School. 
Additionally, technical consultation was a\allable from Edward P. Kelleher, an analyst 
and programmer who has had extensive experience with the design, programming and 
use of the JTLS model. This factor made the JTLS model particularly attractive for use 
in this thesis. 

B. JTLS BACKGROUND 

JTLS is a computer-assisted simulation that models two-sided air, ground, and naval 
combat with logistical and intelligence support. It is designed as a theater-level model 
for use in the following areas: 

1. The analysis, development, and evaluation of contingency plans and joint tactics. 

2. The evaluation of alternative military strategics. 

3. The analysis of combat systems. 

The first JTLS model became operational in September, 19S3. Now in its ninth release 
(Version 1.65C), JTLS is owned by the Force Structure, Resource, and Assessment 
Directorate (J-S) of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Joint Warfare Center at Hurlburt 
Field, FL has MAPP (Modern Aids to Planning Program) component project responsi¬ 
bility for JTLS, and the configuration management agenev is the Joint Data Systems 
Support Center of the Defense Communications Agency. [Ref. 4: p. 2-1, Ref. 5] 

In addition to its use at the Naval Postgraduate School, JTLS is used at the fol¬ 
lowing locations: HQ L'S Atlantic Command, I IQ US Special Operations Command, 
Marine Corps Wargaming & Assessment Center, National Defense University IIQ Re¬ 
public of Korea-US Combined Forces Command, HQ US Central Command, IIQ US 





European Command, HQ L'S Southern Command, Joint Warfare Center, and the L'S 
Army War College. [Ref. 5] 

C. JTLS DESCRIPTION 

1. System Support Hardware 

JTLS is designed to run on VAX computers running the VMS operating system. 
To run JTLS with a reasonable execution time, the VAX computer must have a. ieast 
eight-million'bytes of main memory, and approximately 500 million bytes of disk storage. 
Additionally,.at least four DEC VTlOO-compatible terminals are required. In its maxi¬ 
mum configuration, 26 such terminals are used. A graphics suite allows viewing unit 
locations, unit characteristics, along with terrain characteristics before and during JTLS 
execution. [Ref. 6: p. 4-1] 

2. JTLS Software 

Most of the JTLS source code is written in the SIMSCRIPT 11.5 computer 
language. The ”'C" programming language, developed by Bell Laboratories, is used in 
the development of JTLS databases and the graphics programs that drive the graphics 
displays. A few subroutines in the graphics prog.am are written in FORTRAN. (Ref. 
6: p. 4-3] 

3. JTLS Game Phases 

In the JTLS System, the wargaming process is divided into four game phases: 
initialization, preparation, execution, and analysis. Each game phase consists of one or 
more programs or systems which allow user interface with the system. 
a. Initialization 

During the initialization phase, the Scenario Development System is used 
to create a JTLS database, a very time-consuming and extensive task. The JTLS d«?\*- 
base is divided into two par..*: the terrain file and the scenario data file. The terrain file 
contains an exhaustive amount of data relating to the :c v i tn which the game is held. 
The European database, used for this thesis, cc? ; tins over So,000 coded terrain 
hexagons. Each JTLS hexagon represents an imaginary hexagon on land measuring 16.5 
kilometers from side to side. A hexagon is coJcJ With elevation and one of 15 possible 
terrain types. Some of the additional data associated with a hexagon include the barriers 
and target types located within the hexagon. The scenario data file contains the fol¬ 
lowing types of data: 

1. Gcneial modeling parameters that affect the mathematical and logical algorithms 
used to model the operations of theater level military forces. 


10 



2. Unit and unit force structure data, such as organizational structure, assigned com¬ 
bat and combat support equipment, ordnance, and logistics. 

3. Target data that describe militarily significant objects that can interact with a mil¬ 
itary unit as it conducts its combat operations, such as bridges and runways. 

Due to the popularity of the Fulda Gap s^, ' • among military modelers, the creation 
of a scenario data file for this thesis was rosier than it could have been, in that a 
scenario with US and Soviet forces 1 1 • ? .ton Scenario' already existed in the 
JTLS directory. Minor modifications, su*J as unit location and certain modeling pa¬ 
rameters were made to the 'Patton Scenarr* ‘ dr.r. file and it was used for the compar¬ 
ative analysis. (Ref. 6: pp. 2-1 - 2-4] 

b. Preparation 

The preparation phase uses the JTLS Executive System. The JTLS Technical Coord) 
nator uses this system to start and restart the game, configure the exercises, and manage 
the directories (general housekeeping of files, and making tape backups as necessary). 
(Ref. 4: pp. 2-2] 

c. Execution 

During the execution phase of the game, The Combat Events Program 

(CEP) 'fights the war' while the Model I menace Program (MIP) allows the Controller 

and Game Players to interface with the CEP. 

The CEP is the central pi- gmm of the JTLS system, the combat model. It deter¬ 
mines all of the actions and interactions among the air, land,, and naval forces de¬ 
fined and modeled for the specific scenario being run. The CEP creates, maintains, 
and reports the current status of the warfare environment being modeled. (Ref. 4: 
pp. 2-4] 

Through the MIP, "Players direct the forces under their command by creating and 
sending orders to the CEP. The MIP provides the players with a menu-driven environ¬ 
ment from which these orders can be created and sent." [Ref. 4: pp. 2-4] 

d. Analysis 

The analysis phase of the JTLS game uses the JTLS Postprocessor System 
to aggregate information on game results and to produce reports, charts, and graphs. 
The Postprocessor System is cur.ently undergoing a major redesign effort and was not 
used with this thesis due to incomplete postprocessor files in version 1.65C of JTLS (Ref. 
4: pp. 2-6b]. The data for 'postproccssing-by-hand' was obtained through periodic 
summary reports generated by the Combat Events Program. 









4. JTLS Staffing 

Five different types of staff positions are required in order to run the JTLS 

mudel: 

L Director-Flans and administers the wargame. 

2. Technical Coordinator—Starts and restarts the game, and provides computer ex¬ 
pertise to the game control staff. 

3. System Manager-Configures the computer system in preparation fc v the installa¬ 
tion of the JTLS model. 

4. Controlier-The game monitor. He has the capability to stop the game, change 
game parameters, take checkpoints, and alter the game speed. 

5. Players- RED and BLUE. Have command of forces on tin. r respective side. [Ref. 
6: pp. 2-5] 

Due to the inditjdualized, and independent nature of thesis research, Ur author learned 
how to perform, and then subsequently performed all of the functions, except for num¬ 
ber three, himself. The System Manager function was not needed, as the computer in 
the Navy Wargaming Laboratory was already configured to run JTLS. 


12 







III. SCENARIO DEVELOPMENT 


A. GENERAL DESIGN 

1. Independent Variables 

A major part of the JTLS exercise design has already been determined by 
choosing the three different ADA strategic to be compared. What about the makeup 
of the opposing (Soviet) air force? In the Patton scenario of the JTLS model, the Soviet 
air force in the Fulda Gap consists of 202 airplanes divided among three airbases. Al¬ 
though it is agreed that sending all 202 airplanes to attack at one time or in one day is 
not a wise strategy, a sufficient number of airplanes need to attack in order to fully tax 
the US air defenses. The number of airplanes that was decided upon was 174, or ap¬ 
proximately S6°o of 202. To cnab'.e the comparison of ADA defense stratgies to be ro¬ 
bust with respect to Soviet attack s..atcgies, two exercise design variables were 
introduced: 

1. Location of Attack - This variable can be one of two variants. The Soviet air¬ 
planes can attack targets along the f EBA (ground troops and equipment), or they 
can attack targets in the rear area (airbases). 

2. Air Raid Mission Size - The So\iets can attack with a few missions consisting of 
a large number of airplanes, or they can attack with many missions consisting of 
a small number of aircraft. 

Tor the second design variable, although the number of planes in a mission changes, the 
total number of planes that attack in one day remains constant, as does the total number 
of planes that actually conduct the bombing. The factor that is different between the 
missions is the size of the escort force. The escort force for a bombing mission generally 
consists of: 

1. Air-to-air fighters, whose job it is to eliminate the opposing force interceptors sent 
to shoot down the bombers. 

2. Jammers, who disrupt the opposing forces air defense radars by electronic and 
other means. 

3. Wild Weasels, which take a more direct approacn than the jammers by attacking 
air defense sites with ordnance. 

The So\iet commander can have cither a large escort force, thereby increasing the 
probability of a successful bombing attack but decreasing the the number of targets 
bombed, or he can hat c a small escort force with which he can attack many targets, but 


13 







at a greater risk. Because the size of the escort force is the determining factor in the air 
raid mission size, the second exercise:design variable will be called 'escort size.' The three 
independent exercise design variables (ADA defense strategy, Location of Attack, and 
Escort Size) interact to form 12 combinations. A visual representation of these combi¬ 
nations is displayed as a three-dimensional scenario design matrix in Figure 5 on page 
15. In the figure, each combination is represented by a block, or cell. Each cell corre¬ 
sponds to a unique scenario that must be programmed into the JTLS model, run and 
analyzed. The cell that is shaded represents a forward concentration ADA defense fac¬ 
ing a rear area Soviet attack with a large escort size. The design matrix shows the range 
over which the three ADA strategies will be compared. A strategy which works well 
with one of the 'columns' of the matrix may not be the best choice for another. 

2. Available MOEs 

To determine which ADA strategy is the best choice given the Soviet attack options, 
MOEs will be used. Three of the five MOEs discussed in “C. DESIRED MEASURES 
OF EFFECTIVENESS" on page 6 will be used. 

a. Number of Enemy Planes Shot Down 

This MOE will be referred to as MOE #1: Soviet Airplanes Shot Down by 
US ADA. This information is readily available from the JTLS Periodic Summary Re¬ 
port which lists the number and type of planes shot down by ADA. Information on 
which ADA unit shot the plane down is not available. 

b. Number of Successful Enemy Air Attacks 

Further defined as MOE #2 (Percentage of Successful Soviet Bombing 
Missions) this MOE is available from JTLS as the number of aircraft that delivered 
weapons. In JTLS, an aircraft deli\ers its weapons if it finds a predetermined target type 
along its designated bombing route. To prevent the act of finding a target from be¬ 
coming a source of variation, each bombing mission was given exact information on the 
location of its target. Thus, if an aircraft reached its target, it delivered its weapons. 

c. Amount of Damage Inflicted by Enemy Air Attacks 

This information is captured in MOE #3: Number of US Ground-Targets 
Destroyed. In the JTLS rear area scenario the assets that are attacked are the US 
airbases at Koblenz, Frankfurt, and Kaiserslautern. The target types that are designated 
are US airplanes. Because JTLS records the number of airplanes lost on the ground due 
to air attack, this is a feasible MOE. For personnel, tanks, and lightly armored vehicles 
along the TEBA, JTLS does not specifically record the damage caused by air attacks, 


14 






Figure 5. Three-Dimensional Scenario Design Matrix 

nor is it easily available by modifying the model code. For this reason, MOO #3 will be 
defined only for attacks on the rear area. 

<{. Amount of Damage Sustained by AD A Units 

Because JTLS docs not separate the damage caused by air attacks from 
ground combat, data concerning this MOO arc also not available. The actual results of 
the scenario runs were investigated, and the 'current strength' of the ADA units at the 
end of the day’s attacks was always above 95%, indicating that little or no permanent 
damage was sustained by ADA units. 


15 









c. Amount of MissileslAmmunition Expended by ADA Units 

This MCE is not extractable from the current version of JTLS. JTLS re¬ 
cords the tonnage of ammunition expended during a reporting period. This includes 
ammunition from all weapons systems, incuding air defense systems. An unsuccessful 
attempt was made to modify the code to separate the ADA ammunition from the other 
weapons systems. Future versions of JTLS are expected to be able to report this MOE 
as rounds, missiles Fired by individual ADA units. 

3. Scenario Limitations 

a. Logistics 

The length of each scenario was kept to one day because of the increased 
complexity of running the logistics functions in JTLS for wars in excess of one day. 
Also, the lack of availability of logistical data and unit damage data for ADA units de¬ 
creased the value of the benefits of running the scenarios for a longer period of time. 

b. US Air Force 

Although JTLS is normally run using the air forces of both sides, for a 
'pure' analy sis of ADA defense strategies the L'S Air Force was not played: except to 
provide ground-targets for Soviet air attacks. Incorporating the air force into the sce¬ 
narios would make the effort of programming the scenarios into the JTLS model ex¬ 
tremely difficult and time-consuming, and it would force the introduction of two or three 
more independent variables. This could easily increase the number of possible scenarios 
to 36 or more, resulting in a programming and analysis effort beyond that of this thesis 
research. 

c. Number of JTLS Runs 

Tivc runs were made for each of the twelve scenarios. This number allowed 
for statistical testing of hypotheses at the a = 0.10 level w hile maintaining the time 
spent executing the runs to a reasonable amount. 

B. DESCRIPTION' OF GROUND FORCES 

The ground war was constructed to be as constant a factor as possible throughout 
all scenarios. The beginning location and strength of every unit was the same in every 
scenario. Identical sets of orders were issued to the same units in each scenario. The 
only thing that differed was the independent variable: the location of the ADA units. 

The locations of the major US and Soviet combat units are shown on the map of 
the Tulda Gap area in Figure 6 on page 18. A more detailed list of units and locations 
is contained in Appendix A. In the ground war, the 2d and 4th Armored Divisions are 


16 


ordered to conduct the main attack across the Fulda ri\cr to capture the terrain cur¬ 
rently held by the 12th Motorized Rifle Division. The Sth Infantry Division is ordered 
to conduct a secondary attack in the south; therein clashing with the Idth Motorized 
Rifle Division and not allowing it to reinforce the defense against the main attack in the 
north. The 9th Infantry Division is ordered to move into position behind the Sth 
Infantry Division, and prepare to support cither the main or secondary attack, as 
needed. The Soviet 12th and 14th Motorized Rifle Divisions arc ordered to defend in 
place while the 10th Tank Division moves to reinforce the defense against the main at¬ 
tack. 

C. DESCRIPTION OF ADA UNITS 

The location: cf ADA units in the forward concentration, balanced, and rear area 
concentration defense scenarios are depicted in Figure 6 on page IS. Figure 7 on page 
19. and Figure S on page 20, respectively. The units are represented by engagement 
envelope circles. A detailed list containing units and their exact locations in each of the 
three types of defenses is contained in Appendix B. 

D. DESCRIPTION OF AIR FORCES 

1. Maximum Escort Raid 

The maximum escort raids consist of nine bombing missions taking place over 
a seven-hour period. Each bombing mission contains: 

• twelve to fifteen bomber aircraft 

• two electronic countermeasures (jammer) aircraft 

• eight air defense suppression (wild weasel) aircraft 

• five air-to-air fighter aircraft. 

2. Minimum Escort Raid 

There are eighteen bombing missions in a minimum escort raid. The composi¬ 
tion of a bombing mission is: 

• four to five bomber aircraft 

• one electronic countermeasures (jammer) aircraft 

• two to three air defense suppression (wild weasel) aircraft 

• two air-to-air fighter aircraft. 

A detailed listing of maximum and minimum escort attacks including composition, at¬ 
tack times, and targets is in Appendix C 


17 











Figure 6. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation with Forward Concentration De¬ 
fense 

Source: Hamond, C.S. & Co., Ambassador World Atlas, New York, NY. 












Figure 7. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation with Balanced Defense 


Source: Hamond, C.S. & Co., Ambassador World Allas, New York, NY. 


19 

























J2 



i! n -To | .*.55®' 


T) » / 
^•ps 3 — r 



O 

a Ofd 


ocq^o 


a> c t.v 

re . 






ro > \ 

x: > , O 
•go 0*0^ 

e r :-- -i 


■UJ *-•/ *-» v 

f.vf # * * </Tv, ^ 



M n£ x 
i OCX 1 
c 


- 3 VJ3re\c 3 
ra JVv * re © «o 

D -T rf 3 </) CO .c 

0> r GO J-JO) ^ C u» 

E.T5 IJ Z S « S 

oy.a *o^ 



nm H.# 

•ra 

a> 0 ) /V-0 ^3\ ,k IX 

§ > H 3 !°\a 

1 /f K U ° ife 

C C 5 iLfcUig [X ’ 

^-v & td c \r »* J 

2 I cc ra 5 g CO -■ - 
Hq c o ta 0™ 

E/ S, “ ”0 OO 2 t 


A^'S £ £ * 
fc»* X o -o 

Jc«.? y 


js ^ O 
3 x c 

re O 

re O co 

- S—5- 

.0 x 
■go 20 


j o 1 

In J 2 2 
Cco S O ■ 


C- 1 1 

•e j' ^ 

■O s V 
“o S/--£ 

Cf ra 
* * *2 

7i n u \i 


- c == /!A 

yZZ—^L 

r oE .5(5 
•s- ^ ro o r 

i * 

O' _^> v 
bo S' 


?>-/ r -n ^ 

C 5 ra = S 

I .0 5 co 

y & 


' cE 
*7' ^ D 

w|| 


“ O So 5 

.= £ S-™-£ 

E 


rv 

& m 


) - 
(»3 y 


O a> c 

Lo z „" 


, z 3.S jpo 

\ O .<y 


v r —' u - , •<- jj ^ tv ^ 

y 5* t£? < \.'S'5 o Qra^o 

'yypNo-’-y.-o s ^<6 § 

2 -i3£?^rn £ 

ra o Q g (q-o c P4 -s 

*5 w > -75 .= ,J 5 co r- HZ 

to ^ ^ re A> ,Q3 c .- _ ; 

^IeS cr;£ ? -= ,5 » E g 
E -5 x. fiws w " a. ■§ | 8 


c 

y 


o 

x> 

w- 

CJ 

4\ 

to 

3 

£ 

X 


*5 


> a> ^ — c -r. x. 

, si > ,kz ^ 5 o^o 
w c: A -c jc -S 3 

o£ •—*g.E in. o S> “ 0 S 
%° .^•».o I E °: 

S% 3'-j=$-i“YS2_--S £ 


ra S’c x> 
-c '"\ti 

£ g’.'C . 


?i,«* : ;?-r^ 

*\>.''a « «y 


g-^Oo O^' 
v- cox: o 

W QO) U >> 

_T'*~ T 3 o <y 

_T-£p 2 Q Ton 9- 
^Tsr*z co Sj^v v) 

r i ~££ax o a;-^ 

lY^yl \NP ia X 


—> _ 3 f- 

> p^o | 

■I r °^0 
l— / re 

l-g r* O 

C CO t=U 

~r Q) m 


£ \\ < m / 

- '•■sV - l 

3 —!f c t 

js 

k “X '-c.-g 


r gi’Sf 


‘ — . U 7 v i u 

V ,Q) ^ i 4) 

- * ID '}\ CO 

’5: 1r ..E 

V ^n x 0 . M 


■ < 0 , n 
AT CD u *o C> 

1 . ssi 


a . T 5 GJ 

0 c *o 

cA £ 

i| ; 

? £ •* ( 
< re 




g <u O 
P jc to 

_ o c= 

w :s cl> 


■*- f - w u ' 

U E i ,\i= 
a.5 N-°r 

c-rv.n ■ >. 


« I 
ro J 

■ e- 


figure 8. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation nilh Rear Area Concentration De- 


Sourcc: Ilamond, C.S. & Co., Ambassador World Allas, New York, NY. 


20 














3. Attack Areas 

The location of the aircraft silhouettes in Tigure 9 on page 22 show the general locations 
of a FEB A attack. Figure 10 on page 23 depicts the aircraft attacking the airbases in 
the rear area. The actual targets for both areas of attack are listed in Appendix C. 







Figure 9. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation with FEBA Attack 
Source: Hamond, C.S. & Co., Ambassador World Atlas. New York, NY. 


22 










Figure 10. Beginning Scenario Ground Situation with Rear Area Attack 
Source: Mamond, C.S. & Co., Ambassador World Atlas, New York, NY. 


23 


Zweibriicken 

















IV. MODEL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 


The data produced by the sixty runs of the JTLS model were collected and proc¬ 
essed. The results and the analysis of the results are presented in terms of each MOE. 
The tables containing the results show the MOEs by run number for each of the twelve 
scenarios. The sample mean and sample standard deviation are also presented for each 
scenario. 

A. MOE #1: SOVIET AIRPLANES SHOT DOWN BY US ADA 
Table 1 shows the simulation results for MOE #1. 


Table 1. SIMULATION RESULTS FOR MOE fth Soviet Airplanes Shot Down 
by US ADA 


Type of 
ADA Defense 

Location of 
Air Attack 

Escort 

Size 

Run 

m 

Run 

U2 

Run 

#3 

Run 

#4 

Run 

ns 

Sample 

Mean 

Sample 
Std. Dev. 

Forward 

Concentration 

FEBA 

Large 

s 

6 

8 

9 

16 

El 

3.9 

Small 

45 

51 

46 

38 

46 

45.2 

El 

Rear Area 

Large 

108 

93 

125 

101 

105 

106.4 

11.8 

Small 

148 

152 

153 

151 

147 

150.2 

2.6 

Balanced 

Defense 

FEBA 

Large 

I 

2 

1 

3 

1 

1.6 

.89 

Small 

1 

4 

D 

D 

1 


1 

Rear Area 

Large 

73 

72 

65 

72 

67 

69.8 

El 

Small 

134 

118 

138 

124 

130 


8 

Rear Area 
Concentration 

FEBA 

Large 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Small 

o 

0 

0 

I 

0 

.2 

.45 

Rear Area 

Large 

61 

55 

61 

66 

1 

74 

63.4 

7.1 

Small 

126 

) 

118 



130 

128.4 

El 



































































































1. Soviet attack upon the FEBA 

When analyzing data, it is frequently helpful to start by using a graphical 
method. A graph can quickly convey insights that aj not readily available through a 
table of data (such as Table 1). One type of graph which allows a quick comparison 
of the ADA strategies through the MOE results is a box plot. Box plots-convey a sense 
of location and scale through which a comparison can be made. The box plots for the 
results of a large and small escort attack on the FEBA are illustrated in Figure 11 and 
Figure 12 on pages 25 and 26, respectively. Appendix D contains a succinct explanation 
of the symbols used in the box plots. It is quite apparent that the forward concentration 
defense does a much better job of shooting down aircraft than the other two strategies. 
One would have expected these results, due to the fact that the forward concentrated 
defense has more ADA units in the area of attack than the others. Still, some measure 
of validation can be accredited to a model that produces results in line with intuiti\e 
thinking. 


STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR LARGE ESCORT ATTACK ON FEBA 



Figure II. Box Plot Showing MOE #1 Results for Large Escort Attack on FEBA 

It is one thing to graphically show that the forward concentration defense is 
better than the others; it is quite another to prove it statistically. In each scenario, an 
MOE can be thought of as a random variable. A run of the scenario results in a real- 


25 










ization of that random \ ariuble, and each random variable has an associated probability 
density function. With such a small sample size (five runs) for each scenario, it would 
be incorrect to assume that the number of planes shot down for each strategy has a 
normal distribution, or for that matter, has any particular distribution. 


STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR SMALL ESCORT ATTACK ON FEBA 



Figure 12. Box Plot Showing MOE ill Results for Small Escort Attack on FEBA 

What is needed, then, is a nonparametric (distribution-free) test that detects 
differences in location parameters. The Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test, which is often 
used for this purpose, assumes that the probability functions of the random variables 
have identical variances [Ref. 7: p. 159]. Examination of the data and the box plots show 
that this assumption is not valid. The Wilcoxon signed rank test is a more general 
nonparametric test that docs not require the equality of variances assumption [Ref. 7: 
p. 123J. It is also appropriate to use because the data is paired; the i !h run of every sce¬ 
nario uses the same random number seeds. The Wilcoxon signed iank test uses the sign 
and the magnitude of the difference between samples of two random variables to detect 
a difference in the median of the random variables. As applied to MOE #1 for large 
escort attacks on the FEBA, the corresponding hypotheses for the Wilcoxon signed rank 
test are: 


26 




Null Hypothec's: There is no difference between a forward concentration and a bal¬ 
anced defense as measured by the medians of the number of airplanes killed by each 
strategy for a large escort attack on the FEBA. 

Alternative: There is a difference; the forward concentration kills more airplanes than 
the balanced defense. 

and, 

Null Hypothesis: There is no difference between a forward concentration and a rear 
area concentration defense as measured by the medians of the number of airplanes 
killed by each strategy for a large escort attack on the FEBA. 

Alternative: There is a difference; the forward concentration kills more airplanes than 
the rear area concentration defense. 

The level of statistical significance that will be used with this (and subseqent) applica¬ 
tions of the sign test is a = 0.10 i.e., the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when 
it is really true is 0.10. When the Wilcoxon sign test is applied in this manner, the null 
hypothesis is rejected in the two inferences above.2 The forward concentration defense 
produces the best results in terms of MOE #1. 

2. Soviet attack upon the Rear Area 

The box plots for a large and small escort attack on the rear area are in 
Figure 1 3 on page 2S. The number of airplanes killed is a dramatic increase from those 
resulting from attacks on the FEBA. This is probably because the airplan.es have to fly 
through more ADA coverage tc reach their targets in the rear. When attacks are made 
along the FEBA, the airplane. < ,tly have to fly through minimum co\erage because the 
ADA units are deployed at least 30 kilometers behind the FEBA (where the assets arc 
located) due to tactical considerations. The ADA co\crage for the assets in the rear area 
are able to deploy well fe w ^d of the asset, insuring increased time for airplanes to be 
detected and engaged. 

Although the fonvard concentration strategy appear, to be better than the other 
two strategies for both a large and small escort attack, the difference is not as pro¬ 
nounced as that of an attack on the TEBA. When the Wilcoxon sign test procedures 
are applied to these scenarios, the null hypothesis of equal medians of strategies is re¬ 
jected. The conclusion is made that for Soviet attacks on the rear area, the fonvard 
concentration defense is superior to the balanced or rear area concentration defense with 
respect to MOE #1. Coupled with the results from Soviet attacks on the FEBA, if the 
number of airplanes killed w r as the only consideration, the fonvard concentration defense 

2 Appendix E contains details for the computation of the test statistic used in these hypotheses. 







STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR LARGE ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



o *- 

FORWARD 

CONCENTRATION 


BALANCED 

DEFENSE 


REAR AREA 
CONCENTRATION 


STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR SMALL ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



Figure 13. Box Plot Showing MOE #1 Results for Soviet Attack on Rear Area 


28 







would be the strategy of choice for the US commander, regardless of the choice that the 
Soviet commander made. Tigurc 14 is a skyscraper plot that brings the twelve scenarios 
together for an overall comparison. The height of the skyscrapers are the sample means 
of the number of airplanes killed in each scenario. The dominance of the forward con¬ 
centration strategy regardless of the Soviet attack options is very evident. 

SKYSCRAPER PLOT OF MOE *1 SAMPLE MEANS 



Figure 14. Overall Comparison of Options with MOE #1 Results 

B. MOE i}2\ PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL SOVIET BOMBING MISSIONS 
Table 2 on page 30 shows the simulation results for MOE P-2. For this measure of 
effectiveness, lower percentages are better that higher ones. When examining Table 2, 
notice the extremely high percentages for successful missions when the FEBA is at¬ 
tacked. In view of the results from MOE #1, however, these high percentages should 
be expected. The number of planes shot down during FEBA attacks was very low. Also, 
consider the fact that a plane can be shot down on a successful bombing mission as long 
as it is shot down after it delivers its ordnance. This would account for the percentages 
that still seem to be high even when factoring in the number of planes shot down. 

The box plots for the scenario results in terms of MOE #2 are shown in Figure 15 
on page 31, and Figure 16 on page 32. The plots display the high percentages for at¬ 
tacks on the FEBA very effectively. They also show that the percent of successful 


29 








Table 2. SIMULATION RESULTS FOR MOE #2: Percentage of Successful 
Soviet Bombing Missions 


Type of 
ABA Defense 

Location of 
Air Attack 

Escort 

Size 

Run 

#1 

Run 

TT- 

Run 

#3 

Run 

m 

Run 

#5 

Sample 

Mean 

Sample 
Std. Dev. 

Forward 

Concentration 

FEBA 

Large 

95 

96 

99 

99 

92 

96.2 

- 

mm 

Small 

78 

77 

79 

85 

85 

S0.8 

3.9 

Rear Area 

Large 

43 

51 

33 

43 

42 


mm 

Small 

19 

17 

12 

14 

20 

16.4 

3.4 

Balanced 

Defense 

FEBA 

Large 

99 

100 

100 

100 

100 

99.8 

.45 

Small 

100 

96 

91 

96 

99 

96.4 

3.5 

Rear Area 

Large 

56 

49 

60 

48 

56 

53.8 

5.1 

Small 

33 

35 

27 

22 

36 

£111111 

5.9 

Rear Area 
Concentration 

FEBA 

Large 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

: 

0 

Small 

100 

96 

92 

100 

100 

97.6 

3.6 


Large 

69 

64 | 

K9 

54 

57 

61 

5.9 

Small 

19 

28 

IS 

22 

24 

22.2 

4.0 


bombing missions against a forward concentration strategy seems to be lower than the 
other two strategies in all four plots. Bv applying the Wilcoxon signed rank test to the 
data as in MOE =1, it is found that the null hy potheses that the medians of the forward 
concentration and the balanced defense, rear area concentration for a large small escort 
attack on the FCBA rear area are equal as measured by the percentage of successful 
bombing missions arc rejected for each of the eight cases. Again, the forward concen¬ 
tration emerges as a dominant strategy, as illustrated by the skyscraper plot of MOE #2 
in Figure 17 on page 33. When looking at the plot, keep in mind that lower percentages 
indicate a better strategy. 


30 













































































































STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR LARGE ESCORT ATTACK ON FE 3 A 




Figure 15. Box Plots Showing MOE "2 Results for Soviet Attack on FEBA 













PERCENT OF SUCCESSFUL BOMBING MISSIONS PERCENT OF SUCCESSFUL BOMBING MISSIONS 


STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR LARGE ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR SMALL ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



Figure 16. Box Plots Showing MOE #2 Results for Soviet Attack on Rear Area 


32 











C. MOE #3: NUMBER OF US GROUND-TARGETS DESTROYED 

Table 3 shows the simulation results for MOE #3. The box plots for the large and 
small escort attacks on the rear area in terms of this MOE are presented in Figure 18 
on page 35. As explained in Chapter 3, this MOE was only available in the rear area 
attack scenarios. 


Table 3. SIMULATION RESULTS FOR MOE #3: Number of US Targets De¬ 
stroyed 


Type of 
ADA Defense 

Location of 
Air Attack 

Escort 

Size 

Run 

#F 

Run 

U2 

Run 

113 

Run 

#4 

Run 

H5 

Sample 

Mean 

Sample 
Std. Dev. 

Forward 

Concentration 

Rear Area 

Large 

33 

35 

31 

38 

40 

35.4 

3.6 

Small 

19 

12 

5 

14 

19 

13.8 

5.8 

Balanced 

Defense 

Rear Area 

Large 

48 

48 

52 

49 

46 

48.6 

i ”> 

Small 

27 

27 

26 

19 

23 

24.4 

1 

Rear Area 
Concentration 

Q9 

Large 

m 

52 

51 

34 

42 

47 

8.9 

Small 

16 

28 

15 

15 

17 

18.2 

i 

5.5 


One of the suprising results from examining the box plots is that the balanced de¬ 
fense seems to do as well as the rear area concentration when it comes to protecting rear 
area assets fiom damage. This could be because the balanced defense attrits some of the 
planes along the FEBA as they ingress, some of them around the rear area assets, and 
others along the FEBA as they are on their egress route. Due to the lightly defended 
FEBA in the rear area concentration strategv, however, the airplanes can adjust their 
route of attack so as to avoid the air defenses along the FEBA. Consequently, the ADA 
units are onlv allowed one chance to attrit the enemy; when they are attacking the rear 
area targets. 

The Wicoxon signed rank test is used to determine if the media 1 ' number of 
ground-targets killed in the forward concentration is equal to the medians of the bal¬ 
anced and rear area concentration for large and small escort attacks. The null hypoth¬ 
eses are rejected in all but one case. When comparing the forward concentration to the 
rear area concentration defense for a small escort attack, the null hypothesis cannot be 
rejected at the 0.10 significance level. Therefore, in that scenario it is a toss-up as to 


34 






























































NUMBER OF GROUND-TARGETS DESTROYED NUMBER OF CROUND-TARGETS DESTROYED 











which defense to employ. From the skyscraper plot (Figure 19 on page 36), it looks as 
if the height of the 'forward-small' skyscraper is significantly smaller than that of the 
'rear-small' skyscraper. This could be true, since the Wilcoxon signed rank test is a test 
of equality of medians, not means. The box plots in Figure IS show the sample medians 
for the two scenarios to be much closer than the sample means. 

SKYSCRAPER PLOT OF MOE #3 SAMPLE MEANS 



Figure 19. Overall Comparison of Rear Area Attack Options with MOE #3 Results 
D. MODEL EXCURSION 

The dominance of the forward concentration defense in all three measures of effec¬ 
tiveness was an unexpected result. Ilow could a forward concentration perform better 
against a rear area attack than a rear area concentrated defense that was designed spe¬ 
cifically for a rear area attack? As argued earlier, to attack a target in the rear area 
which is defended by a rear area concentration, an airplane can slip through the ADA 
coverage gaps in the FEB A and then it needs only to survive the heavy coverage around 
the target. In order to attack the same target defended by a forward concentration, an 
airplane must survive the trip through the heavy belt of ADA coverage on ingress, a 
light coverage around the target, and another trip through the forward belt on egress. 

In order to further validate the results of the JTLS model and to demonstrate that 
the 'no gaps and heavy coverage' design of the forward concentration defense strategy 


36 





is indeed the driving force behind its dominance as measured by the MOEs, two addi¬ 
tional scenarios were constructed and run in the JTLS combat model. A new ADA de¬ 
fense 'strategy,' called the reduced forwaid concentration, was constructed by removing 
from the model one out of every two adjacent ADA units in the forward concentration 
defensive belt (sec Appendix B for details). This left the forward belt lightly defended 
by ADA. The reduced forward concentration strategy was tested against two Soviet 
options: a rear area attack with a large escort size, and a rear area attack with a small 
escort size. The results are presented in Table 4. 


Table 4. SIMULATION RESULTS FOR MODEL EXCURSION: Grouped by 
MOEs 


MOE if 1: Soviet Airplanes Shot Down By US ADA 

Type of 
ADA Defense 

Location of 
Air Attack. 

Escort 

Size 

Run 

til 

Run 

#2 

Run 

#3 

Run 

#4 

Run 

#5 

Sample 

Mean 

Sample 
Std. Dev. 

Reduced 

Tonvard 

Concentration 

Rear Area 

Large 

37 

36 

39 

25 

65 

40.4 

14.8 

Small 

123 

102 

138 

123 

129 

123 

13.2 


MOE if 2: Percentage of Successful Soviet Bombing Missions 

Type of 
ADA Defense 

Location of 
Air Attack 

Escort 

Size 

Run 

til 

Run 

H2 

Run 

#3 

Run 

H4 

Run 

US 

Sample 

Mean 

Sample 
Std. Dev. 

Reduced 
Tom aid 
Concentration 

Rear Area 

Large 

76 

89 

79 

90 

67 

80.2 

9.6 

Small 

47 

44 

28 

32 

36 

37.4 

8.0 


MOE il 3: Number of US Targets Destroyed 


Type of 
ADA Defense 

Location of 
Air Attack 

Escort 

Size 

Run 

til 

Run 

til 

Run 

//3 

Run 

ti4 

Run 

IIS 

Sample 

Mean 

Sample 
Std. Dev. 

Reduced 

Forward 

Concentration 

Rear Area 

Large 

61 

61 

58 

61 

53 

58.8 

3.5 

Small 

36 

47 

25 

27 

22 

31.4 

10.2 


'fhc reduced forward concentration defense was compared to the rear area concen¬ 
tration defense for anal}sis. The resulting box plots which illustrate this comparison for 


37 





























































































each MOE are in Figure 20 on page 39, Figure 21 on page 40, and Figure 22 on page 
41. The box plots indicate that rear area concentration performs better than the forward 
reduced concentration in all cases except possibly for MOE 1 with a small escort size 
attach. The Wilcoxon signed rank test confirms this indication: the null hypotheses are 
rejected in favor of the rear area concentration being the better performer in all but the 
one case described above. This solidifies the theory that the key to the success of the 
forward concentration defense lies in its heavy concentration of no-gap ADA coverage. 

E. SUMMARY 

The data produced by running the twelve scenarios on the JTLS model were ana¬ 
lyzed using graphical and nonparametric statistical methods. The results of the analysis 
show that almost without exception, the forward concentration ADA strategy performed 
significant!} better than the other defenses with respect to ever} MOE. Also, no defense 
performed significantly better than the forward concentration defense with respect to 
an} MOE. A model excursion was run that produced results supporting the supposition 
that the ke} to the dominance of the forward concentration strateg} is its dense coverage 
without gaps. Normally, a sensitivity analysis would be performed which would result 
in different strategies being recommended for various scenarios, depending on a subjec¬ 
tive weighting of the MOEs. With a dominant strategy, however, no sensitivit} analysis 
is necessary, the forward concentration ADA strategy is the defense of choice for ail} 
scenario, independent of the weighting of the MOEs. 


3 $ 



STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR LARGE ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR SMALL ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



REAS AREA 
CONCENTRATION 


REDUCED FORWARD 
CONCENTRATION 


Figure 20. Box Plots Showing Model Excursion Results for MOE #1 












STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR LARGE ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR SMALL ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



Figure 21. Box Plots Showing Mode! Excursion Results for MOE ft2 







NUM8ER OF GROUND—TARGETS DESTROYED NUMBER OF GROUND-TARGETS DESTROYED 


Figure 22. 


STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR LARGE ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



STRATEGY COMPARISON FOR SMALL ESCORT ATTACK ON REAR AREA 



Box Plots Showing Model Excursion Results for MOE #3 










V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


A. CONCLUSIONS 

The purpose of this thesis was to determine if ADA units positioned in a belt defense 
performed better than the point defense that the US Army currently uses. It sought to 
do this through a comparison of three ADA defense strategies: 

1. Forward Concentration (belt defense) 

2. Balanced Concentration (point defense) 

3. Rear Area Concentration (point defense) 

The Joint Theater Level Simulation, a computer combat simulation model, was used as 
a tool for analysis to compare the three strategies in a Fulda Gap scenario against a 
variety of Soviet attack options. Using the following measures of effectiveness: 

1. Soviet airplanes shot down by US ADA, 

2. percentage of successful Soviet bombing missions, and 

3. number of US ground-targets destroyed, 

the forward concentration defense pro\cd to have a significant advantage o\er the other 
two strategies, regardless cf the weighting of MOEs. 

While it is acknowledged that a real-world comparison of these strategies could ha\e 
different results than this computer simulation, the total dominance of the forward 
concentration defense strategy is too significant to ignore, even in light of the limitations 
placed on the scenario as discussed in “3. Scenario Limitations" on page 16. A com¬ 
parison b\ computer simulation such as this is just one of the many steps involved in 
developing new strategics to keep up with changing technologies. 

JTLS proved to be a powerful analytical tool in the comparison of ADA strategies. 
Its potential was barely tapped with the relatively small simulation used in this thesis. 
With a large, analytical study run b> a dozen or more people, the ample analytical ca¬ 
pabilities of JTLS could be exercised. The planned improvements such as revision of the 
postprocessor function and availability of detailed logistical information serve to in¬ 
crease its attractiveness as an analytical tool. 


42 







D. RECOMMENDATIONS 

The results of this thesis are significant enough to warrant further study into the 
comparative efl'ectis eness of the forward concentration defense strategy. Immediate 
follow-on research should focus on expansion of scenarios to exploit JTLS capabilities. 
If the results are stiil significant, future research should use different models, and even¬ 
tually field exercises to validate results already obtained. Specific reccommendations for 
immediate follow-on research are: 

1. Repeat the strategy comparison using a classified database. Although the database 
used for this thesis contained highly reasonable figures, they were not the actual 
classified values. 

2. Increase the number of runs in a cell to 20 or more, and attempt to fit the data to 
a distribution. This would aid the process of statistical analysis. 

3. Incorporate US Air Force and logistics into the analysis. Although this will greatly 
complicate the scenario programming and data analysis efforts, both of these areas 
are needed in the model before it can be considered to have real-world application. 

4 . Extend the war from one day to one week. This will show the effects of attrition 
over a period of time on the different strategies. If logistics is played, any effects 
of logistical shortfalls will surface. 

Finally, this thesis has demonstrated that JTLS is, indeed, suitable for evaluating 
tactics and doctrine in a variety of scenarios. In particular, use of the model to investi¬ 
gate various taetks in an emironment such as Desert Shield could provide valuable in¬ 
sights to military planners. 


43 








APPENDIX A. UNIT LOCATIONS AT BEGINNING OF SCENARIO 

The following two lists contain the JTLS short name and beginning location for the 
units (except ADA units) involved in the combat mode! simulation. 

A. US FORCES 


UNIT NAME 

LATITUDE 

LONGITUDE 

CENTAG 

49-25-5SN 

7-39-54E 

21SUPCOM 

49-27-2SN 

7-50-3 IE 

212.HVY 

49-27-2SN 

7-50-3 IE 

VCORPS 

50-04-49N 

S-41-59E 

V.COSCOM 

50-31-00N 

S-41-59E 

HQ4AD 

50-49-5SN 

9-2S-59E 

I 4AD 

50-48-OUN 

9-49-5SE 

2 4AD 

50-56-59N 

9-51-00 E 

3 '4 AD 

50-53-59N 

9-45-00E 

4 43 FA 

50-50-59N 

9-43-5SE 

HQ 5AD 

50-12-OON 

S-26-59E 

1 '5 AD 

50-12-00N 

S-26-59E 

2 5AD 

50-12-OON 

S-26-59E 

3.5AD 

50-12-00N 

S-26-59E 

5 43 FA 

50-12-OON 

S-26-59E 

HQ-81 D 

50-34-5SN 

9-23-59E 

1 SID 

50-25-0 IN 

9-52-59E 

2 SID 

50-2S-01N 

9-43-OOE 

3 SID 

50-37-0 IN 

9-43-OOE 

4 562 FA 

5O-34-0ON 

9-37-00E 

HQ-91 D 

50-19-59N 

9-1S-OOE 

1 91D 

50-19-59N 

9-IS-00E 

2 91D 

50-19-59N 

9-1S-00E 

3 91D 

50-19-59N 

9-1S-00E 

5 562 FA 

50-19-59N 

9-1S-00E 

HQ'2 AD 

50-46-OON 

9-13-00E 

1.2AD 

50-43-59N 

9-40-0 IE 

2 2AD 

50-4S-44N 

9-2S-39E 

3 2AD 

50-43-0ON 

9-18-00E 

2'43 FA 

50-40-0 IN 

9-36-00E 

FRANKFURT 

50-00-57N 

S-32-29E 

353 A10 

50-00-57N 

S-32-29E 

355 A10 

50-00-57N 

S-32-29E 

71'F4 

50-00-57N 

S-32-29E 

567 F4 

50-00-57N 

S-32-29E 

RAM STEIN 

49-27-1SN 

7-32-02E 

165TFW.FI 

49-27- 18N 

7-32-02E 

552 1 ESA 

49-27-1SN 

7-32-02E 

352 TKR 

49-27-1SN 

7-32-02E 

17 RF4 

49-27-1SN 

7-32-02E 

2.FARP 

50-25-5SN 

S-52-59E 

IATK.HELO 

50-25-5SN 

S-52-59E 

2ATK.HELO 

50-25-5SN 

8-52-59E 

BITBURG 

50-23-59N 

7-33-00E 



UNIT NAME 

LATITUDE 

LONGITUDE 

ITFS'AIO 

50-23-59N 

7-33-OOE 

99TFS A10 

50-23-59N 

/-33-0OE 

2STFS.F15 

50-23-59X 

7-33-OoE 

27TFSF15 

50-23-59N 

7-33-OOE 

IIQ 62AD 

49-27-1SX 

7-32-02E 

1 62 AD 

49-27- 1SX 

7-32-02E 

2 62AD 

49-27-1SX 

7-32-02E 

3,*62 AD 

49-27-1SX 

7-32-02E 

HQ; 62 AD 

49-27-1SN 

7-32-02E 


SOVIET FORCES 

UNIT NAME 


GSFD 

12FSB 

I2A.MB 

10TD 

1'IOTD 

2 10TD 

3 IOTD 
2CAA 
14MRD 

1 14.MRR 

2 14MRR 

3 I4MRR 
14T-R 
I2MRD 

1 12MRR 

2 I2MRR 

3 J2MRR 
I2TR 
DAG. 14 
DAG. 12 
22TAA 
7.FTR BMR 
S.FTR 

9. FTR BMR 

10. BMR 
57 LIFT 
WEIMARAFB 

1. FTR.AD 

2. FTR.AD 
LEIPZIG 

5. FTR BMR 

6. BMR 
DAG.24 


LATITUDE 

LOXGITl 

5I-25-29X 

12-01-370 

51-1S-46X 

12-04-29E 

51-10-PX 

j 1-45-OoE 

51-00-59X 

10-57-57E 

51-03-57X 

10-41-59E 

50-56-59X 

10-42-57E 

5O-50-59X 

I0-55-5SE 

51-05-59X 

11-03-0UE 

50-37-0OX 

10-09-59E 

50-40-0 IN 

10-I9-00E 

50-32-59X 

IO-I9-OOE 

50-37-00X 

10-09-59E 

50-45-OOX 

10-30-000 

51-OO-OoX 

10-23-59E 

5o-57-5”N 

10-11-59E 

50-47-59N 

10-09-5” E 

5O-42-0OX 

10-07-5SE 

5<)-51-5~X 

10-IS-OuE 

511 . 34 . 5 SX 

10-26-59E 

50-49-fmX 

10-I9-U0E 

5I-43-5SX 

11 -56-591* 

5I-43-5SX 

11-56-59E 

5I-43-5SX 

11 -56-5‘T 

5I-43-5SN 

I I-56-590 

51-43-5SX 

11-56-59E 

5I-43-5SX 

I1-56-590 

50-58-29X 

11-I9-5SE 

50-5S-29X 

II-I9-5SE 

50-5S-29N 

11-19-5SE 

51-24-OoX 

I2-26-59E 

5I-24-0ON 

12-26-59E 

51-24-OOX 

12-26-590 

50-43-00N 

1I-15-00E 




APPENDIX B. LOCATIONS OF ADA UNITS 

The following four lists contain the JTLS short name and location of t K e ADA units 
in each of the three ADA defense strategies, plus the excursion scenario. 

A. BALANCED DEFENSE 


UNIT NAME LATITUDE LONGITUDE 


101SAM-HWK01 50-33N 7-36E 

I07SAM-HWK07 50-24N 7-50E 

110SAM-HWK10 50-24N 7-50E 

21SUPCOM-HM 49-33N 7-47E 

21SUPCOM-MM 49-27N 7-52E 

FRANK EUR-1-I.V1 50-09N 8-44E 

FRANK Fl'R-MM 50-02N 8-5 IE 

HQ2AD-HM 50-46N 9-13E 

HQ'2AD-MM 50-46N 9-13E 

HQ4AD-HM 50-50N 9-29E 

HQ'4AD-:V1M 50-50N 9-29E 

HQ5AD-HM 50-12N 8-27E 

HQ-5AD-MM 50-12N 8-27E 

l-IQ.'SlD-HM 50-35N 9-24E 

HQ 8ID-MM 50-35N 9-24E 

HQ91D-HM 50-20 N 9-18E 

HQ-91D-MM 50-20N 9-18E 

RAMSTEIN-IIM 49-37N 7-3SE 

RAMSTE1N-MM 49-37N 7-2SE 

0005S A >1-JAWS 50-30N 7-441; 

V.COSCOM-ILM 50-17N 8-37E 

V.COSCOM-MM 50-13N 8-52E 


B. FORWARD CONCENTRATION 
UNIT NAME 


101SAM-HWK01 

107SAM-HWK07 

110SAM-HWK10 

21SUPCOM-HM 

21SUPCOM-MM 

FRANKFUR-I-IM 

FRANKFUR-MM 

HQ/2AD-HM 

I-1Q/2AD-MM 

HQ'4AD-HM 

HQ'4AD-MM 

I-IQ'5AD-HM 

HQ-5AD-.MM 

HQ'SID-HM 


DEFENSE 

LATITUDE 

LONGITUDE 

51-00N 

9-35E 

50-52N 

9-35E 

50-46N 

9-33E 

50-55N 

9-36E 

50-39N 

9-3 IE 

50-09N 

8-44E 

50-33N 

9-3 IE 

50-46N 

9-13E 

50-46N 

9-13E 

50-50N 

9-29E 

50-50N 

9-29E 

50-42N 

9-33E 

50-38N 

9-15E 

50-35N 

9-24E 


46 


UNIT NAME 

LATITUDE 

LONGITUDE 

HQ SID-MM 

50-35N 

9-24E 

HQ'91D-HM 

50-27N 

9-40E 

HQ 9ID-MM 

50-24N 

9-46E 

RAMSTEIN-HM 

49-37N 

7-2SE 

RAM STEIN-MM 

50-20N 

9-54E 

0005SAM-JAWS 

50-30N 

7-44 E 

V.COSCOM-HM 

50-12N 

8-4 IE 

V.COSCOM-MM 

50-3 IN 

9-23E 

REAR AREA CONCENTRATION DEFENSE 


UNIT NAME 

LATITUDE 

LONGITUDE 

101SAM-HWK01 

50-33N 

7-36E 

107SAM-HWK07 

50-24N 

7-50E 

110SAM-HWKI0 

50-24N 

7-50E 

21SUPCOM-MM 

49-33N 

7-47E 

21 SUP COM-MM 

49-27N 

7-52E 

FRANKFUR-HM 

50-09N 

8-44E 

FRANKFUR-MM 

50-02N 

8-5 IE 

HQ 2AD-HM 

50-2SN 

7-48 E 

HQ 2AD-MM 

50-46N 

9-13E 

HQ4AD-HM 

50-2 IN 

7-28E 

HQ 4AD-MM 

50-50N 

9-29E 

HQ 5AD-H.M 

50-ION 

8-37E 

HQ 5AD-MM 

50-12N 

S-27E 

HQSID-MM 

49-24N 

7-25E 

HQ SID-MM 

50-35N 

9-24 E 

HQ9ID-HM 

50-20N 

9-18E 

I-IQ'9 ID-MM 

49-36N 

7-47E 

RAMSTEIN-HM 

49-37N 

7-3SE 

RAM STEIN-MM 

49-37N 

7-28E 

00O5SAM-JAWS 

50-30N 

7-441- 

V.COSCOM-HM 

50-17N 

8-37E 

V.COSCOM-MM 

50-13N 

8-52E 

REDUCED FORWARD CONCENTRATION DEFENSE 


UNIT NAME 

LATITUDE 

LONGITUDE 

107SAM-HWK07 

50-52N 

9-35E 

21SUPCOM-MM 

50-39N 

9-3 IE 

FRANKFUR-HM 

50-09N 

S-44E 

HQ;2AD-HM 

50-46N 

9-13E 

HQ‘2AD-MM 

50-46N 

9-13E 

HQ.4AD-HM 

50-50N 

9-29E 

HQMAD-MM 

50-50N 

9-29E 

HQ.8ID-HM 

50-35N 

9-24E 

HQ'SID-MM 

50-35N 

9-24E 

HQ/91 D-HM 

50-27 N 

9-40E 

RAMSTEIN-HM 

49-37N 

7-28 E 

RAM STEIN-MM 

50-20N 

9-54 E 

0005SAM-JAWS 

50-30N 

7-44E 

V.COSCOM-HM 

50-12N 

8-4 IE 


47 





APPENDIX C. DESCRIPTION OF SOVIET AIR MISSIONS 

The following two lists contain the composition, attack time, and targets for each 
of the air attack missions. The terms in parentheses are the NATO names for the air¬ 
planes used. 

A. MAXIMUM ESCORT MISSIONS 
MISSION NAME: 


MAXI 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS. FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


15 Bombers (FITTER) 

2 Jammers (BACKFIRE) 

8 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
5 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0700 hrs. 

2.4AD, HQ'4AD 
Bitburg, Frankfurt 


MAX2 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS. FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


6 Bombers (BACKFIRE) 

6 Bombers (FITTER) 

2 Jammers (BACKFIRE) 

8 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
5 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0730 hrs. 

1/4AD, 1/2 AD 
Frankfurt, Ramstein 


MAX3 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS. FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


15 Bombers (FITTER) 

2 Jammers (BACKFIRE) 

S Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
5 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0800 hrs. 

2 SID, HQ;SID 
Ramstein, Bitburg 


MAX4 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS, FEBA: 
TARGETS. Rear: 


15 Bombers (FITTER) 

2 Jammers (BACKFIRE) 

8 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
5 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
1300 hrs. 

3/4AD, 2/4AD 
Bitburg, Frankfurt 


48 






♦ 


MAX5 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS, FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


6 Bombers (BACKFIRE) 

6 Bombers (FITTER) 

2 Jammers (BACKFIRE) 

8 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
5 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 

1330 hrs. 

2,‘4AD, 3/4AD 
Frankfurt, Ramstein 


MAX6 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS. FEBA 
TARGETS, Rear: 


15 Bombers (FITTER) 

2 Jammers (BACKFIRE) 

8 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
5 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
1400 hrs. 

3/SID, HQ/SID 
Ramstein, Frankfurt 


B. MINIMUM ESCORT MISSIONS 
MISSION NAME: 


MINT 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS. FEBA: 
TARGETS. Rear: 


4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0700 hrs. 

2'4AD, 3/4AD 
Bitburg. Frankfurt 


4 


MIN2 


COMPOSITION: 3 Bombers (BACKFIRE) 

1 Bomber (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 

3 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
ATTACK TIME: 0705 hrs. 

T ARGETS. FEBA: 2'2AD, I-IQ/4 AD 
TARGETS, Rear: Bitburg, Ramstein 


M1N3 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS. FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0710 hrs. 

2/4AD, 3/4AD 
Bitburg, Frankfurt 


MIN4 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS. FEBA: 
TARGETS. Rear: 


4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0710 hrs. 

L2AD, 2'43FA 
Frankfurt, Ramstein 


49 







MIN 5 


MIN6 


MIN7 . 


MINS 


MIN9 


MIN 10 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS, FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 

3 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0S00 hrs. 

2/43FA, 3/810 
Frankfurt, Bitburg 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS, FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0830 hrs. 

3/SID, 2/43FA 
Frankfurt, Ramstein 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS, FEBA 
TARGETS, Rear: 


5 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0900 hrs. 

2'8ID, HQ/8 ID 
Ramstein, Bitburg 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS, FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


5 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 

3 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
0930 hrs. 

2/SID, HQ-81 D 
Ramstein, Frankfurt 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS, FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


5 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
1000 hrs. 

4/562FA, 2/81D 
Ramstein, Bitburg 


COMPOSITION: 


ATTACK TIME: 
TARGETS, FEBA: 
TARGETS, Rear: 


4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
1030 hrs. 

1/4AD, 4/43 FA 
Bitburg, Frankfurt 


50 



MI Nil 


COMPOSITION: 3 Bombers (BACKFIRE) 

1 Bomber (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 

3 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
ATTACK TIME: liOOhrs. ' 

TARGETS, FEBA: 3/4AD, 1/2AD 
TARGETS, Rear: Bitburg, Ramstein 


MIN 12 COMPOSITION: 4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 

ATTACK TIME: 1130 hrs. 

TARGE'I'S, FEBA: 2/4AD, 4/43FA 
TARGETS, Rear: Bitburg, Frankfurt 


MIN 13 COMPOSITION: 5 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 

ATTACK TIME: 1200 hrs. 

TARGETS, FEBA: 1/2AD, HQ MAD 
TARGETS, Rear: Frankfurt, Ramstein 


MI NT 4 COMPOSITION: 5 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 

3 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
ATTACK TIME: 1230 hrs. 

TARGETS, FEBA: 2.43FA, HQ SID 
TARGETS, Rear: Frankfurt, Bitburg 


MINT5 COMPOSITION: 5 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 

ATTACK TIME: 1300 hrs. 

TARGETS. FEBA: HQ/SID, 2'43FA 
TARGETS, Rear: Frankfurt, Ramstein 


MINT6 COMPOSITION: 4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 

ATTACK TIME: 1330 hrs. 

TARGETS, FEBA: 4.'562FA, HQ;SID 
TARGETS, Rear: Ramstein, Bitburg 


51 








MINI? 


MINIS 


COMPOSITION: 4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFI RE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 

3 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 
ATTACK TIME: 1400 hrs. 

TARGETS, FEBA: 4/43FA, RQ/4AD 
TARGETS, Rear: Ramstcin, Frankfurt 


COMPOSITION: 4 Bombers (FITTER) 

1 Jammer (BACKFIRE) 

2 Wild Weasels (FLOGGERS) 
2 Air-to-Air (FLOGGERS) 

ATTACK TIME: 1430 hrs. ' 

TARGETS, FEBA: HQ/2AD, 3/2AD 
TARGETS, Rear: Ramstcin, Bitburg 


i 


52 



APPENDIX D. EXPLANATION OF BOX PLOTS 

The symbols used in the box plots contained in this thesis and their corresponding 
meanings are as follows: 

• 'fhe top and bottom of the rectangle, or box, represent the upper and lower 
quartiles of the data. 

• The sample median is portrayed by a horizontal line segment within the rectangle. 

• Solid lines extend from the top and bottom of the box to adjacent values, denoted 
by 'x'. The upper adjacent value is the largest observation that is less than or equai 
to the upper quartile plus (1.5 x interquartile range). Conversely, the lower adja¬ 
cent value is the smallest observation that is greater than or equal to the lower 
quartile minus (1.5 x interquartile range). 

• Any observation that falls outside the range of the two adjacent values is called an 
outside value, and is plotted individually as a ' + 

• Dashed lines are used to connect the sample mean, denoted b> of one sample 
to another. |Ref. 8: p. 21 j 


53 






APPENDIX E. WILCOXON SIGNED RANK TEST RESULTS 

> 

This appendix contains details of the Wilcoxon signed rant test procedures as they 
arc applied to the hypothesis testing in Chapter IV. In each case, the null hypothesis is 

r 

that the sample medians are the same. The symbol '>' in the alternate hypothesis is 
used to indicate that the median of the first scenario is greater than the median of the 
second. The short names used to indicate scenarios are: 

• FC = forward concentration 

• BA = balanced 

• RC = rear area concentration 

• RF = reduced forward concentration 
« LG = large escort 

• SM = small escort 

• FB = FEBA attack 

• RA = rear area attack 

* 

The numbers in the signed rank column are the magnitudes (in ranked order with sign 
attached; of the differences in the observations from each run of the corresponding sec- ; 

narios. The Wilcoxon signed rank test statistic (T_) is the sum of the ranks with nega¬ 
tive signs. The midrank method is used to assign ranks for tics. For a sample size of five 
and an « = 0.10, the null hypothesis is rejected when T_ < 3. For a sample size of four 
(used in one case because of a zero value data point), the critical value is 1. 

A. MOE if l 

ALTERNATE NULL HYPOTHESIS 


i Uy * It > * IS 

HYPOTHESIS 

SIGNED RANK 

T_ 

REJECTED? 


FB-LG-FC > FB-LG-BA 

4 6 7 7 15 

0 

YES 


FB-LG-FC > FB-LG-RC 

6 S S 9 16 

0 

YES 


FB-SM-FC > FB-SM-BA 

35 42 44 45 47 

0 

YES 


FB-SM-FC > FB-SM-RC 

37 45 46 46 51 

0 

YES 


RA-LG-FC > RA-LG-BA 

21 29 35 38 60 

0 

YES 


RA-LG-FC > RA-LG-RC 

31 35 38 47 64 

0 

YES 


RA-SM-FC > RA-SM-BA 

14 15 17 27 34 

0 

YES 


RA-SM-FC > RA-SM-RC 

17 18 IS 22 34 

0 

YES 


RA-LG-RC > RA-LG-RF 

9 19 22 2J 41 

0 

YES 

ir 

RA-SM-RC > RA-SM-RF 

1 3 -3 10 16 

2.5 

YES 



54 



B. MOE f}2 


ALTERNATE 



NULL HYPOTHESIS 

HYPOTHESIS 

SIGNED RANK 

T_ 

REJECTED? 

FB-LG-FC > FB-LG-BA 

114 4 8 

0 

YES 

FB-LG-FC > FB-LG-RC 

114 5 8 

0 

YES 

FB-SM-FC > FB-SM-BA 

11 12 14 19 22 

0 

YES 

FB-SM-FC > FB-SM-RC 

13 15 15 19 22 

0 

YES 

RA-LG-FC > RA-LG-BA 

-2 5 13 14 27 

1 

YES 

RA-LG-FC > RA-LG-RC 

11 13 15 26 2S 

0 

YES 

RA-SM-FC > RA-SM-BA 

8 14 15 16 18 

0 

YES 

RA-SM-FC > RA-SM-RC 

0 4 6 S II 

0 

YES 

RA-LG-RC > RA-LG-RF 

7 10 IS 25 36 

0 

YES 

RA-SM-RC > RA-SM-RF 

10 10 12 16 28 

0 

YES 

C. MOE #3 




ALTERNATE 



NULL HYPOTHESIS 

HYPOTHESIS 

SIGNED RANK 

T_ 

REJECTED? 

RA-LG-FC > RA-LG-BA 

6 11 13 15 21 

0 

YES 

RA-LG-FC > RA-LG-RC 

2 -4 17 20 23 

2 

YES 

RA-SM-FC > RA-SM-BA 

4 5 8 15 21 

0 

YES 

RA-SM-FC > RA-SM-RC 

I -2 -3 10 16 

5 

NO 

RA-LG-RC > RA-LG-RF 

5 7 9 11 27 

0 

YES 

RA-SM-RC > RA-SM-RF 

5 10 12 19 20 

0 

YES 




LIST OF REFERENCES 


1. 

United States Army. 

Field Manual 44-1, US Army Air Defense Artillery Employment, 
Headquarters, Department of the Army, May 19S3. 

2 . 

United States Army, 

Field Manual 100-5, OPERATIONS, 

Headquarters, Department of the Army, May 1986. 


Gabriel. Richard A., 

NATO and the Warsaw Pact, 

Greenwood Press, 19S3. 

4 . 

Force Structure, Resource, and assessment Directorate (J-S), Joint Chiefs 
of Staff. JFLS Player Guide, The Pentagon, May 1990. 

5. 

Interview between Edward P. Kellcher, Analyst, Rolands and Associates 
Corporation, and the author, 1 September, 1990. 

6 . 

Force Structure, Resource, and assessment Directorate (J-S). Joint Chiefs 
of Stall. JTLS Executive Overview, The Pentagon, May 1990. 

7 . 

Gibbons. Jean Dickinson. 

Nonparametric Methods for Quantitative Analysis (Second Edition), 
Columbus, OH, 19S5. 

S. 

Chambers, J.M., and others, 

Graphical Methods for Data Analysis, 

Duxbury Press, J9S3. 


56 








CO 


INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 


No. Copies 

1. Defense Technical Information Center 2 

Cameron Station 
Alexandria, VA 22304-6145 

2. Library. Code 52 2 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5002 

Deputy Undersecretary of the Army 1 

for Operations Research 
Room 2E261. The Pentagon 
Washington, D.C. 20310 

4. Director 1 

Attn: Mr. 15.13. Vandiver III 

U.S. Army Concepts Analysis Agency 
Bethesda, MD 20SI4 

5. Director 1 

Requirements & Programs Director 

*' Headquarters. US A-TRADOC 

Attn: ATRC-RP (COL Brinkley) 

Fort Monroe. VA 23651-5143 

4 

6 . Commander and Director 1 

U.S. Army TRADOC Analysis Command 

TRAC-Monterey 
Monterey. CA 93943 

7. Director 1 

U.S. Army TRADOC Analysis Command - Fort Leavenworth 

Attn: ATRC-FOQ (Technical Information Center) 

Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-5200 

S. Professor Samuel H. Parry 2 

Department of Operations Research 
Naval Postgraduate School. Code OR Py 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

9. LTC William Caldwell 2 

Department of Operations Research 
* Naval Postgraduate School, Code OR’Cl 

Monterey, CA 93943-5000 


57 



10. Rolands & Associates Corp. 
500 Sloat Ave. 

Monterey, CA 93940 


1 


11. CPT David M. Savage 1 

Dept, of Systems Engineering 
United States Militarv Acadeniv 
West Point, NY 10996-1779 


5 $ 





