• SOFTC: A Software Correlator for VLBI 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


SOFTC is an advanced software im- 
plementation of a signal correlator for 
very-long-baseline interferometry 
(VLBI) for measuring positions of natu- 
ral celestial objects and distant space- 
craft. Because of increases in processing 
speeds of general-purpose computers, 
software VLBI correlators have become 
viable alternatives to hardware ones. 
The input to SOFTC consists of digi- 
tized samples of raw VLBI-antenna re- 
ceived-signal voltages. Optionally, 
SOFTC also tracks calibration tones su- 
perimposed on the received signals. 


The outputs of SOFTC are (1) phases 
and amplitudes as functions of time and 
frequency for cross-correlated received 
signals and (2) phases and amplitudes 
as functions of time, station, and tone 
number for the calibration tones. 
SOFTC was created to be as accurate as 
possible, capable of processing essen- 
tially any VLBI data, pass strong debug- 
ging tests, have a simple user interface, 
and have no platform dependencies. 
SOFTC is written modularly in the C 
programming language. The great ad- 
vantage of implementing a correlator in 


software, in contradistinction to hard- 
ware, is that it becomes relatively easy 
and much less expensive and time-con- 
suming to adapt, modify, improve, and 
update the correlator. 

This program was written by Stephen Lowe 
of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab- 
oratory. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-41072. 


© Progress in Computational Simulation of Earthquakes 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


GeoFEST(P) is a computer program 
written for use in the QuakeSim project, 
which is devoted to development and im- 
provement of means of computational 
simulation of earthquakes. GeoFEST(P) 
models interacting earthquake fault sys- 
tems from the fault-nucleation to the tec- 
tonic scale. The development of Ge- 
oFEST(P) has involved coupling of two 
programs: GeoFEST and the Pyramid 
Adaptive Mesh Refinement Library. Ge- 
oFEST is a message-passing-interface- 
parallel code that utilizes a finite-ele- 
ment technique to simulate evolution of 
stress, fault slip, and plastic/ elastic defor- 


mation in realistic materials like those of 
faulted regions of the crust of the Earth. 
The products of such simulations are 
synthetic observable time-dependent sur- 
face deformations on time scales from 
days to decades. Pyramid Adaptive Mesh 
Refinement Library is a software library 
that facilitates the generation of compu- 
tational meshes for solving physical prob- 
lems. In an application of GeoFEST (P) , a 
computational grid can be dynamically 
adapted as stress grows on a fault. Simu- 
lations on workstations using a few tens 
of thousands of stress and displacement 
finite elements can now be expanded to 


multiple millions of elements with 
greater than 98-percent scaled efficiency 
on over many hundreds of parallel 
processors (see figure). 

This work was done by Andrea Donnel- 
lan, Jay Parker, Gregory Lyzenga, Michele 
Judd, P. Peggy Li, Charles Norton, Edwin 
Tisdale, and Robert Granat of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
(see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-41079. 



Models of Landers, CA, Earthquake Deformation are shown at two resolutions. These images show the accuracy improvement going from 82,000 finite el- 
ements on four processors (left) to 1.4 million finite elements on 64 processors (right). 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2006 


43 



