NASA 

Technical Memorandum 107199 


Army Research Laboratory 
Technical Report ARL-TR-1060 


An Axial-Torsional, Thermomechanical 
Fatigue Testing Technique 


Sreeramesh Kalluri 
NYMA, Inc. 

Brook Park, Ohio 

and 

Peter J. Bonacuse 
Vehicle Propulsion Directorate 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 


Prepared for the 

Symposium on Multiaxial Fatigue and Deformation Testing Techniques 
sponsored by the American Society for Testing and Materials 
Denver, Colorado, May 15, 1995 



National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 


m~m\% 


RESEARCH LABORATORY 


Trade names or manufacturers' names are used in this report for identification 
only. This usage does not constitute an official endorsement, either expressed 
or implied, by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 



AN AXIAL-TORSIONAL, THERMOMECHANICAL 
FATIGUE TESTING TECHNIQUE 


Sreeramesh Kalluri 
NYMA Inc. 

Brook Park, Ohio 44142 
and 


Peter J. Bonacuse 
Vehicle Propulsion Directorate 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 


ABSTRACT 

A technique for conducting strain-controlled, thermomechanical, axial-torsional fatigue tests on thin-walled tubu- 
lar specimens was developed. Three waveforms of loading, namely, the axial strain waveform, the engineering shear 
strain waveform, and the temperature waveform were required in these tests. The phasing relationships between the 
mechanical strain waveforms and the temperature and axial strain waveforms were used to define a set of four axial- 
torsional, thermomechanical fatigue (AT-TMF) tests. Real-time test control (3 channels) and data acquisition (a 
minimum of 7 channels) were performed with a software program written in C language and executed on a personal 
computer. The AT-TMF testing technique was used to investigate the axial-torsional thermomechanical fatigue be- 
havior of a cobalt-base superalloy, Haynes 188. The maximum and minimum temperatures selected for the AT-TMF 
tests were 760 and 316 *C, respectively. Details of the testing system, calibration of the dynamic temperature profile 
of the thin-walled tubular specimen, thermal strain compensation technique, and test control and data acquisition 
schemes, are reported. The isothermal, axial, torsional, and in- and out-of-phase axial-torsional fatigue behaviors of 
Haynes 188 at 316 and 760 °C were characterized in previous investigations. The cyclic deformation and fatigue 
behaviors of Haynes 188 in AT-TMF tests are compared to the previously reported isothermal axial-torsional behav- 
ior of this superalloy at the maximum and minimum temperatures. 


NOMENCLATURE 

T temperature 

t time 

y engineering shear strain 

£ axial mechanical strain 

X proportionality constant, y a /e a 

<j> phase angle between axial mechanical and engineering shear strain waveforms 

0 phase angle between axial mechanical strain and temperature waveforms 

A denotes range of a variable 


1 



Subscripts: 
a amplitude 

min minimum value in a cycle 
max maximum value in a cycle 
th thermal 

tot total, i.e., mechanical and thermal 


INTRODUCTION 

Aeronautical gas turbine and rocket engine hot section components are routinely subjected to multiaxial states of 
stress under nonisothermal conditions (ref. 1). The nonisothermal nature of thermal loading arises from thermal gra- 
dients generated in components such as turbine blades, combustor liners, and disks during engine start up, shutdown, 
and operational transients as well as from the active cooling typically used in high performance engines. Multiaxial 
loading arises from the thermal gradients, centrifugal and pressure loads, mechanical constraints in the components, 
or combinations of any of these effects. For reliable and safe operation of reusable engines, it is imperative that the 
deformation behavior and fatigue life of the engine components be estimated through the use of the most pertinent 
constitutive and life prediction models and experimental data. 

Generation of cyclic deformation and fatigue life data under nonisothermal, multiaxial conditions requires devel- 
opment of reliable testing techniques. In particular, fatigue test definition can be complicated because of the multi- 
axial nature of mechanical loads and the simultaneously applied thermal load. In addition, specimen heating, test 
control, and data acquisition schemes must be developed to perform these complex fatigue tests. 

In this paper, an experimental technique to perform nonisothermal, axial-torsional fatigue tests on thin-walled 
tubular specimens is described. The technique was successfully used to test tubular specimens of a cobalt-base su- 
peralloy, Haynes 188 between the temperatures of 316 and 760 *C. This material is used for the liquid oxygen carry- 
ing posts in the main injector of the reusable space shuttle main engine and for the combustor liner in the T-800 
turboshaft engine for the RAH-66 Comanche helicopter. Both of these components are subjected to multiaxial 
stresses under nonisothermal loading conditions. Development of the test method, salient features of the testing tech- 
nique, and examples of the nonisothermal, axial-torsional fatigue and deformation data are reported. 


BACKGROUND 
Thermomechanical Testing 

Thermomechanical fatigue (TMF) tests, where a combination of both mechanical and thermal loads are typically 
imposed on a material specimen, have been used by designers and researchers to characterize the uniaxial, 
nonisothermal fatigue and deformation behaviors of reusable engine component materials (refs. 2 to 5). Over the 
last quarter century, several investigators developed experimental techniques to conduct TMF tests on axially loaded 
specimens (refs. 6 to 12). Strain-controlled axial TMF tests require active thermal strain compensation to obtain the 
necessary mechanical strains in a loading cycle. For a given temperature range and axial mechanical strain range, 
depending upon the phase difference between axial mechanical strain and temperature waveforms, an infinite num- 
ber of axial strain-controlled TMF test conditions can be investigated. However, axial strain-controlled TMF tests 
are generally classified as either in-phase (axial tensile peak mechanical strain occurs at T,^; 0 = 0°) or out-of- 
phase (axial tensile peak mechanical strain occurs at T^; 0= 180*). 

Thermomechanical testing under torsion was conducted by Bakis et al. (ref. 13) to investigate the cyclic deforma- 
tion behavior of the nickel-base superalloy, Hastelloy X. In torsional thermomechanical testing, the active thermal 
strain compensation that is required in the axial thermomechanical testing is ideally not necessary. In torsional TMF 
tests in-phase and out-of-phase tests can be defined in a sense similar to the axial TMF tests. In general, the phase 


2 



difference between a single mechanical strain waveform and the temperature waveform is controlled in these TMF 
tests. Note that in axial or torsional TMF tests, the terms “in-phase” and “out-of-phase” refer to thermal phasing 
between either the axial mechanical strain waveform or the engineering shear strain waveform and the temperature 
waveform. 


Axial-Torsional Testing 

Fatigue testing under combined axial-torsional loading is routinely conducted on thin- walled tubular specimens 
under isothermal conditions. Over the past twenty years, several researchers have developed testing facilities and 
techniques to conduct isothermal, axial-torsional tests at both room and elevated temperatures (refs. 14 to 20). As in 
axial or torsional TMF testing, for a given set of axial and engineering shear strain ranges, an infinite number of 
combined axial-torsional loading conditions can be investigated depending upon the phase difference between the 
axial and engineering shear strain waveforms. The combined axial-torsional fatigue tests are commonly classified as 
in-phase or proportional loading (axial strain peak and engineering shear strain peak occur at the same time; <f)= 0*) 
or out-of-phase or nonproportional loading (axial strain peak leads the engineering shear strain peak by a quarter of 
a waveform; $ = 90”). In combined axial-torsional fatigue tests, the terms “in-phase” and “out-of-phase” refer to 
mechanical phasing between the axial and engineering shear strain waveforms. 

Note that the terms “in-phase” and “out-of-phase” as used in the literature for axial TMF tests and isothermal, 
combined axial-torsional fatigue tests have two significant differences. First, as mentioned earlier, these terms repre- 
sent thermal phasing in axial TMF tests, whereas they represent mechanical phasing in isothermal, combined axial- 
torsional fatigue tests. Second, an out-of-phase test typically denotes a phase angle, 0 = 180 in the axial TMF tests, 
whereas it commonly denotes a phase angle, <]> = 90* in isothermal, combined axial-torsional fatigue tests. 


AXIAL-TORSIONAL, THERMOMECHANICAL FATIGUE (AT-TMF) TESTING 

Thermomechanical tests under combined axial-torsional loading require the control of three waveforms of loading 
(temperature, axial strain, and engineering shear strain) and two types of phase differences. (1) a thermal phasing as 
in axial TMF tests and (2) a mechanical phasing between the axial and the engineering shear strain waveforms. An 
infinite number of AT-TMF test conditions are possible, depending upon the combinations of mechanical and ther- 
mal phasings. In this paper, four types of AT-TMF tests are conceived by permutating the commonly investigated 
thermal (0= 0” and 180”) and mechanical ($ = 0” and 90”) phasings in axial TMF and isothermal, combined axial- 
torsional fatigue tests, respectively. The AT-TMF tests are defined as follows; (1) Mechanically In-phase and Ther- 
mally In-phase (MIPTIP) test, 4> = 0 = 0”; (2) Mechanically In-phase and Thermally Out-of-Phase (MIPTOP) test, 

<|> = 0’ and 0 = 180”; (3) Mechanically Out-of-Phase and Thermally In-Phase (MOPTIP) test, 4> = 90” and 0 = 0”; and 
(4) Mechanically Out-of-Phase and Thermally Out-of-Phase (MOPTOP) test, <|> = 90* and 0 = 180”. Note that both 
the “thermal phasing” and the “mechanical phasing” are referred to as either “in-phase” or “out-of-phase” depending 
upon the temperature waveform (for “thermal”) and engineering shear strain waveform (for “mechanical”) relation- 
ships to the axial strain waveform. Schematic axial mechanical strain, engineering shear strain, and temperature 
waveforms with appropriate phasings are shown in figure 1 for all four types of AT-TMF tests. In figures 1 (a) to (d), 
points A and C identify the locations of maximum and minimum temperatures in a cycle, respectively, and points B 
and D identify the locations of intermediate points, where the mean temperature occurs in a cycle. 

In this study, all four types of AT-TMF tests were conducted on thin- walled tubular specimens of Haynes 188 
superalloy between the temperatures of 316 and 760 *C. The selection of the maximum and minimum temperatures 
for the AT-TMF program was governed by the following: (1) Haynes 188 exhibits a ductility minimum at 760 ”C 
(ref. 21), which can significantly influence the low-cycle fatigue life, and (2) the isothermal, axial (A. = 0), torsional 
(X = oo), and combined mechanically in- and out-of-phase axial-torsional (X = 1.73; <|> = 0 and 90”, respectively) 
fatigue experiments were previously conducted at 316 and 760 ”C on the same heat of Haynes 188. The fatigue and 
cyclic deformation data and applicability of different multiaxial fatigue life prediction models to the isothermal, 
axial-torsional data of Haynes 188 were reported in references 22 to 25. 


3 



EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 


Materials and Specimens 

Solution-annealed, hot rolled, and centerless ground, 50.8 mm diameter round bars of wrought Haynes 188 super- 
alloy were supplied by a commercial vendor. The chemical composition of the superalloy in weight percent is as 
follows: <0.002 S, 0.002 B, 0.012 P, 0.1 C, 0.4 Si, 0.034 La, 0.75 Mn, 1.24 Fe, 13.95 W, 21.84 Cr, 22.43 Ni, with 
the balance being cobalt. Thin-walled tubular test specimens (fig. 2) were machined from these round bars. The bore 
of every tubular specimen was finished by a honing operation. Further details on machining of tubular specimens are 
available in ref. 26. 


Test system 

The AT-TMF test system consisted of an axial-torsional load frame with a capacity of ±223 kN axially and 
±2.26 kN-m in torsion. The load frame was controlled with dual servocontrollers, one each for the axial and tor- 
sional actuators. A schematic of the AT-TMF test system is shown in figure 3. Axial and engineering shear strains 
were measured and controlled with a commercially available, water-cooled, axial-torsional extensometer equipped 
with quartz probes. Two indentations, 25 mm apart (gage section) and 80 Jim deep, were pressed into the outer sur- 
face of every tubular specimen to mount the quartz probes of the extensometer. A photograph of the axial-torsional 
extensometer mounted on a calibration fixture is shown in figure 4. Specimens were heated in a three-coil (each coil 
is independently movable) heating fixture (ref. 27) connected to a 50 kW audio frequency induction heating unit. 
The number of turns in the top, middle, and bottom coils were five, one, and five, respectively. 

Test control and data acquisition were performed with a computer system equipped with digital to analog and 
analog to digital converters and interfaced with the servocontrollers, the temperature controller, and the temperature 
measuring instruments. Specifications of the computer system and test interface hardware are listed in table I. Inter- 
rupt driven software for conducting the tests was written in C language. Three command waveforms (e, y, and T) 
were generated and data from 1 1 channels (axial and torsional loads, strains, and strokes, and temperatures at five 
locations on the specimen) were acquired at a rate of 1000 points/cycle. The software provided a keyboard interrup- 
tion capability and a graphical display of axial and shear stresses versus time, data from the temperature measuring 
instruments, and test status. 


Temperature Measurement and Control 

Prior to the AT-TMF testing program, configuration of the three coils in the induction heating fixture was deter- 
mined through the use of an axial-torsional specimen with 16 chromel-alumel thermocouples spot- welded to loca- 
tions illustrated in figure 5. This heavily thermocoupled specimen was dedicated for temperature measurement along 
the straight section of the specimen and for establishing the individual locations of the three coils in the heating fix- 
ture. The thermocouple layout shown in figure 5 is not suitable for conducting fatigue tests because fatigue cracks 
can initiate from the thermocouple spot-welds in the straight section, which includes the gage section, of the speci- 
men. If the temperature in the gage section of the specimen can be monitored separately, thermocouples can be 
mounted in the shoulder regions of the specimen to control the temperature during a fatigue test. In a study involv- 
ing axial thermomechanical deformation tests on tubular specimens of Hastelloy X, Castelli and Ellis (ref. 1 1) re- 
ported that lack of adequate control of temperature profile in the straight section of the specimen resulted in 
cycle-dependent barrelling of the specimens. In an attempt to inhibit the cycle-dependent geometric instabilities in 
the AT-TMF tests, the coil configuration in the induction heating fixture was optimized by minimizing the thermal 
gradients in the straight section of a thermocoupled axial-torsional specimen (fig. 5) at r T max under dynamic condi- 
tions. The maximum allowable temperature deviation in the straight section at T^ under dynamic conditions was 
no more than 1 percent of Tj^. For a temperature range of 316 to 760 °C, this temperature criterion under dynamic 
conditions was satisfied with a cycle time of 10 min. 

In the AT-TMF tests, the temperature in the gage section of the tubular specimens was measured with a noncon- 
tacting optical system equipped with a sapphire probe. Four thermocouples, two each in the top and bottom shoulder 
regions, were spot-welded to the specimen. The specimen temperature was controlled with one of the two 


4 



thermocouples spot- welded in the top shoulder region of the specimen, where the total movement of the specimen is 
considerably smaller compared to the bottom shoulder region of the specimen. The cycle time (10 min) of the 
AT-TMF tests was dictated by the ability to obtain an acceptable gage section temperature under dynamic condi- 
tions over the temperature range of 316 to 760 °C. 

In each AT-TMF test, the remote location temperature control waveform required to achieve the acceptable gage 
section temperature waveform was obtained by a real-time, successive-correction, training method (fig. 6). The 
training was conducted under load control near zero axial and torsional loads. Initially a temperature control wave- 
form was assumed for the remote location and three thermal cycles were applied to allow the specimen to reach 
dynamic equilibrium. The corresponding gage section temperature waveform from the last of these three cycles was 
stored. In each training cycle, the procedure involved modification of the previously stored remote location tempera- 
ture control waveform by operating on the difference between the desired and the real-time gage section temperature 
waveforms. The training method was terminated when the largest deviation of the actual temperature in the gage 
section of the specimen was no more than 6 °C from the desired temperature at each point in a cycle. Typically 
about 6 to 12 iterations (or thermal cycles) were required for this training. An example of the gage section tempera- 
ture achieved after training the remote location temperature control waveform is shown in figure 7. After terminat- 
ing the temperature training, axial thermal strain versus temperature data from the next five cycles were acquired. 
Two sixth order polynomial fits, one for heat up from 316 to 760 °C and another for cool down from 760 to 316 *C, 
were derived from the data using least squares analyses. These polynomials were subsequently used to calculate 
axial thermal strain compensation values during the AT-TMF test. 


Axial thermal strain compensation 

Real-time, thermal strain compensation is necessary in axial and axial-torsional TMF tests to impose the required 
mechanical axial strain range on the test specimens. A method to verify the validity of thermal strain compensation 
technique involves starting the TMF test under strain control with £ max = ^mi n = ® monitoring the axial stresses 
developed in the specimen (ref. 1 1). If the axial stresses developed in the specimen are sufficiently small in compari- 
son to the magnitudes of the maximum and minimum stresses developed in the actual TMF test then thermal strain 
compensation is acceptable. In the case of AT-TMF tests, the functional relations established after the temperature 
training, between temperature and thermal strain for the heat up and cool down portions of the cycle, and real-time 
temperatures were used to offset the thermal strains. Axial stresses developed under strain control in one of the AT- 
TMF tests (largest in magnitude, i.e., worst case) during a thermal cycle (with = Y^ = 7^= 0) leading 

to the fatigue part of the AT-TMF test are shown in figure 8. The magnitude of the largest axial stress developed 
during the temperature cycle was about 14 MPa, which indicated that the axial thermal strain compensation tech- 
nique was functioning adequately. 


Fatigue Test procedure 

Total axial strain control values for the AT-TMF tests were obtained by using the following equation. 

e to ,(0 = e rt (flr(0])+eW (D 

In this equation appropriate functions F[T(t>], determined after terminating the temperature training procedure 
with least squares analyses for the heat up and cool down portions of the cycle, were used for e^. In calculating the 
strains and stresses, the software accounted for the continuous change in the gage length and other geometric param- 
eters of the specimen, which resulted from the changing temperature in the AT-TMF cycle. A flow chart illustrating 
the procedure followed for conducting AT-TMF tests is shown in figure 9. Each AT-TMF test was started in load 
control, and the specimen was heated to the mean temperature of 538 °C and stabilized at this temperature for 
45 min to an hour. After initializing the hardware and software, the servocontrollers were switched to strain control 
and the temperature was cycled between 760 and 316 *C for three cycles to achieve dynamic equilibrium. During 
these cycles axial stress data were acquired to verify the thermal strain compensation technique. After creating the 
required thermal and mechanical phase shifts, the AT-TMF cycling of the specimen was started. During the test, 
axial stresses, strains, and stroke values, shear stresses (obtained by assuming a uniform distribution through the thin 


5 



wall of the tubular specimen), engineering shear strains, and torsional stroke values in a cycle, and the associated 
cycle number were acquired at logarithmic intervals. The AT-TMF test was terminated when a load drop of 5 to 10 
percent was detected in either the axial or torsional peak loads as compared to a previously recorded cycle. 


AT-TMF TEST RESULTS 

Four strain-controlled AT-TMF tests (one each of MIPTIP, MIPTOP, MOPTIP, and MOPTOP) were conducted 
with Ae = 0.08, Ay = 0.014, and X = 1.75 between the temperatures of 316 and 760 °C. In all the tests, fatigue cracks 
that caused failure initiated in the gage section of the specimen. Upon further examination of the failed specimens, a 
small amount of barrelling was observed outside the gage section of the MOPTOP test specimen. No barrelling was 
observed in the other three types of AT-TMF test specimens. In the following sections data generated in the AT- 
TMF tests are presented. 


Hysteresis loops 

The hysteresis loops generated in two of the AT-TMF tests are shown in figure 10. In this figure, axial and tor- 
sional hysteresis loops for cycles 2 (the first fully developed cycle), 10, and 50 are shown along with the temperature 
identifiers A, B, C, and D. For all the hysteresis loops in Fig. 10, points A through D correspond to the similarly 
identified points in figure 1. In the MIPTIP test (fig. 10(a)), both the axial and torsional hysteresis loops indicated 
rapid hardening in Haynes 188, particularly at the cold end of the cycle (point C). In the 10th and 50th cycles, both 
the axial and torsional hysteresis loops exhibited stress relaxation near the maximum temperature of the cycle 
(point A). The hysteresis loops from the MIPTOP test were similar to those observed in the MIPTIP test, except that 
the stress relaxation in MIPTOP test occurred on the negative side of the stress axis for both axial and torsional hys- 
teresis loops. Hysteresis loops from the MOPTOP test (fig. 10(b)) were different from those observed in the 
mechanically in-phase MIPTIP and MIPTOP tests, which clearly indicated the influence of mechanical phasing in 
AT-TMF tests. Hysteresis loops from the MOPTIP test were similar to those observed in the MOPTOP test, except 
that the stress relaxation occurred on the positive side of the stress axis for both axial and torsional hysteresis loops. 

Fatigue lives 

Fatigue lives observed in the AT-TMF tests are compared in figure 1 1 to those reported previously for the isother- 
mal, axial-torsional fatigue tests under similar axial and engineering shear strain ranges (refs. 22 and 24). Under 
mechanically in- and out-of-phase conditions, the isothermal fatigue lives at 760 *C were lower than the correspond- 
ing isothermal fatigue lives at 316 *C. This is because the ductility of Haynes 188 at 760 *C, where it exhibits a 
minimum, is lower than that at 316 *C. Fatigue lives of the thermally in-phase MIPTIP and MOPTIP tests were 
lower than the corresponding isothermal fatigue lives at 760 *C by factors of 3 to 4. This observation suggests that 
isothermal, axial-torsional fatigue test data generated at the maximum temperature of the cycle, do not capture the 
synergistic damage mechanisms precipitating under nonisothermal, axial-torsional loading conditions. Fatigue lives 
of the thermally out-of-phase MIPTOP and MOPTOP tests were not significantly lower than the corresponding iso- 
thermal fatigue lives at 760 *C. 


Cyclic hardening 

Evolution of the axial and shear stresses observed in the mechanically out-of-phase AT-TMF tests are compared 
in figure 12 with the cyclic hardening data generated at the same strain ranges in previous programs on isothermal, 
axial-torsional fatigue (refs. 22 to 24). Axial stresses exhibited pronounced cyclic hardening under thermomechani- 
cal conditions (fig. 12(a)), particularly near the cold end of the cycle, as compared to the isothermal data. Signifi- 
cantly higher cyclic hardening was also observed in shear stresses under thermomechanical conditions compared to 
the isothermal conditions (fig. 12(b)). These two observations suggest that mechanisms of deformation activated 
under thermomechanical loading can be distinctly different from those activated under isothermal, axial-torsional 
loading. 


6 



DISCUSSION 


In the AT-TMF tests the cycle time was dictated by the ability to obtain an acceptable dynamic temperature wave- 
form in the gage section. The cycle time of 10 min used in this investigation was required because of the large size 
of the tubular specimen and was dictated by the natural cooling rate at the low temperature end of the cycle. If 
nonisothermal, axial-torsional fatigue tests need to be conducted at smaller axial and engineering shear strain ranges 
(i.e., to obtain longer cyclic lives) then such a large cycle time may be impractical. Under these circumstances 
forced cooling of the specimen by compressed air blown either through the bore of the specimen or on the external 
surfaces of the specimen can reduce the cycle time for conducting AT-TMF tests. A smaller temperature range, 

(T - T m; J can also reduce the cycle time of the AT-TMF tests. 

The small amount of barrelling observed beyond the gage section in the MOPTOP test could be the result or a 
local hot zone in the straight section of the specimen. This phenomenon may not have affected the fatigue life in a 
significant manner. However, duplication of the MOPTOP test can ascertain whether (1) the small amount of ob- 
served barrelling recurs and (2) whether fatigue life is affected by this phenomenon. If barrelling recurs then the 
dynamic temperature waveforms beyond the gage section of the specimen should also be included in the tempera- 
ture training scheme. 

In the MIPTIP test, the stress relaxation became more pronounced with the number of applied cycles in the axial 
and torsional hysteresis loops (figs. 10(a)) near the hot end of the cycle. The second cycle axial hysteresis loop did 
not exhibit any stress relaxation behavior because the magnitude of the stress was small. However, after a few cycles 
the material hardened, and the magnitude of the stress was large enough for the onset of stress relaxation. In the 
mechanically in-phase MIPTIP and MIPTOP tests, strain hardening occurred near the cold end of the cycle, whereas 
thermal recovery occurred at the hot end of the cycle. In the MOPTOP test (figs. 10(b)), which exhibited more hard- 
ening than the MIPTIP test, a small amount of stress relaxation was present even in the second cycle axial hysteresis 
loop. Stress relaxation was observed predominantly in the axial hysteresis loops in the mechanically out-of-phase 
MOPTIP and MOPTOP tests. This is because in the torsional hysteresis loops maximum temperature occurred at 
much lower magnitudes of shear stresses in the mechanically out-of-phase tests compared to the mechanically in- 
phase tests. 

In this investigation, one test was conducted for each of the four defined AT-TMF tests. Duplication of these tests 
is necessary to assess scatter in the fatigue data. The technique proposed in this paper can be used to conduct AT- 
TMF tests with different maximum and minimum temperatures on Haynes 188 or other materials. The cyclic defor- 
mation and fatigue data generated with this technique would be useful either to validate existing constitutive and 
fatigue life prediction models or to develop improved models. 


CONCLUSIONS 

A technique to perform axial-torsional, thermomechanical fatigue (AT-TMF) tests was developed and the follow- 
ing four types of tests were defined. They are, (1) Mechanically in-phase and thermally in-phase (MIPTIP) test, (2) 
Mechanically in-phase and thermally out-of-phase (MIPTOP) test, (3) Mechanically out-of-phase and thermally in- 
phase (MOPTIP) test, and 4) Mechanically out-of-phase and thermally out-of-phase (MOPTOP) test. A computer 
program was developed for test control and data acquisition in real-time from the AT-TMF tests. Axial -torsional, 
thermomechanical fatigue tests were conducted on thin-walled tubular specimens of a wrought, cobalt-base superal- 
loy, Haynes 188 between the temperatures of 316 and 760 *C. The following conclusions are drawn from the study. 

(1) Shapes of the axial and torsional hysteresis loops were strongly influenced by the mechanical phasing in the 
AT-TMF tests. The location and extent of stress relaxation in the axial and torsional hysteresis loops were strongly 
dictated by the thermal phasing in the AT-TMF tests. 

(2) Fatigue lives of the thermally in-phase AT-TMF tests were lower than the corresponding isothermal fatigue 
lives at 760 W C by factors of 3 to 4 indicating that isothermal, axial-torsional fatigue test data generated at the maxi- 
mum temperature of the cycle can not provide a lower bound on fatigue life for the design of structural components 
subjected to thermally in-phase biaxial loading conditions. Fatigue lives of the thermally out-of-phase MIPTOP and 
MOPTOP tests, were not significantly lower than the corresponding isothermal fatigue lives at 760 *C. 

(3) The rates of cyclic hardening observed (in both the axial and shear stresses) during the AT-TMF tests were 
much higher than those observed in isothermal axial-torsional tests at 316 and 760 °C. 


7 



(4) The axial-torsional, thermomechanical fatigue testing technique reported in this paper can be used to generate 
cyclic deformation and fatigue data for validation of existing constitutive and fatigue life prediction models under 
nonisothermal, multiaxial loading conditions. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The valuable technical discussions with Mr. Mike Castelli (NYMA, Inc.) and Mr. Mike Verrilli (NASA-Lewis 
Research Center) during the development of the testing technique, the steadfast encouragement from Mr. Rod Ellis 
(NASA-Lewis Research Center) throughout this program, and the technical assistance provided by Mr. Chris Burke 
(NYMA, Inc.) in the High Temperature Fatigue and Structures Laboratory, NASA-Lewis Research Center, are 
gratefully acknowledged. 


REFERENCES 

1. Leese, G.E. and Bill, R.C., “Multiaxial and Thermomechanical Considerations in Damage Tolerant Design,” 

Damage Tolerance Concepts for Critical Engine Components. AGARD-CP-393. Presented at the 60th Meet- 
ing of Structures and Materials Panel, San Antonio, Texas, 1985, pp. 15-1 to 15-13. 

2. Bill, R.C., Verrilli, M.J., McGaw, M.A., and Halford, G.R., “Preliminary Study of Thermomechanical Fatigue 

of Polycrystalline Mar-M 200,” NASA TP-2280, AVSCOM TR 83-C-6, National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, Washington, DC, February, 1984. 

3. Marchand, N., L’Esperance, G., and Pelloux, R.M., “Thermal-Mechanical Cyclic Stress-Strain Responses of 

Cast B-1900+Hf.” Low Cycle Fatigue. ASTM STP 942. H.D. Soloman, G.R. Halford, L.R. Kaisand, and 
B.N. Leis, Eds., American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1988, pp. 638-656. 

4. Cook, T.S., Kim, K.S., and McKnight, R.L., “Thermal Mechanical Fatigue of Cast Rene 80,” Low Cycle Fa- 

tigue. ASTM STP 942. H.D. Soloman, G.R. Halford, L.R. Kaisand, and B.N. Leis, Eds., American Society 
for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1988, pp. 692-708. 

5. Castelli, M.G., Miner, R.V., and Robinson, D.N., “Thermomechanical Deformation Behavior of a Dynamic 

Strain Ageing Alloy, Hastelloy X,” Thermomechanical Fatigue Behavior of Ma terials. ASTM STP 1 1 86, H. 
Sehitoglu, Ed., American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1993, pp. 106-125. 

6. Carden, A.E. and Slade, T.B., “High-Temperature Low-Cycle Fatigue Experiments on Hastelloy X,” Fatigue at 

High Temperature. ASTM STP 459. American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1969, 
pp. 111-129. 

7. Carden, A.E., “Thermal Fatigue Evaluation,” Manual on Low Cycle Fatigue Testing. ASTM STP 465, Ameri- 

can Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1970, pp. 163—188. 

8. Hopkins, S.W., “Low-Cycle Thermal Mechanical Fatigue Testing,” Thermal Fatigue of Materials and Compo- 

nents. ASTM 612. D. A. Spera and D. F. Mowbray, Eds., American Society for Testing and Materials, 
Philadelphia, 1976, pp. 157-169. 

9. Jaske, C.E., “Thermal-Mechanical, Low-Cycle Fatigue of AISI 1010 Steel,” Thermal Fatig ue of Materials and 

Components. ASTM 612. D.A. Spera and D.F. Mowbray, Eds., American Society for Testing and Materials, 
Philadelphia, 1976, pp. 170-198. 

10. Malpertu, J.L., and Remy, L., “Thermomechanical Fatigue Behavior of a Superalloy ,” Low Cycle Fatigue. 

ASTM STP 942. H.D. Soloman, G.R. Halford, L.R. Kaisand, and B.N. Leis, Eds., American Society for Test- 
ing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1988, pp. 657-671. 

1 1. Castelli, M.G., and Ellis, J.R., “Improved Techniques for Thermomechanical Testing in Support of Deformation 

Modeling,” Thermomechanical Fatigue Behav ior of Materials. ASTM STP 1 186. H. Sehitoglu, Ed., Ameri- 
can Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1993, pp. 195—211. 

12. Koster, A., Fleury, E., Vasseur, E. and Remy, L., “Thermal-Mechanical Fatigue Testing,” Automation in Fa- 

tigue and Fracture: Testing and Analysis. ASTM 1231. C. Amzallag, Ed., American Society for Testing and 
Materials, Philadelphia, 1994, pp. 563-580. 

13. Bakis, C.E., Castelli, M.G., and Ellis, J.R., “Thermomechanical Testing in Torsion: Test Control and Deforma- 

tion Behavior,” Advances in Multiaxial Fatigue. STP 1191. D.L. McDowell and J.R. Ellis, Eds., American 
Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1993, pp. 223—243. 


8 



14. Blass, J.J., and Zamrik, S.Y., “Multiaxial Low-Cycle Fatigue of Type 304 Stainless Steel ,” A$Mg-MPC Sym- 

posium on Creep-Fatigue Interaction. MPC-3. R.M. Curran Ed., The American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, New York, December 1976, pp. 129-159. 

15. Kanazawa, K., Miller, K.J., and Brown, M.W., “Low-Cycle Fatigue Under Out-of-Phase Loading Conditions,” 

Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology, July 1977, pp. 222-228. 

16. Socie, D.F., Waill, L.A., and Dittmer, D.F., “Biaxial Fatigue of Inconel 718 Including Mean Stress Effects,” 

Multiaxial Fatigue. ASTM STP 853. K. J. Miller and M. W. Brown, Eds., American Society for Testing and 
Materials, Philadelphia, 1985, pp. 463—481. 

17. Fatemi, A., and Stephens, R.I., “Biaxial Fatigue of 1045 Steel Under In-Phase and 90 Deg Out-of-Phase Load- 

ing Conditions,” Multiaxial Fatigue: Analysis and Experiments. AE-14, G.E. Leese and D. Socie, Eds., 

Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, 1989, pp. 121-138. 

18. Jayaraman, N., and Ditmars, M.M., “Torsional and Biaxial (Tension-Torsion) Fatigue Damage Mechanisms in 

Waspaloy at Room Temperature,” International Journal of Fatigue, 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 309-318. 

19. Fernando, U.S., Miller, K.J., and Brown, M.W., “Computer Aided Multiaxial Fatigue Testing,” Fatigue and 

Fracture of Engineering Materials and Structures. Vol . 13, No. 4, 1990, pp. 387-398. 

20. Kalluri, S. and Bonacuse, P.J., “A Data Acquisition and Control Program for Axial-Torsional Fatigue Testing,” 

A pplications of Automation Technology to Fatigue and Fracture Testing, ASTM STP 1092 , A.A. Braun, 

N.E. Ashbaugh, and F.M. Smith Eds., American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1990, 
pp. 269-287. 

21. Nickel Base Alloys. International Nickel Company, Inc., New York, 1977. 

22. Kalluri, S. and Bonacuse, . J„ “In-Phase and Out-of-Phase Axial-Torsional Fatigue Behavior of Haynes 188 

Superalloy at 760°C ,” Advances in Multiaxial Fatigue. ASTM STP 1191, D.L. McDowell and J.R. Ellis, 

Eds., American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1993, pp. 133-150. 

23. Bonacuse, P.J. and Kalluri, S., “Cyclic Axial-Torsional Deformation Behavior of a Cobalt-Base Superalloy,” 

Cyclic Deformation. Fracture, and Nondestructive Evaluation of A dvanced Materials: Second Volutne, 
ASTM STP 1184. M.R. Mitchell and O. Buck, Eds., American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadel- 
phia, 1994, pp. 204-229. 

24. Kalluri, S., and Bonacuse, P.J., “Estimation of Fatigue Life under Axial-Torsional Loading,” Material Durab . i . l; 

itv/I.ife Prediction Modeling: Materials for the 21st Century. PVP-Vol. 290, S.Y. Zamrik and G.R. Halford, 
Eds., American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 1994, pp. 17-33. 

25. Bonacuse, P.J. and Kalluri, S., “Elevated Temperature Axial and Torsional Fatigue Behavior of Haynes 188,” 

Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology. Vol. 117, April 1995, pp. 191-199. 

26. Bonacuse, P.J. and Kalluri, S., “Axial-Torsional Fatigue: A Study of Tubular Specimen Thickness Effects,” 

Journal of Testing and Evaluation. JTEVA, Vol. 21, No. 3, May 1993, pp. 160-167. 

27. Ellis, J.R., and Bartolotta, P.A., “Adjustable Work Coil Fixture Facilitating the Use of Induction Heating in 

Mechanical Testing,” Paper presented at the ASTM Symposium on Multiaxial Fatigue and Deformation Test- 
ing Techniques, Denver, Colorado, May 15, 1995. 


TABLE I. — SPECIFICATIONS OF COMPUTER SYSTEM AND 
TEST INTERFACE HARDWARE 

i486 Based PC-AT Compatible Computer 

33 MHz Clock Speed 

16 MB RAM 

100 MB Hard Disk 

1 .2 MB and 1 .44 MB Floppy Drives 

Digital to Analog Converters 

16 bit Resolution, 2 Channels 
12 bit Resolution, 2 Channels 

Analog to Digital Converters 

16 bit Resolution, 8 Channel Differential Input 

12 bit Resolution, 8 Channel Low- Voltage Differential Input 


9 




Temperature [®C] Shear Strain Axial Strain &. Temperature [°C] Shear Strain Axial Strain 


0.01 


0.005 

0 

- 0.005 

- 0.01 

0.01 

0.005 

0 

- 0.005 

- 0.01 

800 

700 

600 



150 300 450 600 750 900 1050 121 

Time [sec] 



0 150 300 450 600 750 900 1050 1200 

(b) Time [sec] 

Figure 1 . — Schematic axial mechanical strain, engineering shear strain, and temperature 
waveforms for AT-TMF tests, (a) MIPTIP test, (b) MIPTOP test. 


10 






Temperature [°C] Shear Strain Axial Strain o. Temperature [°C] Shear Strain Axial Strain 




800 

700 

600 

500 

400 

300 


(d) 


/\Ti max 


: /t\ 

X N 

j 

A \ 1 

"j Tmax = 760°C 
Tmin= 316°C 

\ 

X^ T min 

; t \ , / 

B x \jX 


150 300 450 600 750 900 1050 1200 

Time [sec] 

Figure 1. — Concluded, (c) MOPTIP test, (d) MOPTOP test. 


11 










Figure 2. — Schematic of tubular, thin-walled, axial -torsional fatigue specimen. All the dimensions are in mm. 



12 









Figure 4.— Axial -torsional extensometer mounted on a calibration 
fixture. 



\ 

X 

A 

X 

X • A 


c x 4 


x • 

X l 



12.7 

12.7 

12.7 

12.7 

12.7 

12.7 


Seven thermocouples (K-type 
chromel-alumel) are spot- 
welded in a line parallel to the 
specimen axis 1 2.7 mm apart. 
This is duplicated on the 
opposite side of the specimen. 
Two thermocouples are also 
spot-welded in the center of the 
gage section (90° around) as 
shown. A total of 1 6 thermo- 
couples are spot-welded to the 
specimen. 


x Thermocouple location 

• Extensometer probe 
indentations 


Figure 5. — Schematic of thermocouple layout used for optimizing the 
induction coil configuration. All the dimensions are in mm. 


13 




Figure 6. — Flow chart of real-time, successive-correction, training method to obtain 
remote location temperature control waveform. 


14 









Figure 6. — Concluded. 


15 















300 




I 


ill 


-200 


-100 


0 


-300 

Time [sec] 

I after training the remote location temperature waveform. 


6 





Axial Stress [MPa] 



Temperature [°C] 

Figure 8. — Largest axial stresses (worst case) developed in one of the AT-TMF tests during a thermal cycle designed to 
verify thermal strain compensation. 


17 



Temperature vs. 
Thermal Strain 
Fit Coefficients 


Remote Location 
Temperature 
Control Data 


Calibration Data 


Test 

Specification 

Data 



Manual Mode 
Switch from 
Load to Strain 
Control 


Cycle 

Temperature 
(3 cycles) 


Perform Phase 
Shift 


Figure 9. — Flow chart of the procedure for conducting AT-TMF tests. 


18 






A 




Figure 9. — Concluded. 


19 
















Shear Stress [MPa] £ Axial Stress [MPa] 



(0 Axial Strain 



(a) (ii) Shear Strain 

Figure 10. — Hysteresis loops generated in the AT-TMF tests, (a) MIPTIP test, (i) Axial hysteresis loops, 
(ii) Torsional hysteresis loops. 


20 











As = 0.008 and Ay = 0.014 



316°C 760°C MIPTIP MIPTOP 

In-phase (Mechanical) 



316°C 760®C MOPTIP MOPTOP 

Out-of-phase (Mechanical) 


Figure 1 1 . — Comparison of the fatigue lives of isothermal, axial-torsionai and AT-TMF tests. 


22 





Shear Stress [MPa] S Axial Stress [MPa] 



Figure 12. — Comparison of cyclic hardening in mechanically out-of-phase, isothermal, axial-torsional and 
AT-TMF tests, (a) Evolution of axial stresses, (b) Evolution of shear stresses. 













REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMBNo. 0704-0186 


Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-01 &8), Washington, DC 20503. 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY {Leave blank) 


TITLE AND SUBTITLE 


2. REPORT DATE 


May 1995 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Technical Memorandum 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 


An Axial-Torsional, Thermomechanical Fatigue Testing Technique 


6. AUTHOR(S) 


WU-505-63-5B 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


E-10119 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 


NASA TM- 107 199 
ARL-TR-1060 


Sreeramesh Kalluri and Peter J. Bonacuse 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

NASA Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191 
and 

Vehicle Propulsion Directorate 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory 
Cleveland, Ohio 44 1 35-3 1 9 1 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Washington, D.C. 20546-0001 

and 

U.S. Army Research Laboratory 
Adelphi, Maryland 20783-1145 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Prepared for the Symposium on Multiaxial Fatigue and Deformation Testing Techniques sponsored by the American Society for Testing 
and Materials, Denver, Colorado, May 15, 1995. Sreeramesh Kalluri, NYMA, Inc., 2001 Aerospace Parkway, Brook Park, Ohio 44142 
(work funded by NASA Contract NAS3-271 86) and Peter J. Bonacuse, Vehicle Propulsion Directorate, U.S. Army Research Laboratory, 
NASA Lewis Research Center. Responsible person, Sreeramesh Kalluri, organization code 5220, (216) 433-6727. 


12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

Unclassified - Unlimited 
Subject Category 39 

This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, (301) 621-0390. 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

A technique for conducting strain-controlled, thermomechanical, axial-torsional fatigue tests on thin-walled tubular 
specimens was developed. Three waveforms of loading, namely, the axial strain waveform, the engineering shear strain 
waveform, and the temperature waveform were required in these tests. The phasing relationships between the mechanical 
strain waveforms and the temperature and axial strain waveforms were used to define a set of four axial-torsional, 
thermomechanical fatigue (AT-TMF) tests. Real-time test control (3 channels) and data acquisition (a minimum of 7 
channels) were performed with a software program written in C language and executed on a personal computer. The AT- 
TMF testing technique was used to investigate the axial -torsional thermomechanical fatigue behavior of a cobalt-base 
superalloy, Haynes 188. The maximum and minimum temperatures selected for the AT-TMF tests were 760 and 316°C, 
respectively. Details of the testing system, calibration of the dynamic temperature profile of the thin-walled tubular 
specimen, thermal strain compensation technique, and test control and data acquisition schemes, are reported. The 
isothermal, axial, torsional, and in- and out-of-phase axial-torsional fatigue behaviors of Haynes 188 at 316 and 760°C 
were characterized in previous investigations. The cyclic deformation and fatigue behaviors of Haynes 188 in AT-TMF 
tests are compared to the previously reported isothermal axial-torsional behavior of this superalloy at the maximum and 
minimum temperatures. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

Thermomechanical fatigue; Axial-torsional fatigue; Computer-controlled testing; Data acquisi- 25 

tion; Thin-walled tubular specimen; Testing techniques; Hysteresis loop; Cyclic deformation; 16. PRICE CODE 
Cobalt-base superalloy A03 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 
OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 
298-102 

























"0 

O 


CO 


2 

> 


CO 


-H 


m 


33 


C 

3 

CL 

<D 

< 

£ 

cr 

® 


O 

o 



33 

CD 

C 

3 


National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 

Lewis Research Center 

21000 Brookpark Rd. 
Cleveland, OH 44135-3191 



