DEVELOPMENT 

NASA/ASEE 


Prepared by: 

Academic Rank: 
University & Department 

NASA/JSC 
Di rectorate: 

Division: 

Branch: 

JSC Colleague: 

Date: 

Contract Number: 


N88- 14864 

OF A GRAPHICAL DISPLAY ON THE DMS TEST BED //&&S 3 
FINAL REPORT 


Summer Faculty Fellowship Program -- 1987 


Johnson Space Center 




Robert A. Donnelly, Ph. D 

Associate Professor 

: Auburn University 

Department of Chemistry 
Auburn University, AL 36849 


Engineering and Development 
Avionics Systems 
Flight Data Systems 
Michael M. Thomas 
August 26, 1987 
NGT 44-001-800 


9-1- 



ABSTRACT 


The DMS test bed is a model of a data network aboard Space 
Station. Users of the network share data relevant to the functional 
status of various systems (Guidance, Navigation and Control, Environ- 
mental Control and Life Support, etc.) aboard the Station. Users may 
inquire the status of myriad sensors, obtaining readings of Station 
subsystem status in real-time via the Data Acquisition and Distribution 
Service. 

This project is aimed at development of a graphical display of the 
status of a simulation of the Environmental Control and Life Support 
System. Two broad issues were addressed: (1) Flexible, extensible 

software design; (2) The impact of utilizing standard processors, 
languages, and graphics packages implementing the software design 
concept. 

Our experience gained with DEC hardware, the DEC implementation of 
the GKS graphics standard, and with Ada can be summarized as follows. 
DEC hardware seems adequate to the display tasks which form one part of 
the present research project. Highly graphics-intensive applications 
run slowly on the MicroVax GPX when it is programmed using the various 
DEC implementations of the GKS standard. Use of the GKS standard for 
graphics can provide code portability provided the FORTRAN/77 to GKS 
binding is used. Since no binding to Ada is currently available it 
makes sense to provide a procedural interface between Vax Ada and the 
FORTRAN/77 binding. This was accomplished, and can be used by other 
generations of graphics programmers who must program in the development 
environment provided by DEC. 


9-2 


I. INTRODUCTION 


The DMS test bed is a model of a distributed communications network 
which is proposed for the Space Station. Users of the network have 
access to data generated by several subsystems likewise attached to the 
network. Users may inquire the status of these subsystems (and their 
components) through DADS (Data Acquisition and Distribution Service). 
Each element of requestable data (a subsystem or sensor status, or an 
engineering measurement) is uniquely identified by a measurement 
identifier (MS ID). 

One purpose of the present project is development of an interactive 
graphical display of the status of a simulation of the Environmental 
Control and Life Support subsystem (ECLSS). Sets of MSID's defined in 
the graphics software are transported over the network to the ECLSS 
simulation software using DADS. DADS then returns the simulated status 
of sensors aboard ECLSS, which are then displayed on a high-resolution 
computer graphics terminal. The software package is interactive, 
allowing the user to display the status of various components of the 
ECLSS subsystem. 

A second, equally important, aspect of this research project is 
concerned with the impact of "standard" hardware and software on 
implementation of the software package. Developers of the DMS test bed 
have declared the MicroVax GPX as the standard display device. GKS is 
a well-known standard for rendering two-dimensional graphical images, 
which is available on DEC hardware. Finally, Ada has been adopted as 
the standard programming language aboard the Space Station. 

Accordingly, the software package was developed using a mixture of 
FORTRAN and Ada (for reasons to be discussed below). It is anticipated 
that lessons learned in this research can be helpful to those who 
design the final software aboard Space Station. 


9-3 



II. SOFTWARE DESIGN 


Two features of the software design were judged especially 
important. First, the software should be designed in such a way that 
additional display capabilities could be added with a minimum of 
alteration to the original package. Second, the software package 
should be transportable across host processors equipped with GKS 
software. 

The first consideration was accomplished by coding a control 
structure with “stubs" for added simulations as they become available. 

A control section written in Ada is essentially a menu-driven display 
processor, the highest level of which allows the user to select a sub- 
system for display. The display requirements for each subsystems can 
be made completely invisible to the main routine. Alternately, the 
display requirements can be met using a graphics parser written in 
FORTRAN and included as a package accessible by the main Ada super- 
visory routine. The graphics parser is general enough to provide all 
graphics services. Its capabilities can easily be extended as needed 
by extension of its dictionary of recognized graphics commands. Net- 
work access is provided by a separate Ada package which can be modified 

independently of the supervisory routines. 

A second feature of the program design is its minimal reliance on 
"hard-coded" display items. We accomplished this by utilizing ASCII 
input files containing graphics commands directed to the graphics 
parser. Dynamic components of each display window are maintained as 
retained graphical segments which are defined once and for all at 
startup time and inserted into each display window as required. This 
strategy results in a flexible display manager: Static components of 

each display window can be changed by merely editing the corresponding 


9-4 


file with a text editor without recompiling the display program itself. 
Design of retained segments representing standard components of a 
schematic display, for example, make it easier for system-wide users to 
interpret graphical displays of system status. 

The second consideration, software transportability, has been 
addressed by mixing languages in the demonstration program. The 
reasons for this are discussed in the next Section, where we consider 
the impact of the development environment on program design. 

Ill THE IMPACT OF STANDARDS ON SOFTWARE DESIGN 

GKS is itself merely a method for the device-independent manage- 
ment of two-dimensional graphics displays. As such it includes 
procedures for storage and manipulation of graphical segments, for 
implementation of software windows and view ports, and for interaction 
with graphical input devices such as the keyboard and mouse. Device 
independence allows the applications programmer to concentrate on the 
display task at hand, without the need to consider the specific 
characteristics of a particular hardware device. The functional con 
trol of graphics displays afforded by the GKS routines is judged 
adequate for the graphical manipulations required in the current dis- 
play task. 

The DEC/Vax implementation of the GKS standard has a significant 
impact on programmers writing in FORTRAN/77 or Ada. The GKS package 
used in this research is revision 3.0 of the DEC Vax software produced 
by Digital Equipment Corporation. The issues we consider in this Sec- 
tion are: (1) Existence of standard interfaces to GKS through FORTRAN 

and Ada; (2) Documentation and ease of software use by graphics 
novices and experts; (3) "Low-level" support provided for control of 
graphics input devices and display hardware; and (4) The availability 
of expert consulting services from the software vendor. 


9-5 



There are several interfaces to GKS procedures provided by DEC. 

Each prog rammi ng language (Ada, Basic, C, FORTRAN, Pascal, etc.) uses a 
different interface, so that no single set of procedure calls exists. 
That is, the names of the routines are not the same in different 
languages, and the number and type of arguments passed to procedures 
differ from language to language. Here we focus on three such inter- 
faces, Vax FORTRAN/77 to VAX GKS, ANSI FORTRAN/77 to GKS using the 
standard FORTRAN binding, and Vax Ada to Vax GKS. As of this writing 
there is no standard binding between Ada and GKS. Two such bindings 
have been proposed independently by ANS and ISO, but neither is avail- 
able on DEC machines at present. (Parenthetically, we remark that an 
alternative interface to graphics routines is provided by UIS, the 
native graphics interface on the MicroVax. This is probably the 
highest performance, most powerful interface, but could not be used in 
this research. First, it is specific to the MicroVax GPX, and there- 
fore requires non-portable code. Second, its use requires compilers 
and linkers which are unavailable on the DMS MicroVax. Third, DEC 
currently supplies no interface to UIS routines from Ada.) 

The net result of the profusion of interfaces to GKS and their 
varying levels of documentation and functionality is that we chose to 
use a mixed-language program: The control structure was written in 

Ada, while direct access to graphics was provided by the FORTRAN/77 
binding to GKS. We accomplished this by writing an Ada package 
specification containing pragma interfaces which allowed importing the 
FORTRAN/77 binding to GKS. Several procedures found to be only 
accessible through FORTRAN are accessed only through that language. 

The net result of this strategy is the generation of a single, standard 
interface between either FORTRAN/77 or Ada and the portable GKS 
binding. Transportability of the graphics software is thus possible 


9-6 



between processors equipped with FORTRAN/77, Ada, and GKS. Only a 
single level of documentation on the interface to GKS need be provided 
to FORTRAN and Ada programmers using this system. 

We found the documentation provided by DEC to be generally inade- 
quate. The highest level of documentation is provided for Vax 
FORTRAN/77 to Vax GKS. There is only minimal documentation on the 
FORTRAN/77 binding to GKS, and no documentation on the Vax Ada to Vax 
GKS interface. Several features of the FORTRAN/77 binding to GKS are 
completely unspecified in the system documentation, even though this 
interface is claimed to meet the highest standard of portability 
between processors equipped with GKS software. 

This lack of adequate documentation is particularly undesirable. 

The complexity and profusion of procedure calls required to perform 
simple tasks is certain to confuse programmers with little training in 
graphics. Code fragments produced to document each procedure call are 
discussed briefly, but examples of only the simplest type of procedure 
call are given. The environment in which a given procedure call can be 
made is not generally discussed, so that one is required to read and 
study the entire two-volume manual set in order to trace errors. DEC 
has a rather unorthodox model of segment storage which can be confusing 
to the novice programmer. Its method of segment definition requires 
careful study, and is largely undocumented. Finally, access to 
graphics primitives (a circle, for example) is provided through 
graphics drawing primitives (GDP's). This is a most unorthodox method 
of generating these primitives, is tedious to code, largely undocu- 
mented, and error-prone. We have had extensive experience with a wide 
variety of graphics software and hardware. This implementation of GKS 
is by far the most complex one. we have encountered. In fact, though 


9-7 



Ada was unknown to us at the start of the research project, it was 
much easier to learn that language than it was to become familiar with 

GKS. 

Tasks requiring precision control of graphics input devices are not 
easily accomplished in the Vax implementation of GKS. We have been 
unable, for example, to find a means of controlling the foreground and 
background colors of a "pop-up" menu from software. The font used in 
displaying the menu items is not under software control, unless one is 
prepared to write a special-purpose graphics handler routine (outside 
of GKS). Control of hardware windows appears possible only by use of 
the non-standard Vax FORTRAN/77 to Vax GKS interface. Importantly, the 
GKS software does not make use of the specialized hardware aboard the 
MicroVax GPX. Highly graphics-intensive applications run unacceptably 
slowly on the MicroVax for this reason. 

Finally, we find that software support from DEC appears to be 
largely inadequate. Those to whom we have spoken are largely unknowl- 
edgable of grahics in general, and of procedural inter-relationships in 
DEC'S GKS in particular. There seems to be little support given to the 
standard FORTRAN/77 binding to GKS. 

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

Our experience gained with DEC hardware, the DEC implementation of 
the GKS graphics standard, and with Ada can be summarized as follows. 
DEC hardware seems adequate to the display tasks which form one part of 
the present research project. Highly graphics-intensive applications 
run slowly on the MicroVax GPX when it is programmed using the various 
DEC implementations of the GKS standard. Use of the GKS standard for 
graphics can provide code portability provided the FORTRAN/77 to GKS 
binding is used. 


9-8 



The lack of adequate documentation on the GKS software makes it 
unlikely that novice graphics programmers will be able to use the 
system easily. It is therefore likely that modern display techniques, 
which make use of multiple windows and view ports, and of segment 
transformation techniques, will remain largely the province of 
experienced graphics designers. This is unfortunate, as the use of 
modern techniques makes for quickly-developed, expandable, transport- 
able computer codes. 

The Ada programming language is easy to learn, and possesses many 
desirable features. It is strongly favored in recursive applications, 
such as the menu-driven display processor developed here. Since no 
binding to Ada is currently available it makes sense to provide a 
procedural interface between Vax Ada and the FORTRAN/77 binding. This 
was accomplished, and can be used by other generations of graphics 
programmers who must program in the development environment provided by 
DEC. 

Finally, it appears that there are in fact no "standards" yet 
available on DEC hardware. Though GKS is a graphics standard suitable 
for two-dimensional display management, the only interface presented to 
meet a portability standard is provided by the largely undocumented 
binding to FORTRAN/77. No similar binding of GKS to Ada exists. 

Indeed, no link between Ada and the UIS procedures native to MicroVax 
yet exist. The net result is a 1 owest-common-denominator software 
implementation which is not designed to make most efficient use of 
existing hardware. 



