NAS*-CK-1'W 



/i^> 



Ames 



The Vision 
Res^irch Center 



rg 

f- 
I 

z 



1/1 
(0 

c 

3 



o 



00 






a 

ro 

a 

o ** 
m < 

> -" 

X cr- 

V- 

z 

f<^ o 

o X 

(?> Qi 
^ **, 

o; <>^ 
I tf 

4 

lO «^ 

^^ 




January 



1987 



THE VISION OF AMES RESEARCH CENTER 



INTRODUCTION 



Ames Research Center, a vital field installation of the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration, has a long tradition of award-winning advances in 
aeronautical, space, and life science research. The Center has completed the 
first step of a comprehensive strategic planning program to ensure its 
continued effectiveness as a national research laboratory in support of the 
Nation's aeronautical and space goals. This step resulted in the 
identification of key areas in which Ames can provide unique capabilities and 
make significant contributions to major Agency initiatives in the next decade. 
Tne path to the 21st Century is one which will bring continued distinction to 
Ames Research Center for outstanding contributions to science and technology 
through its exceptional personnel and premier facilities. 

STRATEGIC PLANNING 

The strategic planning activity at Ames Research Center involves a broad 
participation of employees at all levels in setting the Center's direction. 
This process is intended to provide a base of shared values and awareness in 
the staff of technical, political, and managerial considerations facing the 
Center and the Agency. In strategic planning, the definition of the 
organization as it wishes to be in the future - or the "vision" of the 
organization - is the first and most difficult task. The Ames vision should: 

- Above all, define how the Ames of the future can best support the Agency 
and the Nation 

- Capitalize on our strengths 

- Alleviate or reduce the impact of our weaknesses 

- Move the Center toward securing the most promising opportunities which 
can be projected today 

- Position the Center to be successful within the context of a wide 
spectrum of future scenarios 

The Ames vision results from an extensive analysis of our internal and 
external environment. This analysis exposed the most promising future 
directions in light of the Center's potential and projected opportunities. 
The vision will provide the framework for evaluating program and project ideas 
and it will establish a focus for the research activities of the Center. 



THE AMES OF THE FUTURE 

Through reports such as "Pioneering the Space Frontier" (National Commisssion 
on Space), "Aero 2000", and the "National Aeronautical R&D Goals" (Office of 
Science and Technology Policy), the future of the civil space and aeronautics 
programs has been projected and advocated with confidence. These reports 
provide an exciting framework for the vision of the Ames Research Center of 
the future. 

A characterization of the vision for the Ames of the future is shown in the 
figure. Each circle or "bubble" in the diagram represents a distinct vision 
element. The size of the bubble denotes the degree of Center emphasis. The 
overlapped regions depict synergies between vision elements. In 10 years, the 
primary emphases at Ames will be associated with the vision elements Humans in 
Space, Intelligent Systems Research and Computation to Flight, the three large 
bubbles in the diagram. 

The National Commission on Space projects an ever-increasing manned presence 
in space, spanning the development of Space Station, to Lunar bases, and 
onward to Mars bases. The first key component of the Ames vision. Humans in 
Space, responds to the need for extensive basic research to understand the 
effects of the low gravity environment of space flight on humans and other 
biological systems. This vision element will also focus on the development of 
technology to support a safe, productive, and extended-duration human presence 
in space. Ames is uniquely suited to fulfill this critical role by integrating 
and expanding an already-established research base in space biology, human 
factors, and space technology development. Working with the NASA development 
and operations centers, Ames will provide the research groundwork necessary 
for the development and operation of extraterrestrial installations by NASA. 

In both space and aeronautics, the progression toward highly integrated and 
automated systems is a prominent element of the technological advances 
necessary to achieve most future scenarios. The second key element of the 
Ames vision. Intelligent Systems Research, bridges the space and aeronautics 
boundaries with the integration of our existing research capabilities in 
guidance and control, human factors, and artificial intelligence for 
application to aerospace systems. This critical research and technology 
development has applications which span manned and unmanned space systems and 
terrestrial and extraterrestrial highly automated vehicles. 

Ames has provided to NASA and the U.S. aerospace community a set of unique 
capabilities and facilities in aeronautical research and technology 
development. The third key element of the Ames vision. Computation to Flight, 
transforms our existing distinct capabilities in computational and 
experimental aeronautics, flight simulation, and flight research and testing 
into an iterative integrated process providing the full spectrum of research 
tools for application to specific vehicle classes and basic aeronautical 
research problems. Tne use of highly interactive research tools will become 
increasingly necessary to achieve improvements in the performance, usefulness, 
and safety of both terrestrial and space vehicles in the future. 



In addition to the three main emphasis areas in the Ames vision, there are 
several other vision elements which are emphasized on the basis of their 
importance to mainline NASA directions, the unique capabilities provided by 
Ames, and the synergetic enhancement of the overall vision. In the area of 
Space and Earth Sciences, Ames would continue to provide high-quality research 
focused on the evolution of planetary systems and on the ongoing evolution of 
Earth ecosystems supported by a fleet of airborne science aircraft essential 
to the Agency and the scientific community. Projects in support of "Space and 
Earth Science" and "Humans in Space" of moderate size would be designed and 
managed in the vision element Space Projects. The vision also includes a 
continuing emphasis by Ames in the development of enabling research and 
technology in hypersonic vehicles and probes in the vision element 
Transatmospherics. In tne scope of the vision element Aero-Projects, Ames 
will perform selected technology development and demonstration projects. 

State-of-the-art facilities are crucial to the maintenance of U.S. preeminence 
in aeronautics and space. Unique facilities, including wind tunnels, 
simulators, supercomputer systems, platform aircraft, and flight-test ranges, 
are a fundamental component of the Ames vision. In line with the vision, the 
Center will maintain national facilities such as the National Full-Scale 
Aerodynamic Complex, the Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel and the Numerical 
Aerodynamic Simulation facility in support of our in-house research efforts 
and joint efforts, and as a service to the U.S. aerospace community. Ames 
will continue to be known as a national flight research center and existing 
capabilities will be further strengthened. In addition, Ames will advocate 
and construct facilities as a means of supporting principal research roles 
consistent with this vision. 

The Center vision builds on the existing strengths of Ames, i.e., the 
existence of a spectrum of research capabilities in aeronautics, and our 
expertise in life, space and Earth sciences. The vision retains diversity, 
yet provides focus for areas of involvement and capitalizes on synergies 
between research disciplines. It is oriented toward fundamental research and 
technology development and recognizes the importance of project activities as 
an integral part of the total research effort. An important characteristic of 
any vision is its robustness, i.e., its ability to anticipate and capitalize 
on a changing external environment. This vision is a purposeful balance 
between space and aeronautics programs, enabling the Center to continue its 
significant contributions to the Nation's aeronautics efforts while adjusting 
the Center's mission to better reflect the anticipated future direction of the 
Nation's civil space program. With this vision, Ames will be a significant 
contributor to the main work of the Agency for Space Station and beyond for 
both manned and unmanned programs. 



Vision Element: Humans in Space 

Narrative: 

Ames will play a leading role in conceiving and conducting fundamental 
research and developing selective techologies which are critical to humans 
living and working in space and readapting to gravity. Ames will excel in 
research in human performance and habitability, in the adaptation of humans 
and other biological systems to the space environment, in the development of 
life support technologies, and in the development of hardware for life science 
research for Space Station and for future NASA extraterrestrial installations. 
Ames will provide support to NASA development and operations centers for major 
National space programs. • 

Examples of Program Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Space Biology 

Gravitational Biology 

Space Human Factors 

Telepresence 

Life Support Systems 

EVA technology 

Examples of Project Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Closed Environment Life Support Systems (CELSS) technology 
Bioscience Module for Space Station 
Space Suit Technology Development 
Space Station Centrifuge Technology 



Vision Element: Space and Earth Science 
Narrative: 

Ames will be known for its research concerning the origin and evolution of 
stellar and planetary systems, and life thereon. Ames will apply complimentary 
theoretical, observational, and laboratory capabilities in astrophysics, solar 
system science, and exobiology to these fundamental questions. Ames will also 
be known for its scientific contributions to understanding how the Earth 
systems, especially its atmosphere and ecosystems, have evolved since their 
formation, how they interact, and how they may be expected to evolve in the 
future. Ames will operate airborne-science aircraft for the science community 
in support of these and other Agency goals. 

Examples of Program Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Exobiology Research 

Astrophysics 

Infrared Astronomy 

Planetary Detection, Science and Origin and Atmospheric Modeling 

Atmospheric and Ecosystem Science 

Climate and Biosphere modeling 

Stratosphere- troposphere Exchange 

Fires Research 

Ozone Depletion 



Vision Element: Space Projects 
Narrative: 

Ames will play a prominent role in the development and operation of a variety 
of small-to-moderate-sized flying and orbiting observatories and laboratories, 
planetary probes, and instruments for the purpose of advancing the research 
goals of the Center. 

Examples of Project Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Earth Observation Systems (EOS) simulator/science 
Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) validation 
IR Spartan Module 

c?DTr f^'^I^^'^oPe. optics, and detector technology, instruments, operations) 
MKlh (telescope, optics, and detector technology, instruments, operations) 

CRAF Instruments 

Astrometric telescope facility, telescope, operations 

Tethered satellites 

Lifesat 



Vision Element: Intelligent Systems Research 

Narrative: 

Ames will expand and integrate the areas of human factors, guidance and 
control, and artificial intelligence into a unique program of Intelligent 
Systems Research. The complimentary goals of this program are to optimize the 
interface between human and machine, and where appropriate to automate human 
functions. Both basic and applied research will be driven by significant 
applications in such major Agency missions as the Space Station, highly 
automated aircraft, and planetary exploration. Through its powerful array of 
existing computational, ground, and flight resources and international 
reputation in the contributing disciplines, Ames will become a national center 
for research in intelligent systems and its application to aerospace systems. 

Examples of Program Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Human Factors 
Computer Science 
Artificial Intelligence 
Telescience and telerobotics 
Manned Simulation 
Control Theory 

Examples of Project Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Aircraft Automation 
Space Systems Autonomy Demonstration 
Army-NASA Aircraft-Aircrew Integration 
Virtual Environment Workstation 
Autonation of National Airspace System 



Vision Element: Computation to Flight 
Narrative: 

Ames will maintain excellence in computational analysis, wind tunnel research, 
flight simulation, and flight research. Research emphasis will be on the 
synergistic integration of these capabilities to create and validate new 
predictive methodologies and to develop new rotorcraft, powered-lift, 
high-performance, and hypersonic vehicle concepts. This research will also 
advance the elements of basic aeronautics which determine component 
characteristics and contribute to total vehicle performance. Ames' facilities 
and capabilities will continue to support important national and industry 
needs. 

Examples of Program Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Physics of Turbulence 

Vortical Flow Control 

High Angle-of-attack Aerodynamics 

Drag Reduction and Transition Control 

Microgravity Fluid Mechanics 

Interdisciplinary Aerophysics 

Propulsion- Flight Control Integration 

Human Factors 

Algorithm and Instrumentation Development 

Vehicle Concept Development 



Vision Element: Aero-Projects 

Narrative: 

Ames will conduct selected aeronautical technology projects, including joint 
and/or cooperative activities with industry and other Government agencies. 
These activities will extend the range of data beyond laboratory or 
ground-based capabilities, probe previously unexplored flight regimes, and 
focus research efforts to accelerate technology readiness. Primary emphasis 
will be on high performance, powered-lift, and rotary-wing aircraft, on other 
unique vehicles that highlight NASA-developed technology, and on 
interdisciplinary flight-systems integration. 

Examples of Program Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Integrated Controls Research and Technology 

Crew Station Research and Development 

Agility and Maneuverability Concepts (Map-of-the-Earth) 

Automated Control Research and Development (Automated Wingman) 

Examples of Project Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Supersonic STOVL 
Oblique »Jinged Aircraft 
Autonomous Rotorcraft 
High-speed Tilt-Rotor 
Low-Observable Rotorcraft 
Transatmospheric Vehicles and Probes 
High Alpha 
X-Wing 



Vision Element: Transatmospherics 
Narrative: 

Ames will provide leadership in basic research and technology development in 
selected areas, for the development of aerospace systems which transport 
humans and materials to and from space and within the atmospheres of other 
bodies in the solar systan. Ames will excel in the areas of fluid and thennal 
physics, re-entry systems, and hypersonic vehicle flight research. Vehicles to 
be studied are those which travel at Mach numbers of 5 or greater These 
include hypersonic aerospacecraft, atmospheric entry probes, and space carao 
transports. r , ^^ yu 

Examples of Program Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

Aerothermod yn amies 

Thermo-Physics 

Thermal Protective Materials Development 

Computational Chemistry 

Hypersonic Vehicle Flight Research 

Re-entry Systems 

Examples of Project Ideas Consistent with this Vision Element: 

NASP Program 

AOTV 

Planetary Probes 



Major Facilities Supporting the Vision 



Existing Facilities 



Future Facilities and 
Modifications 



Wind Tunnels: 

National Full -Scale Aerodynamics Complex 

7X10' Wind Tunnels 

Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel (UPWT) 

12', 14', 6x6', 2x2' Wind Tunnels 

Fluid Mechanics Laboratory 

3.5 Ft Wind Tunnel 

2x9 Turbulent Duct 

Ballistic Ranges i Shock Tubes 

Hot Structures Facility 



NFAC Enhancements 

Real Gas Wind Tunnel 

UPWT Automation and Enhancement 

12' Wind Tunnel Restoration 

Full -Scale Open-Throat Anechoic 

Tunnel 
3.5 Ft. Wind Tunnel Upgrades 
Arc-Jet Complex Upgrades 



Computational Facilities 



Numerical "Aerodynamic Simulation Facility Enhanced NAS 
Central Computing Facility 



Simulation Facilities: 

Flight Systems Research Laboratory 
Vertical Motion Simulator 
Man-Vehicle Systems Research Facility 
Proximity Operations Simulator 



Airborne Science and Research 
Aircraft & Facilities: 

KAO, ER-2, U-2's, DC-8, C-i30 

Program Support Aircraft 

Airborne Science Operations Facilities 

Dryden Flight Research Facilities 

Crows Landing 

Dryden Remotely Augmented Vehicle Facility 



Rotorcraft Systems Integration 

Simulator (RSIS) 
Aircraft Automation Facility 
Crew Station Research & 

Development Facility 
Simulator Enhancements 



Integrated Test Facility 

Hydrogen Structural Test Fac. 

SOFIA 

Engine Run-up Pad 



Major Facilities Supporting the Vision (con't) 



Existing Facilities 



Future Facilities and 
Modifications 



Life and Space Science 
Research Facilities: 

Cooled Mirror Facility 
Liquid Helium Facility 
Pioneer Operations Center 
Animal Control Facility 
Human Bed Rest Facility 
Human and Animal Centrifuges 
STS Spacelabs 
Environmental Chambers 
Plant Research Laboratories 
Mars Aeolian Laboratory 
Vestibular Research Laboratory 



Space Suit Test Facility 
Lifesat 

Space Station Research Lab 
Man-Rated Mission Simulator 
1.8m Space Station Centrifuge 
Space Station Manned Centrifuge 
Life Support System Development 
Facility 



Intelligent Systems 
Research Facilities: 

Human Factors, Guidance and 
Control, Artificial Intelligence 
Laboratories 



Human Performance Research Lab. 
Automation Sciences Research Fac, 
Telescience Facility 



^:32 C301 621 0134 



.NASA CASI 



BlOll 



CENTER RELEASE FORM 
NASA WIlBCBllaneous Publications 



(2) 



(3) 



AUCTIONS 

o Btodc 2 ho. »H^ oomplet^J wHh «all*l. Wormtlon 



OR 



O BIOCK A naa uvo" — ■■f 

. • M.M. .tAHBiMait Mid it can be distr3>utea 

o Co«pl.t. Stock 3 H Ihcie «e NO R.str.ctK.n. «»i *• document -. 

to Iha pubic. 

.unCA CASI Attn- ACQUISITIONS. P.O. Bw 8757. 



Author: NM^.&!33S& 

Originating NASA Orgonization. ftm^ p. R«»i>arc,h gfflity 

Report Number: 

Pubication Dete: Jflptmnf 198? 



3^^^ 



/ 



^/3 



/ y^l PUBUCLY AVAILABLE 



(4) 



LIMITED: 

• • / / Available Only From:. 



^ ^ Avaiable Only To (USGA. NASA....) 



1 ^ 

FFxxx 




MAV 20 '93 11:28 



301 621 0134 PAGE. 011 



