■/c>f//U - dAj 0"-Vf *J/ 

//V ' ^ ’ =■ — i — / c 3 


3 (3 S ^ 


AdaNet Research Plan 


John McBride 


SofTech,lnc. 

(NASA-CR—1 67262 ) AddNET RESEARCH PLAN N91-13147 

(Houston Univ. ) 66 p CSCL 09B 


Unci as 

G3/62 0308269 

May 1, 1990 


Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 
— Research Activity IM.14 


NASA Johnson Space Center 
NASA Technology Utilization Program 



Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems 
University of Houston - Clear Lake 



TECHNICAL REPORT 




The 

RICIS 

Concept 


The University of Houston-Clear Lake established the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information systems in 1986 to encourage NASA Johnson Space 
Center and local industry to actively support research in the computing and 
information sciences. As part of this endeavor, UH-Clear Lake proposed a 
partnership with JSC to jointly define and manage an integrated program of research 
in advanced data processing technology needed for JSC’s main missions, including 
administrative, engineering and science responsibilities. JSC agreed and entered into 
a three-year cooperative agreement with UH-Clear Lake beginning in May, 1 986, to 
jointly plan and execute such research through RICIS. Additionally, under 
Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16, computing and educational facilities are shared 
by the two instituti ons to ggnductthe research.^ V-- . ; • 

The mission of RICIS is to conduct, coordinate and disseminate research on 
computing and information systems among researchers, sponsors and users from 
UH-Clear Lake, NASA/JSC, and other research organizat ions. Within UH-Qgar 
Lake, the mission is being implemented through interdis ciplinary invo lv emen t of 
faculty and students from each of the Four schools: Business, Education, Humarr 
Sciences and Humanities, and Natural and Applied Sciences. 

Other research organizations are involved via the “gateway ” concept. UH-Cl ear 
Lake establishes relationships wi th other u niversities and research organizations, 
having common research interests, to provide additional sources of expertise to 
conduct needed research. 

A major role of RICIS is to find the best match of sponsors, resea rchers and 
research objectives to advance knowledge in the computing and informatio n" 
sciences. Working jointly with NAS A/ JSC, RICIS advises on research needs, 
recommends principals for conducting the research, provides technical and 
administrative support to coordinate the research, and integrates technical results 
into the cooperative goals of UH- Clea r Lake and NASA/ JSC, - - 


AdaNET Research Plan 




Preface 


This research was conducted under the auspices of the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems by John McBride, of SofTech, Inc. Dr. Peter C. 
Bishop, Director of the Space Business Research Center, served as RICIS technical 
representative for this activity. 

Funding has been provided by the NASA Technology Utilization Program, 
NASA/JSC through Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 between NASA Johnson 
Space Center and the University of Houston-Clear Lake. The NASA technical 
monitor for this activity was Robert B. MacDonald, Assistant to the Director for 
Technology Utilization, Mission Support Directorate, NASA/JSC. 

The views and conclusions contained in this report are those of the author and 
should not be interpreted as representative of the official policies, either express or 
implied, of NASA or the United States Government. 



AdaNET 


Research Plan 


May 1, 1990 


Contract IM.14 


Submitted to: 


Dr. Peter Bishop 

University of Houston Clear Lake 
2700 Bay Area Boulevard 
Houston, Texas 77058 


Prepared by: 


SofTech, Inc. 

1300 Hercules Drive, Suite 105 
Houston, TX 77058-2747 
(713) 480-1994 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


3. 

4. 

5. 


6 . 

7. 


Introduction 1 

1.1. Purpose __ 1 

12 . AdaNET Research Mission 1 

13. Organization of Document 1 

Approach 2 

2.1. Develop Requirements Definition 2 

23. Operate Research System 4 

24 . Evaluate Research System 5 

Work Breakdown Structure and Task Descriptions.... 6 

Deliverables 25 

Organization 30 

5. 1 . Team Members 30 

52 . Team Structure 31 

53. Key Personnel 3 1 

Schedule 34 


Cost and Labor Hours. 




til 37 


Figures 

Figure 2-1 Implement AdaNET Research Plan 3 

Figure 2-2 Provide AdaNET Research 3 

Figure 4- la Cost/Performance Status Report, Summary 26 

Figure 4-lb Monthly Status Report by WBS 27 

Figure 4- lc Cost/Performance Status Report, Detailed 28 

Figure 5-1 AdaNET Contracting Organization 32 

Figure 5-2 AdaNET Technical Organization. 33 


SOFf eCH 

2378-00-001 


PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 





Figure 6-1 AdaNET R & D Schedule 35 

Tables 

Table 3-1 Work Breakdown Structure & Task Descriptions 7 

Table 4-1 Explanation of Terminology 29 

Table 7-1 Project Hours and Cost, First Level 37 

Table 7-2 Project Hours and Cost, Second Level 38 

Table 7-3 Project Hours and Cost by Resource 39 

Table 7-4 Project Costs by Fiscal Year. — 44 

Table 7-5 Project Fiscal Year Hours and Cost by Resource 49 

Table 7-6 Project Cost by Month 50 


SOFf ecH 

iii 


2378-00-001 





1. Introduction 

1.1. Purpose 


AdaNET Research Plan 


This project plan specifies the goals, activities and resources necessary to support the research of the 
AdaNET system. It will serve as the guiding document to control the overall research effort 

1.2. AdaNET Research Mission 

The mission of the AdaNET research effort is to determine how to increase the availability of reusable 
Ada components and associated software engineering technology to both private and Federal sectors. The 
effort is structured to define the requirements for transfer of Federally developed software technology, 
study feasible approaches to meeting the requirements, and to gain operational experience in applying 
various technologies and practices. 

1J. Organization of Document 

Section 2 presents the overall approach to the development of the AdaNET System Specification. Section 
3 presents a work breakdown structure with each research activity described in detail. Section 4 
summarizes the deliverables for each work area. Section 5 describes the overall organization and 
responsibilities for each research area. Section 6 presents the schedule and necessary resources for each 
research activity. Section 7 summarizes the estimated cost for each activity. The project plan is fully 
described in the Super Pro ject Expert data file contained on the floppy disk attached to the back cover of 
this plan. 


SOF feCH 


2378-00-001 


1 


2. 


Approach 


The strategy to develop the AdaNET specification is driven by the philosophy of iterative prototyping 
development that includes activity of requirements definition, development, operations and evaluation 
The overall effort is represented in Figure 2-1. This figure illustrates the management, research and 
review activities necessary to produce the AdaNET Research Results. The management activity uses the 
Project Plan to provide technical direction which aids in the development of various research products 
dunng the AdaNET Research activity. These research products arc reviewed to provide management with 
visibilty into the research effort and to provide the research team with feedback to facilitate their efforts 


Figure 2-2, Provide AdaNET Research, represents the activities in box two of Figure 1. The principle 
activities are divided into four work areas. Each work area can proceed as soon as necessary input 
information becomes available. While some activities do depend upon some results of other activities to 
carry out the full range of tasks, each activity can begin its research immediately. With feedback from 
evaluation activities, each of the work areas continues to iterate on new information. The primary 
activities and products of each work area are described below, while detailed work breakdown structure 
with task descriptions is discussed in Section 3. 


2,1. Develop Requirements Definition 


This activity describes what services and products AdaNET should provide by 

• refining the concept of the AdaNET miss ion 

• identifying potential users, sources of reusable software, reuse methodologies and potential 
application domains 

• developing a set of user requirements 

• understanding the legal implications of software reuse. 

This information will be acquired through market surveys and coordinating with related reuse activities 
in other organizations, including RAPED, COSMIC, Space Station Freedom Software Support 
Environment, STARS, as well as various corporate initiatives. 


The major products of this activity include: 


AdaNET Market Survey 
AdaNET Mission Concept Document 
AdaNET User Requirements Document 
The Legal Implications of Reuse Study 


SOF feCH 


2378-00-001 


2 


Project User Requirements 



Figure 2-1 Implement AdaNET Research Plan 



Figure 2-2 Provide AdaNET Research Plan 


SOF feCH 


2378 - 00-001 


3 










2.2. 


Analyze Requirements and Develop System 


This activity consists of two major thrusts. The first is to analyze the requirements to determine 
feasibility, benefits and cost and to recommend specific enhancements to the research system. Secondly, 
this activity includes the development of all software components, policies and procedures to support the 
operation of the research system. The major products of this activity include; 


Trade Studies - Several short studies of various implementation alternatives shall be conducted 
to support analysis and development 

Research System Enhancements - These represent the upgrades to the current system and other 
operational prototype capabilities used to assess the overall support strategies and facilities for 
software technology transfer. The principle focus of these enhancements is to provide a research 
platform to address specific reuse issues. 

System Requirements - This document describes the desired functional capabilities of AdaNET 
based on the research findings of this effort. It includes the AdaNET mission, operational 
concept, and operational sequence diagrams, and an information schema. 


System Specification - This document specifies the system's functional and performance 
requirements necessary to support the system requirements. It shall also include characteristics 
such as reliability, maintainability, availability, and functional allocation quality assurance 
factors. 

Rejected Requirements - This is a report that summarizes the many requirements that were 
considered as part of this research effort but were not included in the System Requirements 
document Each rejected requirement and a rationale for rejection shall be enumerated. 

23. Operate Research System 

Operational activities provide support to the AdaNET users and collect certain usage data for subsequent 
evaluation. These activites include: 

• maintaining the AdaNET information including information on conferences, contracts, news, 
products, publications, references and training, resuable software components, and information in 
hardcopy form, 

• supporting users by registering new users, distributing output requests, problem solving, 
updating user guides, attending conferences to promote project interaction with potential users, 
and operating a software engineer's help desk, 

• ma intaining the AdaNET system through hardware and software upgrades and operating the 
research system and telecommunications equipment 

The major products of this activity are operational usage results and AdaNET products distributed to Us 
users. 


SOf= feCH 


2378-00-001 


4 


2 . 4 . 


Evaluate Research System 


This activity Includes coordination with the aforementioned activities to evaluate 

• the degree to which the research prototype supports the current requirements, 

• existing products and services on their quality, utility, accessibility, client satisfaction and 
efficiency. 

• the degree to which the AdaNET products and services are reaching the appropriate clients. 

This activity will produce research reports evaluating AdaNET features. 


SOFJecH 


2378 - 00-001 


5 


3. Work Breakdown Structure and Task Descriptions 

Table 3-1 provides the project level AdaNET Research tasks, their descriptions, resources and associated 
work breakdown (WBS) code. 


SOf= TecH 


2378-00-001 


6 


Table 3-1 


Work Breakdown Structure <Sc Task Descriptions 


Heading/Task Resource 


Descn pt ion/Hote Text 


AXjAnET .P J 


0.0.0.0.000 


Project Office 


1. 0.0. 0.000 


Hanagefoent 


1.1.0.0.000 


Rserch Actv Hgmt Research Activity Management 

The UHCL AdaNet Project Manager will provide support to 
AdaNet by: 


1.1.1.0.002 


- Supervising AdaNet Project 

- Coordinating with related activities 

- Preparing briefings t presentations 

- Reporting Status to NASA 

- Attending Conferences t Seminars on related topics 

UHCL 

AH 

Program Hgmt . 

MTN 

Technical Hgmt 

The Technical Oirector is responsible for monitoring the 
technical performance on the contract, providing technical 
direction, promoting team communication, and recomaending 
plan adjustments. 

So f Tech 

Oata Management 

The Oata Manager shall be responsible for establishing a 
filing system for project deliverables and supporting 
reference material for the AdaNet effort and entering 
those data items into the AdaNet Project Library according 
to the filing system. The OH will update the documents and 
other material as changes are received, assure that all 
library entries are updated as approved changes are 
received, and distribute the current list of library 
contents to AdaNet project members. There will be 
complete physical collections in Houston and West 
Virginia. 


1.1.2.0.003 


1-1-3.0.004 


1.1.4.0.005 


Support 

Meetings&fteviews 
Project Reviews 

Review progress with UHCL and NASA/JSC. Develop and 
approve policy, approve new elements and research, 
(Configuration Control Board Activities), receive 
deliverables and research. Meetings will be held 
monthly. Attendees shall include RICIS project monitor, 
JSC monitor, RICIS Oirector, KountainMet Program Manager 
and AdaNet Technical Oirector. Meetings will be held in 
W once per quarter and Houston at other times. 

HTM 

SofTech 

GHG 

NASA Reviews 

Meetings shall be held quarterly to review progress with 
NASA HQ TU in Washington, O.C. Attendees shall include 
JSC Monitor, RICIS Project Monitor, MourrtainNet Program 
Manager and Technical Oirector. 

SofTech 

MTN 

GHG 

Advisory Group 

Meet with UHCL convened advisory group to present AdaNHT 
research. Plan to meet semi-annually for one day. 

MTN 

SofTech 


1 . 2 . 0 . 0.000 

1.2.1.0.000 

1.2.1.1.007 


1.2.1.2.008 


1.2.1-3.009 


SOF feCH 

2378 - 00-001 7 

ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

: . OF POOR QUALITY 




Heading/Task Resource 


Descripc ion/Mote Text 


Conferences 
TriAda 90 


GHG 

Adv. Grp. 


HTM 

So f Tech 

GHG 

UHa 

TriAda 91 

MTM 

SofTech 

GHG 

UHCL 

General Conferen 


HTM 

SofTech 

GHG 

two. 

A £ 

OtherO i rectCos ts Other Direct Costs 

The estivates of Other Direct Costs in the Project Office 
Plan are as follows: 

l tea Description Tear 1 Year ; 

Organization Oues i Fees S 200 S 20< 

Xeroxing, Printing 1,200 1,201 

Postage, Shipping 600 60< 

Telephone Equip, t Long Dist. 2,400 2,40* 

Office StppUe* 1,527 2,30< 

Books, Subscriptions 300 30 < 


Year 2 
S 200 
1,200 
600 
2,400 
2,300 
300 


Total est (anted OOC-Proj. Office 


16,227 


17,000 


The et^ifpvent purchase anticipated for the Project Office 
is the following: 

S2 80386 or equivalent 

Personal Page II Laser printer or equivalent 

The breakdown of OOC expenses es cleared for Allied 
Expertise I * * 4 * entry into the plan are as follows: 

I tee description Year 1 Year 2 

Conference fees % 3,244 t 3,244 

Meeting Costs 1,298 1,298 

A0PE 5,408 5,408 

Total OOCs for Applied Expertise % 9,950 % 9,950 

The equipeant end software to be provided fay the UHCL to 
support SofTech on UBS 1.2.4 is the followir*: 


Equipment Type 


Function 


Onty Estreated Cost 


OS2 80386 or 
equivalent 
Mac II 

Laser printer 
Subtotal 


Project Manageeent 1 

Office workstation 5 

and CASE support 
Printer for I8H 2 
and Macs 



1 .2.2.0.000 

1 .2,2.1 .011 


1.2.2.2.012 


1.2.2.3.013 
1.2. 3.0. OH 


1.2.4.0.015 


Software 

PC 

Word 


Application 


Word Processing 


soFTecH 




2378 - 00-001 

8 


■ 



ORIGINAL PAGE IS 


- - : - 


OF POOR QUALITY 

Ha 




Heads ng/fask 


Resource 


Oescripc ioo/Note Text 


UBS 


T 


SuperProject 

Project Management 


600 

Expert 

ProComm Plus 

Modem Coomunieat i ons 

1 

60 

Guattro Pro 

Spreadsheet 

1 

300 

RAF 

Network to VAX for 
backup, data exchange 

1 

500 

Mac 

Symantec 

Utilities 

Virus prevention. 
File recovery 

5 

900 

Design/IDEF 

Functional/data modeling 

1 

3000 

OataSculptor 

Entity-Relation modeling 

t 

1000 

ScperPaint 

Bit-mapped graphics 

5 

750 

MacOrau 

Object-oriented graphics 
PERT Chart graphics 

5 

1450 

MacProJect II 

1 

370 

Hac240 

MicroVAX connectivity 

5 

1000 

PowerPoint 

Presentation production 

5 

1200 

Excel 

Spreadsheet 

2 

480 

Word 

Word processing 

5 

1200 

Silver 

Network Software 

5 

1250 

Utilities 

Pyro! 

Subtotal 

Screen saver 

5 

75 

$14535 

Total OOC (Hardware and Software) 


$61035 


Code 


MTN 

SofTech 

imcL 

GHG 

AE 

Retirements Requirements Definition 


2.0.0.0.000 


AM Market Survey 

A Market Study will be performed to help identify potential 
AdaMet user*, contributors to the AdaMet Library and 
candidate application domains for initial RSC population. 
The domains will be evaluated with respect to the potential 
nimber of users, maturity of the domain, their likelihood 
of using Ada in the near future, mid the potential of 
* harvesting 1 RSCs and co m me rcial applicability. The user 
requirements for an on-line service and their willfnpiess 
to pay for these services wilt be evaluated. In addition, 
the similar on-line information retrieval systems and reuse 
methodologies will be identified and studied. 


2.1.0.0.000 


Market Surv Plan AdaNET Marketing Survey Plan 

A short planning phase will detail the survey questions 
and will identify a preliminary target population in a 
“AdaMet Market Survey Plan". The target population 
includes potential AdaMet Users, contributors, and related 
reuse efforts. A partial listing of meobers of the target 
population have already been identified. Market Survey 
Target Population is: 


2.1.1.0.018 


MASA COSMIC 
NASA GSFC 
MASA JPL 
NASA SSE 
NASA SSPO 
NASA JSC 
Fed Lib Oep Prg 


Army RSL 

Martin Marietta 

SEI 

STARS 

Coot el 

FAA 

SX>10 

IBM ISO 

HOSC 

CAMP 

Unisys 

RAPI0 

MTIC 

Boeing 

JAIUG 

OTIC 

IEEE 

DACS 


MDSSC 



GHG 

J Staples 

N/Mrkt Srv Pin D Mi lest one: Market Survey Plan 

Deliver 


2.1.2.0.019 


Survey Pin Rev. 


Survey PLAM Review 


GHG 

Market Survey 

This includes personal 


AdaMet Marketing Survey Oata 
and telephone interviews of the 


2.1.3.0.020 

2-1.4.0.021 


SOFfecH 

2378 - 00-001 



^eaOing/Task Resource 


Oescrtption/Note Tex< 


targer population. Besides gathering data, this personal 
interview process is designed to help gain support for the 
AdaWet project throughout the user community As the 
survey progresses, the target population nay be expanded 
as potential AdaNet users are identified and as tine 
allows. 


GHG 

Dyer/FA 

M/Survey Data D 

Harket Study AdaWet Marketing Survey 

The final phase of the Market Study entails the analysis 
of the survey data and culminates in a report called 
“AdaMet Market Survey*. 


GHG 

JStaples 

M/HHct Study Del 
Survey Review 


Mi lest one: Market Study Oe livery 
SURVEY Review 


GHG 

Mission Definiti Produce Mission Concept docs 

The contractor shall define a new * AdaNet Statement of 
Mission" in a brief concept docuaent. The current AdaNet 
mission, system, and retirements shall be analyzed with 
regard to the important role the AdaNet system can play in 
uniting the resources of the NASA Office of Technology 
Utilization and other similar government agencies. The 
AdaNet approach to promoting the utilization of goverrment 
technology by providing information, reusable products, and 
services via an on-line system shall be presented. If the 
role of AdaNet is broadened, a new name shall be suggested 
for the AdaNet system. 


Analysis Definit Analysis Definition 

TBO 

GHG 

SofTcch 

Dyer/FA 

Mission Concept 

Current AdaNet documents will be collected «nd the 
statement of mission, system, and requirements will be 
analyzed. The original authors of the AdaNet docuaents 
will be available as consultants to assist In this 
analysis. AdaNet Management from NASA and RICXS will play 
an integral role in defining the AdaNet mission and 
defining the AdaNet System Concept that can accost ish 
that mission. 


2 . 1 . 5 . 0 . 119 

2 . 1 . 6 . 0 . 023 


2 . 1 . 7 . 0 . 024 

2 . 1 . 8 . 0 . 025 


2.2.0.0.000 


2 . 2 . 1 . 0.027 


2 . 2 . 2 . 0.028 


GHG 

SofTech 

Dyer/FA 

K/Pre Cncept Doc 


M/FinlCncept Doc 


Cncept Docu Rev 


Miles tone :Preli mi nary Mission 
Concept Oocuaent 

Mi l es tone: Final Mission Concept 
Oocuaent 

Concept Oocuaent Review 


GHG 

SofTech 

User Repats Oefi User Requirements Definition 

The contractor shall generate a requirements docuaent that 
contains the functional requirements for an on-line 
information resource that most effectively promotes the 
transfer of technology as outlined in the AdaNet Mission 
Concept Oocuaent. 

User Req. Doc. User Requirements Oocuaent 

Requirements for the AdaNet system will be gathered from 
several sources. These include the existing AdaNet system 


2 . 2 . 3 . 0.029 


[ 2 . 2 . 4 . 0.030 


2 . 2 . 5 . 0.031 


2 . 3 . 0 . 0.000 


2 . 3 . 1 . 0.033 


SOF TecH 




2378 - 00-001 

10 

original page fs 

1 



OF POOR QUALITY 


JdiO iVi 



= 





SOFfecH 

2378 - 00-001 


omasum 

0f poor 


PASS is 

QUALITY 






Heading/Task Resource 


Descript fon/Mote Text 


CHG 

Legal Cons 
Legal Study Ooc. 

A -^f v ! ew of te S al docents will be conducted. The review 
w«U include laws relevant to U.S. Copyright law, patents 
FAR regulations, intellectual property rights, liability 
maintenance of reusable items, warranties, and guaranties. 
An extensive bibliography will be included. NASA and 
other legal cocncU may be consulted as required, 

LEGAL QUESTIONS: 

Uhat * re 1*9*1 implications of transferiog software 
to and from AdaNet? 

" who retains the data rights to reusable software? 

- Uho carries the liability for reused software? 

- What type of organization should act as the transfer 
agent? 

CHG 

Legal Cons 

Retire. Mgart. 

Project direction, cost accosting, projections, 
scheduling. 

GHG 

Require. Travel 

Travel associated with requirements definition. 

GHG 

Require. OOC 

Includes expenses for don wen t reproduction* 

GHG 

Development 

Est a. node Establish Clear lake Nock 

The project will network the ASV2 system in Morgantown, UV 
with a cooputer In the RttF in Clear Lake. The purpose of 
esty»lf shing the Clear Lake node is two fold. firet/it 
will allow NASA's Center Information Network <CIH) users to 

. S « condl >'' Software 

Library <RSL) capabilities developed In Clear Lake will be 
accessible to ell AdaNet users. This task wilt provide 
connectivity between ASV2 resources and the RCDF. probably 
via Internet. r 

KTN 

SofTech 

Est RSI Establish Reusable S/V Library 

An initial reusable software library <RSL) capability 
provides a platform to assess the Ad*fet operations and 
retired technology* It will be used to validate the 
concepts of operations and the ability of existing 

will provide 

an initial SSL capability in the Clear Lake area. Tasks to 
accomplish this are discussed below. 

Platform Study Evaluate RSLs 

An evaluation of existing RSLs will be nde to determine 
the reusable software library systM to be used for 
prototyping the research system. The evaluation will 
include the preparation of a set of initial criteria which 
will be approved by the project office. The study will 
iSJdate a prior RSI study conducted by GHG for the Space 
Station Software Support Environment. Subsequent in 

this plan associated with establish ir« an RSL in Clear 
Lake are based on the assumption that the SofTech Reusable 
Software Library system will be chosen. 

SofTech 

GHG 

InstaURSLS/V Provide Reusable S/M Library 

SofTech will make our proprietary Reusable Software 
Library <RSt) system available to the AdaNet program in 
accordance with the data rights in exhibit C. The system 
will be rehosted onto resources available to the AdaNet 


UBS 

Code 


2.5.2.0.044 


2.6.0. 0.045 

2.7.0. 0.046 
2*6.0.0.047 

3*0.0.0.000 

3.1.0. 0.049 


3.2.0.0.000 


*2.1.0.051 


.2.2.0.052 


SOf TecH 

2378 - 00-001 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

OF POOR QUALITY 


Head i ng/ Task Resource 


Oescr i pt » on/Kote Text 


SOF TecH 


project. Candidate computers for rehosting are the UHCL * s 
RCDF I BH 4341, Harris HCX-9, a leased VAX or other systems 
which may be provided by the project. The final selection 
will be based on factors including availability, 
accessibi l ity, and software development support. 
Evaluations of software development tools may be necessary 
prior to computer selection. 

SofTech 

Oev. Op. P/P Dev Ops Pol icies/ Procedures 

Operational strategies of AdaNet will be developed that 
provide guidance for the conduct of all activities related 
to AdaNet. It will provide infonaation regarding the 
AdaNet organization and staff, RSC (reusable software 
component) selection, development and maintenance, 
operations, and reuse advocacy. 

The strategies for organization and staff must address the 
roles and responsibilities of each member of the AdaNet 
Center. Specific duties must address the following: 

Policy * Develop and maintain policies that address 
standards, guidelines, data rights, liability, warranties. 

Publicity - Provide advocacy for AdaNet by analyzing 
and promoting reuse benefits and advertising. 

Technical Guidance - Provide guidelines to produce 
RSCs, training for reuse retrieval support, and RSC use. 

RSC Descriptions and Products - Provide information 
on RSC descriptions, costs, sources, classification and 
distribution. 


3.2.3.0.053 


Histories - Track user feedback about their s u ccess 
or problem with RSCs and maintain history. 

Analyze AdaNet Experience - Collect and analyze 
experiences related to RSC use and cost effectiveness. 

RSC Collection - Stay abreast of opportunities and 
present the forthcoming applications for sources of new or 
enhanced RSCs. 

RSC Development and Acceptance - Qualify and enh a nce 
RSCs as needed to meet AdaNet standards. 

RSC Classification, Evaluation, Maintenance - Ensure 
RSCs are propoerly described for easy retrieval, ensure 
RSCs comply with applicable standards and enh a nce RSCs as 
they evolve. 

Administrative Support - Process reports, follow-**) 
on users, handle problem reports and manage user accounts. 

This task shall develop the overall strategies, policies 
end procedures to operate the RSL. The policies and 
procedures will be tested by populating the RSL with 
information taken from NASA end 000 progr a m s tAich ere not 
subject to restrictions. After successful trial use of 
these policies and procedures, the operations personnel 
will be trained in their appropriate use. 

SofTech 

GHG 

Train Ops. Pa rs Train Operations Personnel 

Operations personnel shall be trained in the proper use 
end maintenance of all operational software, policies and 
procedures. 

SofTech 

KTN 

Dev. New Element Develop New Element 

Recasts. Analysis Requirements Analysis 

AdaNet requirements analysis will be performed to better 
inderstand the requirements developed during the 


3.2.4.0.054 


3.3.0. 0.000 

3.3.1.0. 000 


2378 - 00-001 


ORIGINAL PA(gr ,~ 

of poor quality 




Heading/Task Resource 


Oescr ipt ion/Wotc Text 


requirements definition activities. Its focus is to 
assess the feasibility of the requirements in terms of 
requirements coapat ibi l i ty, necessary technology to 
implement re<^ii rements, and those requi remen ts that have 
high cost relative to their benefit. It will consider the 
requirements in terms of mission needs, commercial 
realities and aciaini strati ve policies affecting 
development and experience of AdaMet and other projects 
promoting the transfer software engineering technology 
This effort will be in two phases. The first phase is 
focused on the analysis of the initial research system 
requirements, Uiile the second is oriented toward on going 
analysis based on feedback from the operational system. 
System Rqrwts. 

Based on the Concept Document and User Requirements 
developed ckirfng the Requirements Definition phase, this 
task will analyze the requirements to determine which 
retirements should be incorporated into the research 
system, Uiidt should be deferred, and which should be 
rejected based on trade studies of cost, feasibility and 
benefit. To support this effort both requirement and 
functional models that depict the capabilities ad 
functional architecture of the AdaMet system will be 
developed. The requirement models address the 
operational capabilities, policies and procedures for 
using AdaMet, while the functional architecture models 
describe the underlying information schema necessary to 
st*jport the AdaMet services end the information 
management system needed to process AdaMet service 
requests. Additionally, an assessment of NASA/JSC SCAD 
system will be made to determine how to integrate its 
services into the AdaNET system. 

SofTech 

M/Deliver Rqmts Milestone: Deliver Requirements 

System Req. Rev. 

UHCL 

MTM 

SofTech 

CHG 

Sustaining Sustaining Analysis 

During operational use of the research system, additional 
* haU ** conducted to determine 
iMuch capabilities to introduce into the research system 
Specif Scaly, reuse issue* will be addrassed to refine 
the policies end procedures for operating the AdaMet 
Th * l ** ues ' discussed in more detail In the 
SofTech report "Software Reuse Issues Affecting AdaMet". 
dated July 5, 1989, are sumarized below: 


Types of Reusable Software Components - Market analysis 
is needed to determine what types of RSCs are needed, how 
they »re selected, their appropriate level of 
granularity, and their consistency of quality. 

Methodology - To trfiat extent will the AdaMet program 

! n development of approaches to improve 
RSC utilization? 

Incorporation - Mow should RSCs be described to 
facilitate their use? 

Technical Guidance - To what extent will technical 
guidance be provided? 

Distribution * In tiiat forms <i.e. electronic bulletin 
dUtSb^tST di%k * 4 etC-> WUl *** RSC descriptions be 

Acquisition - Uhat type of procedures will be employed to 
support the acquisition of RSCs? 

Retrieval Methods - Much techniques of retrieval will be 


UBS 

Code 


3.3.1.1.057 


3.3.1.2.058 

3.3.1.3.059 


3.3.1.4.060 


SOF TecH 


2378 - 00-001 


14 


GRJG5NAL PAGE fS 

OF POOR QUALITY 



SOf=f ecH 

2378 - 00-001 


ORIGINAL PAGE !$ 

OF POOR QUALITY 






Head ing/Task Resource 


Oescription/Note Text 


New technologies and methods of representing reuse 
inforr&atioo will be investigated to assess their 
feasibility. This effort is dist inguished from 
requi rements analysis in that it addresses approaches for 
reuse that oiay be incorporated into the System 
Specif ication but too immature to be included in any of 
the planned enhancements during the two year research 
effort. Prototypes will be investigated for their 
suitability to support advanced information systems. 
Specifically, technologies such as Object Management 
Systems and the Teradata Database System will be examined. 
Also, the requirements and functional models mill be 
extended to reflect the capability to represent 
information as an EA/RA description. This description 
provides the ability to represent and relate information 
such as requirements, design, design rationale, source 
code, test programs and other software artifacts. 

Sof Tech 
McKay 
WVU CS 

Develop Sys Spec 

Based on the research findings during the evaluation of 
prototype operations and other trade studies, a System 
Specification shall be prepared and delivered. 



3.4.0.0.072 


SofTech 

GHG 

HTW 

Develop. Hgmt 

SofTech 

Develop. Travel 

SofTech 

Develop. COC 

OOCs to support Development are 


as follows; 


3.5.0.0.073 


3.6.0.0.074 


3.7.0.0.073 


Item Description 
FEDEX 

Xeroxing, Printing 
Long Distance 
Computer Time 


Cost/Year 
t 150 
1500 
1000 
2250 


Total Cost 
- S 300 
3000 
2000 
4500 


SofTech 


Operations 
Maintain Inform. 
Gen Info Maine. 


Maintain Information 


Jen Info Maine. Maintain General Information 

- Maintain Conference Information 

Maintain a database of current conference information 

- Maintain Contracts Information 

Maintain a database of current RFPs ad contract awards 
through monitoring the Coomeree Business Oaily as well as 
other print sources available onsite. 

- Maintain Mews Information 

Includes scanning publications identified in Mews doc u me nt 
generation information for pertinent information and 
maintaining a current database. 

- Maintain Products Information 

Includes selecting product Information from that received 
inhouse, scanning publications and requesting full 
information based on articles or advertisements contained 
therein and maintaining this inforamtlon in a database. 

- Maintain Publications Information 

Includes identifying citations to publications and 
identifying and obtaining print or electronic copies of 


4.0. 0.0.000 

4.1.0. 0.000 

4.1.1 .0. 078 



sop TecH 


2378 - 00-001 


oric^al Page is 

OF POOR QUALITY 





Heading/ Task 


Resource 


Oescript ion/Note Text 


V8S 

Code 


non -copyrighted standards, gu i de l i nes , delines, or 
newsletters and maintaining this information in a 
database. 


- Maintain Reference Information 

Includes maintaining acronym translation file, glossary of 
terms, ASR information files, keyword lists, and lists of 
names and addresses by scanning information, received 
in-house for applicable information for each file and 
maintaining this information in a database. 

- Maintain Training Information 

Includes sorting training/education information from that 
received inhouse, extracting and entering it into a 
database. 

MTM 

WVU CS 
IFB 

Reusable S/U Hnt Maintain Reusable Software 

- Maintain ASV2 Reusable Software 

Includes regular updates of the reusable software from the 
ASR and other sources investigating the large software 
systems in order to find standalone components and 
subsystems, assigning keywords and creating appropriate 
categories for new software in accordance with standard 
procedures. 

- Maintain Reusable Software Componenets Library 
Includes updating existing components in the reusable 
software library system in accordance with standard 
operating procedures as well as acquiring and cataloging 
new components. 

KTN 

WVU CS 

Physical Lib Hnt Maintain Physical Library 

Includes processing all incoming materials, assignir^ an 
LC classification ruber and preparing a catalog record 
for all materials being add e d to the collection, 
recoosaending purchases, maintaining a library catalog, 
maintaining a serials holding list, maintaining a serials 
check-in file, maintaining a record of items checked out 
of the library, providing assistance in use of the 
physical library, and providing assistance in obtaining 
materials needed which are not available onsite. 

IFB 

Qua l . Meas. Rep. Report Quality Measures 

- Perform Quality Measures 

Determine timeliness, completeness, and accuracy of ASV2 
information in accordance with standard procedures. 


4.1.2.0.079 


4.1.3.0.080 


14.1.4.0.081 


- Prepare and Distribute Report 

Coabine all statistics in a sumary report on a monthly 
basis and distribute as required. 


KTN 

IFB 

Support Users 

Register Users 

- Distribute Information 

Includes the distribution of AdaMet information and AdaMet 
secant applications to potential users. 

- Process New Accounts 

Includes processing applications for new accounts 
according to the current ASV2 model. User guides will be 
sent out and training provided. 

Mailing lists and datafiles will be tpdated accordingly. 

- Distribute User Guides 

Current versions of user Guides will be distributed to 
each new user. Each guide will contain a copy of the 
Kermit and ProComm communication software and a Telenet 
brochure listing the U.S. access telephone numbers. Upon 
completion of any new versions or supplemental user 


4.2.0.0.000 


14.2.1.0.083 


SOFfecH 

2378 - 00-001 


17 


ORiQ^fleRl r»o 

OF Print f AG ? fS 
POOR QUALITY 



Headmg/Task Resource 


D«eripti on/No ce Text 


guides, copies wi U be distributed to all AdaNet users. 

- Collect User Information 

user information will be collected frora the user 
application to create and update mailing lists and data 
files for the usage reports. Such information will 
include the full name, title, company, address, phone 
ntfrtwr and requested user identi f icat ion. 

Information on the primary function of the user's 
organization, size of the company, use of Ada within 
company electronic networks used and whether or not the 
conpany develops software will also be collected. This 
information may be submitted for use in the evaluation of 
the service or research purposes. 

Technical information will be kept such as the equipment 
and communications software being used. This information 
will be vital in troubleshooting user problems. 

List processing within CEO will be used for this purpose. 
This will allow each itm# of information on the user to be 
entered separately making it possible to perform a search 
for each field. For example, a search for users within a 
particular organization or a certain state can be 
performed. 

This information will also be added to the master user 
data file on the VAX. 


HTM 

Support Users 

- Distribute Output Requests 

User Services wilt provide users with hardcopies or disks 
containing information found on-line. On-line documents 
may be queued by the user to one of KountainNet's printers 
or to be loaded on disks. The User Service Coordinator 
wilt check printers and the on-line queue display for such 
requests daily. 

- Solve Problems 

Users will be provided with on-goir« technical stpport. 
User Services will be the first point of contact to the 
users needing assistance* A trouble report form will be 
collated detailing the problems and equipment used. User 
Services will ask for assistance or direct the trouble 
report to other staff m akers as needed. Documentation 
will be kept on how the problem was resolved for future 
reference. 

- Distribute User Guide Updates 

User Guides will be updated periodically as a result of 
devel op m en tal changes. Users will be notified of «ry new 
services or changes to the existing service. Supplements 
to the user 4 s guide or any \fsda ted versions of the guides 
will be distributed to ell users as they are completed. 

- Participate In Project Brief ings 

Project briefings wilt be held for targeted interest 
groups to promote project visability and give potential 
users an overall insight to the project. A project 
presentation will consist of a briefing of the AdaMet 
project giving ft*a history, current status and goals. 
Following the briefing will be e hands-on d em onstration of 
the system to potential users. 

- Attend TriAda 

Attendance at the TH-Ade conference is necessary to 
promote project interaction with communities of targeted 
potential users. The AdaMet booth display will be set 
end demonstrations of the system will be performed. Staff 
will also be available to answer questions that potential 
users may have. Product handouts and user applications 
will be available for distribution. 


U.2. 2. 0.064 






He jd » ng/Task Resource 


Descript ion/Hote Text 


sof=r ecH 


2378 - 00-001 


- Operate Software Engineers* Help Desk 

A “Help Desk" will be operated to assist users to find 
needed information that is not contained on- line . 

Requests for non-ASV2 information wilt be handled 
following the M Non-ASV2 Information Request Procedures** 
approved 9 / 89 . A search to find the information will 
begin within the AdaNet in-house library. If the 
information is not found in-house, various AdaWet 
employees and/or consultants will be contacted for their 
input. Requested information will be forwarded to the 
requestor on the requested media. 

HTM 

IFB 

Strictfiusi 

Maint. User Gde Maintain User Guides As Required 4.2.3.0.085 

- Update User Guides As Required 

The ASV2 User Guide will be revised periodically to 
provide the users with documentation to use the ASV2 
system efficiently. Updated versions of the guide will be 
forthcoming to reflect any changes to the menus or the 
user cottuands within the ASV2 system. Revisions will be 
done also to reflect changes to the system as a result of 
user feedback. Electronic on- line version located in the 
Reference drawer wilt also be updated. 

- Develop User Guide Supplements As Required 

Feedback from users indicates the desirability of certain 
user guide supplements dealing with specific topics such 
as network access, customizing menus, and/or specific 
segments of the on-line service. 

-Oevelop New User Guides As Required 
New user guides will be required for each major 
enhancement of the existing service and for any 
independent subsystems that may be developed. 

KTN 

Docuaent Users 4.2.4.0.086 

- Maintain User Mailing Lists 

User Services wilt continuously ipdate the user mailirg 
lists on-line. List processing within CEO will be used. 

The mailing list will be contained in the Reference 
drawer. User Directory folder. Additional mailing lists 
may be developed to focus on a particular interest grots*. 

- Maintain On-Line Data Files As Required 

At least two online master data bases wilt be maintained 
including the master user database and system use log 
database. 

-Update User Files 

User files such as mailing lists, user applications, etc. 
will be updated to reflect any personal information 
changes. Inactive accounts will be removed from the 
current files periodically. 

KTN 

Usage Oata Repor Report Usage Data 4.2.5.0.087 

- Prepare and Distribute Usage Reports 

Transport login and access data f rqa ASV2 and/or other 
online services to master usage database. Recode and 
organize usage data as required. Run SAS and/or other 
basic statistical suaaaries on usage data. Distribute 
reports on a monthly basis to all project teams. 

- Prepare and Distribute User Feedback 

Compile user feedback collected via letters, telephone 
calls, electronic mail, or any other means. Distribute 
reports on a monthly basis to all project teams. 

- Log Requests for Off-Line Information 

Record in detail all requests for offline information. 

Compile sumaaries of such requests and distribute to 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS ' 
OF POOR QUALfTY 



He Jd i ng/ Task Resource 


Oescnpt ion/Note Text 


project team mefTt>ers. Participate in planning the 
Software Engineering Help Desk. 

- Kaintain Output Requests tog 

A log will be maintained on output requests. This log 
will contain such information as the date, username, queue 
used, drawer, folder and name of the document, and the 
date the printout was mailed to the user. This data will 
be maintained in ana lyr able form to the project team as 
requi red. 

- Document Trouble Reports 

All trouble reports wfll be documented. Logs will detail 
the date of the report, nature of the problem, how the 
problem was resolved, person handling the report, date and 
by iAom user was notified with help arvi/or a solution. 

Logs will be used as a reference for future calls and to 
evaluate future developments needed. This fnforemtion 
will be provided in analyzable form to the project tema as 
required. 

NTH 

WVU OCT 

Maintain Systems 

Install Hardware 

- Install SPX-50 

Install multiplexor interface between Data General 
computers and wide area telecommunications networks. This 
device will allow acre serial asynchronous connectivity 
for AdaNet users. The current SPX-50 will reach capacity 
prior to the end of Oeceafcer 1989, and has no room for 
expansion. 

- Install Ethernet 

Ethernet will provide the physical connectivity between 
all AdaNet NV2000 and HV8000 II computers for file sharing 
and user coanuni cat ions. 

- Install 2gb tea Tap# SacfcLp 

This device will provide a more efficient disk 
system saving on system down time and personal service 
requirements. 

- Install EOC+ PC Hardware 

This personal computer hardware will enable advanced 
monitoring of AdaNet SPX and Series 2000 wide area 
networking devices, and will aid in recovery from 
e<jjip*ent failure, capacity planning and network 
management. 

- Install 120*6 Disk Drives for MV2000s 

These additional disk drives will permit the NVZOOOs to 
have value for the AdaNet project. Currently, the NVZOOOs 
have 1 38*6 disk drive, which when loaded with AOS/VS ard 
CEO systems software would have very little room for user 
files. The additional disk space is necessary given the 
AdaNet environment. 

- Install new hardware as required 

Arrange shipping to West Virginia and install Teradata 
machine. Install other new hardware as required. 

NTH 

Install Software 

- Install Software Updates and Revisions 

Install patches, grades, end revisions to all exist fr* 
software on a timely basis, including operating systems, 
compilers, office automation, and application systems 
software. 

* Install New Software As Required 
Install new operating systems, compilers, office 
automation, application systems, or any other new software 
including internally developed enhancements to the AdaNet 


4.3.0. 0.000 

4.3.1.0. 089 


14.3.2.0.090 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

OF POOR QUALITY 






Heading/Ta^fc Resource 


Oescr i pc t on/Wotc T«xt 



system. 

MTM 

Operate CL node 

Participate in Operating CL Node As Required 
Participate in operating teleconrmjmcations node<s) and/or 
computer systems located in the Clear lake area as 
retired. 

HTN 

Operate UV Mode 

■ Install Raised Computer floor 

Raised computer flooring will permit the safe installation 
of wires running between AdaNet systems. Such wires 
permit networking and the electrical powering of 
equipment. Keeping wires from walkways protects humans as 
well as machines. 

- Maintain System Performance 

System performance is the speed at which computing devices 
are able to perform their operations. System performance 
can be held close to peak levels through proper systems 
performance management techniques. 

Rians for disk space utilization will be updated as 
required. Lack of disk space can not only cause 
indivickal user file storage problems, ft can shut down an 
operating system completely. Such cases are avoided by 
planning and management activities. 

The disk optimizer software facilitates the reorganization 
of disk files, aimed at the shortest possible movement of 
disk read/write heads. The greater the amount of this 
movement, the slower the filing system is. Slow filing 
systems can lead to increased levels of user 
dissatisfaction. 

As the AdaNet environment changes, it may become necessary 
to reallocate computer resources. For example, as the 
number of files and users increase. It may be necessary to 
increase the amount of cache memory available to the 
systems, by taking some of the available paging memory and 
reallocating ft. 

- Establish ASV2 User Accounts 

ASV2 user accounts permit computer access to the AdaMet 
service. These accounts permit tracking of user activity, 
necessary for the study of user behavior, and provide 
security through user accountability and built in 
operating system software and application system software 
facilities. 

The User Service Division informs the Systems and 
Telecomnuiicaitons Division when applications for user 
accotsits are approved. 

Usually within 24 hours of notif i cation, user profiles are 
established. These profiles are read by operating system 
software and by application system software In authorizing 
users to access AdaNet computing services. 

The Division of AdaNet User Services will be notified that 
the accounts are ready for use, and in turn will contact 
users as appropriate. 

- Upgrade Skills As Required 

The Systems and Telecommunicaitons Division keeps its 
personnel well trained on the various systems required for 
the AdaNet Service. This training is necessary for 
P^opoer operation and support of systems hardware and 
software. 

Current skills and knowledge are measured against required 
skills and knowledge. Areas where there is a gap are 
targeted for skills upgrading. 


4 . 3 . 3 . 0.091 





Head ing/Task Resource 


Oe^cript ion/Note Text 


Vendors of professional development in targeted areas are 
identified through literature or professional 
contacts/referrals. 

Arrangements are made for AdaNet Systems and 
Telecomnoiications staff to engage in professional 
development. 

- Provide User Training 

Systems and Tel ecomni cat ions staff often have the 
knowledge and/or resources to assist other project staff 
meirbers. AdaNet staff meofcers having questions have 
access to systems and telecomuni cat ions persomel. Where 
training is required, a person from this division is 
available to meet with others. End users are supported by 
the AdaNet User Services Division. 

- Monitor Hardware Performance 

Through user reports, messages on fnput/output devices 
event record logs, and front panel displays, harefcare is 
monitored. Determine that a problem is not software 
related through hardware testing, vendor support, and 
available docuentai ton* Determine tbich hardware 
component is creating a problem through hardware testing, 
vendor support, and available documentation. Determine 
who is responsible for repair or replacement of hardware 
through maintenance agreements and vendor contracts. 

- Operate and Maintain Teradata System 

Operate the Teradata database platform to be located in 
the AdaNet Computer Center in Morgantown, including 
physical security, operator functions, and 
telecommunications links. 


Operate Telecomm 

- Maintain Internet Links 

Operate and maintain TCP IP rout if* devices, modem or data 
service units, maintain telecomauncations lines, system 
software, and ethemet networks necessary for connection 
to Internet. 

* Maintain Telenet Links 

Operate and maintain X.25 packet assent l er /disassembler 
modem, maintain talecoomutfcations lines, and network 
connections necessary for connection to Telenet. 

- Maintain Futurecom Network 

Operate and maintain switched packet exchange and servers 
modem, maintain telecommunications lines and network 
connections necessary for connection to HountafnNet. 

- Monitor Telecommunications Performance 

Monitor error rates and device connection charnels and 
telecomuni cat ions links. Review event logs end analyze 
the f regency of events which indicate han*»re or 
telecomuni cations problem. 

HTM 

Operations Mgmt. 

Coor TravtRep Do Coordinate travl arrange .^reports 

Make travel arrangements for all KountainNet project 
staff. Prepare travel itirtaries and deliver to travelor. 
Ascertain that written requests to travel, expense 
reports, and trip reports are properly completed. Audit 
travel expenses per Federal Travel Regulations and enter 
that information into accounting system. Design, revise 
and implement travel policies and procedures. Participate 
in formal training as required. Participate in formal 
audits of travel expenses as required. 


4.3.5.0.093 


HTM 

Proc GdsXSecv AR 


4.4.0. 0.000 

4.4.1.0. 095 


Procure goodts/serviees as required 


4.4.2.0.096 



I Hcadtng/Task Resource Description/Note Text .. 

UBS 

Code 

Procure all goods aod services required for execution of 
the project. Prepare and execute purchase requisitions in 
accordance with established policies and procedures and 
Federal Acquisition Regulations including documentation of 
competition or sole sourcing as appropriate. Enter 
procurement data into accounting system. Design, revise, 
and implement procurement policies and procedures. 
Participate in formal training as required. Participate 
in formal audits of procurements as required. 


HTM 

Prep,Mon&Neg Cnt Prep/moni tor/negotiate-contrts/sub 

Prepare project work breakdown schedules, plans, budgets, 
proposals, contracts, and contract modif i cat ions and 
participate in reviews of same as required. Supervise and 
monitor all project activities by HocntairMet staff, 
subcontractors, and consultants as required. 

4.4.3.0.097 

HTM 

Cost Acct. Accocnt for & invoice project 

Compile all operating, travel, payroll, subcontract, 
consultant, and other costs using the DCAA approved 
accounting system. Maintain hardcopy documentation of all 
costs as required by Federal Acquisition Regulations. 
Prepare and transmit invoices to UNO. for all incurred 
costs. Document incurred costs as requested by UHCU 
Participate in informal and formal audits as required. 
Resolve questioned costs as required. Participate in 
formal training as required. 

4.4.4.0.098 

KIN 

Est,Rev,£UD P/P Es tab/ rev/ update policies/proced. 

Establish, review, revise, and update all policies and 
procedures as required to ensure compliance with all 
applicable regulations including but not limited to 
travel, procurement, accounting, property control, 
personnel, and standard operating procedures for 
maintaining information, assisting users, and maintain!^ 
computer and telecommunications systems. 

4.4.5.0.099 

HTM 

Opera t. Travel 

4.5.0.0.101 

HTM 

Operations 00 C 

4.6.0.0.102 

HTM 

Evaluation 

The activities in this task include coordination with the 
requirements definition, development and operations 
activities to evaluate: 

5.0.0.0.000 

- the degree to which the research prototype (inputs, 
confi ^ration, and operations) supports the current 
requi rements 

- existing products and services on their quality, utility, 
accessibility, client satisfaction, and efficiency 

- the degree to which the AdaMet products and services are 
reaching the appropriate clients 

This activity commences immediately with the evaluation of 
the existing AdaMet system and continues interactively upon 
the release of each major AdaMet enhancement. 


Define Data Define Data to be Collected 

Define which features of the operational AdaMet prototype 
are to be evaluated. Determine the user requirements these 
features meet. Develop evaluation criteria for each 
feature and define what data should be collected from 
operations or other sources to validate the utility of each 
feature. Develop an evaluation plan for collecting the 

5.1.0.0.104 


SOFfecn 

2378 - 00-001 

"7 ' . ' ' T ^ 7 C 

* 'vi_. -j%j $ ' * > * 


23 



Heading/ Taste Resource 


Desenpeton/Note Text 


data that includes the specific data formats required from 
each data source. 

GHG 

JStaples 

Grasso 

Col tect Oara 

Collect operational data for the features under evaluation 
from data sources that include the AdaNet operations team, 
the User Help Desk, solicitation, and other sources as 
required by the evaluation plan. Data will be collected on 
a monthly basis for three months per evaluation. 

GKG 

Grasso 

Scvnaarize Oata 

Assemble these data into useful categories by feature for 
analysis. 

GHG 

Grasso 

Analyze Oata 

Analyze the data collected relevant to each feature under 
evaluation and report on each feature's utility, 
performance, quality, etc. Report on those features found 
to be desirable, or not useful. Trace those features to 
the original user requirements document and deliver to the 
rest of the AdaMet Team for further consideration in the 
final user requirements document. 

GHG 

JStaples 
Evaluation Mgmt 

Project direction, cost accocntir^, for evaluation. 


5.2.0.0.105 


5.3.0.0.106 


5-4.0.0.107 


5.5.0.0.108 


Eval. Travel 

Travel associated with AdaNet evaluation te« 
GHG 

Evalut ion ODC 

Includes expenses for document reproduction. 


5.6.0.0.109 


5.7.0.0.110 


6 . 0 . 0 . 0.111 



ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



4 . 


Deliverables 


The delivery schedule of AdaNET products is summarized below in accordance with the work breakdown 
structure. 


WBS 

Data Requirement 

Schedule 

2.1.5 

AdaNET Market Survey 

2/11/91 

22.4 

Mission Concept Definition 

8/04/90 

233 

User Requirements Definition 

9/21/90 

232 

Legal Study Document 

3/04/90 

2.6 

Monthly Contract Summary/ 
Status Report 

Monthly 

3.1 

Clear Lake Node 

6/29/90 

32 

RSL 

8/31/90 

33.1 

System Requirements 

11/6/90 


Rejected Requirements 

11/6/90 

332.1 

Enhancement Release #1 

2/12/91 

3322 

Enhancement Release #2 

5/07/91 

3323 

Enhancement Release #3 

7/30/91 

332.4 

Enhancement Release #4 

10/22/91 

33.4 

Trade Studies 

As required 

3.4 

System Specification 

3/31/92 

33 

Monthly Contract Summary/ 
Status Report 

Monthly 

423 

Usage Results 

Monthly 

4.4 

Monthly Contract Summary/ 
Status Report 

Monthly 

5.0 

Evaluation Reports 

90 days after each 
enhancement release 

53 

Monthly Contract Summary/ 
Status Report 

Monthly 


Regular Contract Summary/S tarns Reports will be prepared in accordance with the format in Figures 4- 
la, 4- lb, and 4-lc. Explanations of terminology for these reports are provided in Table 4-1. 


SOF feCH 


2378-00-001 


25 



Subcontractor 


Summary Presentation 


of 

AdaNet Monthly Costs/Performance/Status Report 
For the Month Ending 


Project Director 


Research Activity Title 


Summary Cost and Performance Information 

Percent Cost Estimates Cumulative Forecasted Cost 

Completed for Previous Month Cost Estimates Current Month 


Status Report Overall Summary 

Technical Status 


Technical Problems 


Projected Activities 


Figure 4- la Cost/Performance Status Report, Summary 


SOFfecn 


2378-00-001 


26 


Monthly Status Report By Each 
Work Breakdown Element 


Work Break Down Title WBS NO. 

Technical Status 


Technical Problems 


Protected Activities/ Accomplishments 


Figure 4-lb Monthly Status Report by WBS 


SOF feCH 


2378-00-001 


27 



A Detailed 

AdaNet Monthly CostVPerformance/Status Report by Work Breakdown Elements* 
For the Month Ending 


Subcontractor [Project Director 

Research Activity Title 


Cost and Performance Information 


SEork Breakdown Elements 
Short Title WBSNO. 


CUMULATIVE 


Scheduled/ Actual 
Start Date 


Scheduled/ Percent Actual Actual 

Actual End Date Completed Effort Cost 


Figure 4-lc Cost/Performance Status Report, Detailed 


SOFJecH 


2378-00-001 


28 



Table 4-1 


Explanation of Terminology 


I. Percentage Completion of Work Breakdown Elements 

An estimate of the percentage completion of each work breakdown elements from its 
inception through the month indicated on this report 

II. Cost Estimates for Previous Month 

The amount of funds expensed against this research activity for the previous month. These 
expenditures include invoiced costs as well as an estimate of incurred costs not yet invoiced 

III. Cumulated Costs Estimate 

The total amount of funds that have been expensed against the research activity from its 
inception through the month indicated on this report. 

IV. Forecasted Cost Current Month 

An estimate of expected expenditures for the month in which this report is submitted 

V. Technical Status 

A brief description of the previous month activities and accomplishments. 

VI. Problems 

A description of critical incidences that may impede or that impede the orderly progress of 
the research activity. 

VII. Projected Activities 

A brief description of the planned activities and accomplishments for the next month. 


SOf TecH 


2378 - 00-001 


29 



5. Organization 

5.1. Team Members 


The AdaNET Team, composed of the below organizations, has the necessary qualifications to implement 
the project plan. Their qualifications are as follows: 

RICIS, UH -Clear Lake 

• experience in software engineering 

• knowledge of this project 

• appreciation for project goals 

• accomplished in project management 

• good government and corporate relations 

MountainNET 

• original unsolicited proposal 

• currently operating the prototype 

• solid base in West Virginia 

• small business orientation 

• contract administration experience 

West Virginia University 

• Development 

- Information search and retrieval 

- Database design and implementation 

• Operations 

- On-line data collection 

• Evaluation 

- customer interface 

SofFech 

• well respected software engineering firm 

• involved in the development of Ada 

• developed RAPID Center for Aimy/ISEC 
■ assisted in project planning for one year 

GHG 

• software development firm 

• supports reuse for Space Station Freedom/Software Support Environment 

• central node for information and parts 

• certified 8a small business 

Staples Technology 

• market research in information technology 

• contacts through information industry 

• small business 


SOF feCH 


2378 - 00-001 


30 


5.2. 


Team Structure 


The team as represented in Figure 5-1 is contractually organized in the following manner. NASA7TU is 
the sponsoring organization and is responsible for overall AdaNET program management. Co-sponsors 
include the Ada Joint Program Office, DepL of the Army, and OFTI/DOC. The program receives NASA 
technical direction from the Johnson Space Center with advice from the Project Control Board. It is 
administered through the UHCL RICIS under their cooperative agreement with Dr. Charles McKay 
serving as the Chief Technical Advisor. UHCL RICIS has contracted with MountainNET as the prime 
contractor. Major subcontractors for all work areas except Operations include GHG (Requirements and 
Evaluation) and SofTech (Technical Direction and Development). Other subcontractors supporting 
MountainNET, SofTech and GHG are contracted in a manner that is closely aligned with primary work 
area responsibilities. UHCL RICIS has also contracted with Applied Expertise to provide support for 
interagency relations. 

The functional organization, i.e. operational structure, is represented in Figure 5-2. It principally differs 
from the contractual organization in that SofTech and MountainNET are acting in a leader- follower 
relationship. SofTech, as a subcontractor to MountainNET, is providing the Technical Director on the 
behalf of MountainNET. The Technical Director reports directly to the RICIS Project Manager on all 
technical matters and is technically responsible for the overall technical direction of each work area. 
Also, interagency relations activities are under the direct control of the AdaNET Program Manager, 
NASA/TU. 

5*3. Key Personnel 

The following are key personnel and their major responsibilities from each organization: 

UHCL RICIS: 

Peter Bishop - RICIS Project Manager 
MountainNET: 

Robert Michael Digman - Contract Team Leader and Operations Team Leader 
Linda Braun - Contract Administrator 

West Virginia University: 

John Grasso - Operations Data Collection and Evaluation Support 
John Atkins - Research in Development Technology Assessment 
David Ekhraann - Research in Development Technology Assessment 

SofTech: 

John McBride - AdaNET Technical Director 
David Auty - Development Team Leader 

GHG: 

Lionel Hanley - Requirements and Evaluation Team Leader 


SOF feCH 


2378-00-001 


31 



AdaNET Contracting Organization 
Reporting Structure 










AdaNET Technical Organization 
Reporting Structure 



ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 










6 . 


Schedule 


This section presents a Gantt chart of the AdaNET Research Project, 


SOf= feCH 


2378 - 00-001 


34 



Figure 6-1 AdaNET R & D Schedule 


soPTecH 

2378 - 00-001 35 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALfTY 














SOf= feCH 


2378 - 00-001 


36 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

OF POOR QUALITY 












7. 


Cost and Labor Hours 


This section provides cost dates and labor hours for the project at these levels of detail. Table 7-1 provides 
the cost and labor hours summary by major functional areas. Table 7-2 provides cost and labor hours dates 
at the second level of the WBS, while Table 7-3 depicts the allocated cost and labor hours for each task by 
resource. These costs reflect fully loaded costs to the project, including any G&A and fees imposed on 
subcontractors. It does not reflect actual funds individual resources are to be authorized. Funding 
authorizations are handled by separate contract agreement and are not within the scope of this plan. Table 
7-4 presents the projected costs by fiscal year for each task, while table 7-5 presents the project fiscal year 
hourly and cost allocations by resource again, these costs are fully loaded through fee for any 
subcontractors. Table 7-6 presents the project costs by month for each task. 


Table 7-1 Project Hours and Cost , First Level 



Heading/Task 

WBS Code 

Total Hoars 

Total Cost 


ADANETJM 

1 F F F ^ 1 H 

140074 

65591603 


Project Office 

1.0.0.0.000 

27825 

161275251 

r * 

Requirements 

2.0.0.0.000 

10935 

50910953 


Development 

3.0.0.0.000 

25964 

1826260.78 


Operations 

4.0.0.0.000 

68121 

2253066.11 


Evaluation 

5.0.0.0.000 

7229 

357971.99 


SOF TecH 


2378-00-001 


37 











Table 7-2 


Project Hours and Cost, Second Level 




Heading/Task 

WBS Code 

Total Hours 

Total Cost 

ADANET.PJ 


140074 

6559161.33 

Project Office 

M 

27825 

1612752.91 

Management 


25029 

93725336 

Support 

1 

2796 

675499.66 

Requirements 


10935 

509109.53 

AN Market Survey 


2598 

120518.00 

Mission Definiti 

23.0.0.000 

752 

38317.64 

User Reqmts Defi 


3280 

153331.90 

Coor/User Groups 


1120 

48854.40 

ProdJegal reprt 


700 

3718130 

Require. Mgmt 


2405 

104906.10 

Require. Travel 


40 

4000.00 

Require. ODC 

23.0.0.047 

40 

2000.00 

Development 

3.0.0.0.000 

25964 

1826260.78 

Est CL node 

3.L0.0.049 

397 

1018139 

EstRSL 

33.0.0.000 

2124 

13573738 

Dev, New Element 

33.0.0.000 

18503 

128023339 

Develop Sys Spec 


2520 

169592.41 

Develop. Mgmt 


2340 

170515.81 

Develop. Travel 


40 

50000.00 

Develop. ODC 

3.7.0.0.075 

40 

10000.00 

Operations 


68121 

2253066.11 

Maintain Inform. 


27800 

509261.05 

Support Users 


16045 

362321.90 

Maintain Systems 


10286 

178527.12 

Operations Mgmt 


13910 

193956.04 

Operat Travel 

r i * t iuii» 

40 

76000.00 

Operations ODC 


40 

933000.00 

Evaluation 


7229 

357971.99 

Define Data 

5.L0.0.104 

682 

3575830 

Collect Data 

53.0.0.105 

1560 

7978630 

Summarize Data 

53.0.0.106 

1560 

7978630 

Analyze Data 

5.4.0.0.107 

1944 

8744234 

Evaluation Mgmt 

53.0.0.108 

1403 

61198.86 

EvaL Travel 

54.0.0.109 

40 

12000.00 

Evaluation ODC 

5.7.0.0.110 

40 

2000.00 


SOFfecn 


2378 - 00-001 


38 












Table 7-3 


Project Hours and Cost by Resource 


Heading/Task 

Resource 

WBS Code 

Total Hours 

Total Cost 

ADANET.PJ 


0.0.0.0.000 

140074 

655916133. 

Project Office 


1.0.0.0.000 

27825 

1612752.91 

Management 

Rserch Actv Mgmt 


1.1.0.0.000 

1.L1.0.002 

25029 

12304 

93725326 

398692.09 


UHCL 

AE 


ff|E§9 

123762.08 

274930.01 

Program Mgmt 

MTN 

LL2.0.003 

6880 

6880 

123840.00 

123840.00 

Technical Mgmt 

SofTech 

Ll-3.0.004 

5645 

5645 

411351.17 

411351.17 

Data Management 


1.1.4.0.005 

200 

3370.00 


tFB 



3370.00 

Support 

Meetings&Reviews 
Project Reviews 

MTN 

L2.0.0.000 

L2.LO.OOO 

1.2.1.1.007 

2796 

2212 

1170 

0 

675499.66 

20766034 

79407.90 

0.00 


SofTech 

GHG 


970 

200 

70683.90 

8724.00 

NASA Reviews 


1.2.1.2.008 

162 

11804.94 


SofTech 


162 

11804.94 


MTN 


0 

0.00 


GHG 


0 

0.00 

Advisory Group 

MTN 

1.2.1.3.009 

880 

0 

116448.00 

0.00 


SofTech 

GHG 


200 

200 

14574.00 

8724.00 

Conferences 

Adv. Grp. 

1.2.2.0.000 

480 

384 

93150.00 

26110.08 

TriAda90 


1.2.2.L011 

192 

13055.04 


MTN 


0 

0.00 


SofTech 


160 

1165920 


GHG 


32 

1395.84 


UHCL 


0 

0.00 

TriAda91 


LX2J.012 

192 

13055.04 


MTN 

SofTech 


0 

160 

0.00 

1165920 


GHG 


32 

1395.84 


UHCL 


0 

0.00 

General Conferen 
Travel 


L2.2J.013 

L2J.0.014 

0 

200 

0l00 

196730.00 


MTN 


40 

32000.00 


SofTech 


40 

30000.00 


GHG 


40 

50000.00 


UHCL 


40 

49680.00 


AE 


40 

35050.00 



2378-00-001 


39 













Heading/Task 


O iher D tree tCosts 


Requirements 
AN Market Survey 
Market Surv Plan 


M/Mrkt Srv Pin D 
Survey Pin Rev. 

Market Survey 


M/Survey Data D 
Market Study 


M/Mrkt Study Del 
Survey Review 

Mission Definiti 
Analysis Definit 


Mission Concept 


M/Pre Cncept Doc 
M/FinlCncept Doc 
Cncept Docu Rev 


User Reqmts Defi 
User Req. Doc. 


M/Prel User Req 
M/Final User Req 
User Req Doc Rev 


Refine Req. Doc. 


Resource 


MTN 

SofTech 

UHCL 

GHG 

AE 


GHG 

JStaples 


GHG 

Dyer/FA 


GHG 

JStaples 


WBS Code 


1.2.4.0.015 


GHG 

SofTech 

Dyer/FA 

GHG 

SofTech 

Dyer/FA 


GHG 

SofTech 


GHG 

SofTech 

Dyer/FA 


GHG 

SofTech 

GHG 
SofTech 
er/FA 


2.0.0.0.000 
2.1.0.0.000 
2. L. 1.0.018 


2.L2.0.019 

213.0. 020 

2.1.4.0. 021 


21.5.0. 119 

2.1.6.0. 023 


2.1.7.0. 024 
2L8.0.025 

2.2.0. 0.000 

22L0.027 


2.2.2.0.028 


223.0. 029 

2.2.4.0. 030 

2.2.5.0. 031 


23.0. 0.000 

23.1.0. 033 


23.20.034 

233.0. 035 

23.4.0. 036 


2.3.5.0.037 


Total Hours 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

10935 

2598 

208 

194 

14 

0 

8 

8 

2050 

1670 

380 

0 

324 

270 

54 

0 

8 

8 

752 

180 

130 

27 

23 
500 
350 
100 

50 

0 

0 

72 

48 

24 
3280 
1140 
1006 

59 

75 

0 

0 

96 

64 

32 

2044 

1752 

146 

146 


Total Cost 


244998.73 

0.00 

61000.00 

93238.73 

10000.00 

80760.00 

509109.53 

120518.00 

9376.48 
8462228 

914.20 

0.00 

348.96 

348.96 

95140.00 

72845.40 

22294.60 
0.00 

15303.60 

11777.40 
3526220 

0.00 

348.96 

34896 

38317.64 

8987.50 

5670.60 

1967.49 
1349.41 

2548790 

15267.00 
7287.00 
293390 

(LOO 

0.00 

384264 

2093.76 

174838 

15333190 

5258130 

43881.72 

429933 

440025 

OjOO 

OjOO 

512392 

2791.68 

233134 

95627.08 

7642224 

10639.02 

8565.82 




2378 - 00-001 


40 










Heading/Task 


Coor/User Groups 
Estab SIGs/Reuse 

SIG Mtgs. & Rev. 

SIG Liaison 

ProdJegal reprt 
Legal Review 


Legal Study Doc. 

Require. Mgmt. 

Require. Travel 

Require. ODC 

Development 
EstCL node 


EstRSL 
Platfonn Study 


Install RSL S/W 
Dev. Op. P/P 


Train Ops. Pers 


Dev. New Element 
Reqmts. Analysis 
System Rqmts. 

M/Deliver Rqmts 
System Req. Rev. 


Resource 



GHG 

LegalCons 

GHG 

LegalCons 


Sustaining 


MTN 

SofTech 


SofTech 

GHG 

SofTech 

SofTech 

GHG 

SofTech 

MTN 


SofTech 


UHCL 

MTN 

SofTech 

GHG 

SofTech 

GHG 


WBS Code 

Total Hours 

Total Cost 

2.4.0.0.000 

1120 

48854.40 

2,4,1.0.039 

200 

8724.00 


200 

8724.00 

2,4.2.0.040 

200 

8724.00 


200 

8724.00 

2.4.3.0.041 

720 

31406.40 


720 

31406.40 

2J.O.O.OOO 

700 

37181-50 

2.5.1.0.043 

300 

18404.00 


200 

8724.00 


100 

9680.00 

2-5.2.0.044 

400 

1877750 


375 

1635750 


25 

2420.00 

2.6.0.0.045 

2405 

104906.10 


2405 

104906.10 

2.7.0.0.046 

40 

4000.00 


40 

4000.00 

28.0.0.047 

40 

2000.00 


40 

2000.00 

3.0.0.0.000 

25964 

1826260.78 

3.1.0.0.049 

397 

1018139 


344 

631928 


53 

386211 

3J.0.0.000 

2124 

13573738 

3.2. L0. 051 

269 

14688.03 


101 

7359.87 


168 

7328.16 

3220.052 

269 

1960203 


269 

1960203 

323.0.053 

1162 

79526.94 


986 

71849.82 


176 

7677.12 

3.2.4.0.054 

424 

21920.88 


248 

18071.76 


176 

3849.12 

3J.O.O.OOO 

18503 

128023329 

3-3. L 0.000 

5119 

36553354 

3J.LL057 

927 

67550.49 


927 

67550.49 

3212058 

0 

0.00 

3J.1J.059 

96 

699552 


0 

0.00 


0 

0.00 


96 

699552 


0 

OjOO 

3J.L4.060 

4096 

29098753 


3840 

27982031 


256 

11166.72 



2378-00-001 


41 











Heading/Task 


Enh Reusable Sys 
Enhance Release I 


Enhance Re!ease2 


Enhance Release3 


Enhance Release4 


Enhance Other 
Help Desk 


CL Services 

Product Info. 

Resource Directo 

Assess Technok). 

Develop Sys Spec 

Develop. Mgmt 
Develop. Travel 
Etevelop. ODC 
Operations 


Resource 

WBS Code 

Total Hours 

Total Cost 


3.3.2.0.000 

8348 

572800.82 


3.3.21.062 

1455 

102499.11 

SofTech 


1356 

98811.72 

GHG 


72 

3140.64 

MTN 


27 

546.75 


3.3.2.2.063 

2297 

156718.66“ 

SofTech 


1954 

142387.99 

GHG 


316 

13783.92 

MTN 


27 

546.75 


3.3.2-3.064 

2298 

15679153 

SofTech 


1955 

142460.86 

GHG 


316 

13783.92 

MTN 


27 

546.75 


3J.2.4.065 

2298 

15679153 

SofTech 


1955 

142460.86 

GHG 


316 

13783.92 

MTN 


27 

546.75 


3-3-3.0.000 

4% 

29916.12 


3.3.3.1.067 

112 

6146.04 

SofTech 


58 

4226.46 

GHG 


39 

1701.18 

MTN 


15 

218.40 


3JJ.2.068 

96 

559 152 

SofTech 


48 

3497.76 

GHG 


48 

2093.76 

MTN 


0 

aoo 


355.3.069 

144 

908928 

SofTech 


96 

699552 

GHG 


48 

2093.76 

MTN 


0 

Qj00 


355.4.070 

144 

908958 

SofTech 


96 

699552 

GHG 


48 

2093.76 

MTN 


0 

000 


35.4.0.071 

4540 

31198251 

SofTech 


3840 

27982051 

McKay 


100 

sooaoo 

WVUCS 


600 

2716100 


3.4.0.0.072 

2520 

16959141 

SofTech 


2040 

14865451 

GHG 


480 

2093750 

MTN 


0 

000 


35.0.0.073 

2340 

17051551 

SofTech 


2340 

17051551 


3.6.0.0.074 

40 

50000.00 

SofTech 


40 

5oooaoo 


3.7.0.0.075 

40 

10000.00 

SofTech 


40 

10000.00 


tEXMZjm,: 

68121 

2253066.11 



SOF TecH 


2378-00-001 






Resource 


Headmg/Task 


WBS Code 


Total Hours 


Total Cost 


Maintain Inform. 


4.1.0.0.000 

27800 

509261.05 

Gen Info Maim. 


4.1.1.0.078 

12476 

21660732 


MTN 


2700 

51759.00 


WVU cs 


416 

1883232 


IFB 


9360 

146016.00 

Reusable S/W Mnt 


4.1.2.0.079 

6688 

15600057 


MTN 


6272 

137168.65 


WVU cs 


416 

1883232 

Physical Lib Mnt 


4.L3.0.0S0 

5624 

87734.40 


IFB 


5624 

87734.40 

QuaL Meas. Rep. 


4.1.4.0.081 

3012 

48918.36 


MTN 


308 

6735.% 


IFB 


2704 

42182.40 

Support Users 


4.2.0.0.000 

16045 

36232150 

Register Users 


4.2. 1.0.083 

1320 

17120.40 


MTN 


1320 

17120.40 

Support Users 


4.2.2.0.084 

6453 

115128.70 


MTN 


5429 

8414930 


IFB 


832 

1297930 


StrictBusi 


192 

18000.00 

MainL User Gde 


4.2J.0.085 

1088 

18071.68 


MTN 


1088 

18071.68 

Document Users 


4.2.4.0.084 

1368 

18043.92 


MTN 


1368 

1804352 

Usage Data Repor 


4.23.0.087 

5816 

19395730 


MTN 


1240 

2235730 


WVU 


4576 

171600.00 


OCT 




Maintain Systems 


43.0.0.000 

10286 

178527.12 

Install Hardware 


43. L 0.089 

1404 

24008.40 


MTN 


1404 

24008.40 

Install Software 


43.2.0.090 

1294 

26708.16 


MTN 


1294 

26708.16 

Operate CL node 


433.0.091 

1820 

3077630 


MTN 


1820 

3077630 

Operate WV Node 


43.4.0.092 

4052 

67141.64 


MTN 


4052 

67141.64 

Operate Telecomm 


433.0.093 

1716 

29892.72 


MTN 


1716 

29892.72 

Operations Mgmt 


4.4.0.0.000 

13910 

193956.04 

Coot Trav&Rep Do 


4.4.L0.095 

1998 

21898.08 


MTN 


1998 

21898.08 

Proc Gds&Serv AR 


4.4.2.0.096 

3768 

56783.76 


MTN 


3768 

56783.76 

Prep,Mon&Neg Cnt 


4.43.0.097 

2210 

2968030 


MTN 


. 2210 

2968030 

Cost Acct 


4.4.4.0.098 

4704 

69148.80 


MTN 


4704 

69148.80 

EstJtev,&UD P/P 


4.43.0.099 

1230 

16445.10 


MTN 


1230 

16445.10 







Heading/Task 

Resource 

WBS Code 

Total Hours 

Total Cost 

OperaL Travel 


4.5,0.0,101 

40 

76000.00 


MTN 


40 

76000.00 

Operations ODC 


4.6.0.0.102 

40 

933000.00 


MTN 


40 

933000.00 

Evaluation 


5.0.0.0.000 

7229 

357971.99 

Define Data 


5.1.0.0.104 

682 

35758.50 


GHG 


310 

1352220 


J Staples 


62 

4048.60 


Grasso 


310 

18187.70 

Collect Data 


5.2.0.0.105 

1560 

7978620 


GHG 


780 

34023.60 


Grasso 


780 

45762.60 

Summarize Data 


53.0.0.106 

1560 

7978620 


GHG 


780 

34023.60 


Grasso 


780 

45762.60 

Analyze Data 


5.4.0.0.107 

1944 

8744224 


GHG 


1822 

79475.64 


J Staples 


122 

7966.60 

Evaluation Mgmt 


5.5.0.0.108 

1403 

6119836 


GHG 


1403 

6119836 

EvaL Travel 


5.6.0.0.109 

40 

12000.00 


GHG 


40 

12000.00 

Evalution ODC 


5.7.0.0.110 

40 

2000.00 


GHG 


40 

2000.00 

End Project 


6.0.0.0.111 

0 

0.00 


Table 7-4 Project Costs by Fiscal Year 


Heading/Task 

WBS Code 

1990 

1991 

1992 



Total Cost 

Total Cost 

Total Cost 

Project Office 

1.03.0.000 




Management 

1.13.0.000 




Rserch ActvMgmt 

1.1.13302 

114100.19 

20601424 

78577.66 

Program Mgmt. 

1.12.0.003 

3525120 

63648.00 

24940.80 

Technical Mgmt 

1.13.0304 

117524.74 

212197.45 

81628.98 

Data Management 

1.1.4.0305 

97036 

175240 

647.04 



267846.69 

48361208 

185794.48 

Support 

123.0300 




Meetings^ Re views 

121.0300 




Project Reviews 

121.1307 

23499.07 

4242838 

1347935 

NASA Reviews 

1212308 

335735 

606278 

2384.31 

Advisory Group 

1213309 

4108329 

7324636 

2118.06 



6794021 

12173832 

1798231 


SOF feCH 


2378-00-001 


44 







Head in g/T ask 

WBS Code 

1990 

Total Cost 

1991 

Total Cost 

Conferences 
TriAda 90 
TriAda 91 
General Conferen 

122.0.000 

1221/311 

122.2.012 

1223.013 

13055.04 

13055.04 



13055.04 

13055.04 

Travel 

OtherDirectCosts 

123.0. 014 

12.4.0. 015 

5665824 

244998.73 

102299.60 



301656.97 

102299.60 


Requirements 

20.0.0.000 



AN Market Survey 

21/3.0/500 



Market SurvPlan 

21.1.0j018 

9376.48 


M/Mrkt Srv Pin D 

2120/519 



Survey Pin Rev. 

213.0/520 

348.96 


Market Survey 

21.4.0.021 

59141.13 

35998.87 

M/Survey Data D 

213.0.119 



Market Study 

213.0/523 


15303.60 

M/Mrkt Study Del 

21.7.0/524 



Survey Review 

213.0/325 


34856 


68866.57 51651.43 


Mission Definiti 

220.0/500 


Analysis Definit 

221/3/127 

898730 

Mission Concept 

2220.028 

2548730 

M/Pre Cncept Doc 

223.0/529 


M/FinlCncept Doc 

224.0.030 


Cncept Docu Rev 

225.0/531 

3842.64 


38317.64 0.00 


User Reqmts Defi 

23/5/5/500 



User Req. Doc. 

23.1.0/533 

5258130 


M/Prel User Req 

2320/334 



M/Final User Req 

233.0/335 



User Req Doc Rev 

23.4.0/336 

512332 


Refine Req. Doc. 

233.0/337 

1389632 

81730.76 


71601.14 • 81730.76 


SOf= feCH 


1992 

Total Cost 


0.00 

37772.16 

37772.16 


0.00 


0.00 


0.00 


2378-00-001 


45 



Heading/Task; 

WBS Code 

1990 

Total Cost 

1991 

Total Cost 

1992 

Total Cost 

Coor/User Groups 
Estab SIGs/Reuse 
SIG Mlgs. & Rev. 
SIG Liaison 

2.4.0. 0.000 

2.4.1.0. 039 

2.43.0. 040 

2.43.0. 041 

8724.00 

251231 

1256236 

4536.48 

18843.84 

1675.01 



23799.07 

2338032 

1675.01 

Prod.legal reprt 
Legal Review 
Legal Study Doc. 

23.0.0.000 
23. 1.0X143 
233.0X144 

17217.54 

1186.46 

1877730 




1721734 

19963.96 

0.00 

Require. Mgmt 
Require. Travel 
Require. ODC 

2.6X1.0.045 

17X1.0.046 

18X1.0X147 

30150.14 

1152.00 

576.00 

54437.76 

2080.00 

1040.00 

2031830 

768.00 

384.00 



31878.14 

57557.76 

2147030 

Development 
EstCL node 

3.0X1.0X100 

3.1X1.0.049 

1018139 





1018139 

0.00 

0.00 

EstRSL 
Platform Study 
Install RSL S/W 
Dev. Op. P/P 
Train Ops. Piers 

33X1.0X100 

33.1.0X151 

333.0. 052 
333.0X153 

33.4.0. 054 

14688.03 

19602.03 
79526.94 
2192038 





135737.88 

0.00 

0.00 

Dev. New Element 
Reqmts. Analysis 
System Rqmts. 
M/Deliver Rqmts 
System Req. Rev. 
Sustaining 

33X1.0X100 

33.1.0X100 

33.1.1X157 

33.13X158 

33.13X159 

33.1.4X160 

48222.45 

19328.04 

6995.52 

22824334 

62744.19 



48222.45 •’ 

25456650 

62744.19 


SOFfecH 


2378-00-001 


46 


HeadingyTask 

WBS Code 

1990 

Total Cost 

1991 

Total Cost 

1992 

Total Cost 

Enh Reusable Sys 
Enhance Release 1 
Enhance Release2 

3.32.0.000 

3.32.1.062 

3.322.063 


102499.11 

156718.66 


Enhance Release3 
Enhance Reiease4 

3.323.064 

332.4065 


15679133 

15679133 




0.00 

572800.82 

0.00 

Enhance Other 
Help Desk 
CL Services 
Product Info. 
Resource Directo 

3.33.0.000 

333.1.067 

3332068 

3333069 

333.4J070 

6146.04 

559132 

908928 

908928 




6146.04 

23770.08 

0.00 


Assess Technolo. 

33.4.0.071 


26184229 

5014033 



0.00 

26184229 

5014033 


Develop Sys Spec 

3.4j0.0.072 



169592.41 

Develop. Mgmt 

33.0.0.073 

50367.75 

90941.76 

2920630 

Develop. Travel 

330.0.074 

14400.00 

26000.00 

9600.00 

Develop. ODC 

3.7jO.Oj075 

2880.00 

5200.00 

1920.00 



67647.75 

122141.76 

210318.70 

Operations 

4.00.0.000 




Maintain Inform. 

4.10.0000 




Gen Info Maine. 

4.1.1.0J078 

61825.42 

11162923 

43152.67 

Reusable S/W Mnt 

4.120J079 

45795.46 

8268624 

2751926 

Physical Lib Mnt 

4.13.0.080 

2587833 

46725.12 

15130.75 

QuaL Meas. Rep. 

4.1.4.0J081 

18776.66 

21740.16 

8401.54 



152276.07 

262780.76 

9420422 


Support Users 

42jO.OjOOO 




Register Users 

42.1.0.083 

4930.68 

8902.61 

3287.12 

Support Users 

422.0084 

3417235 

61700.08 

1925627 

Maine UserGde 

423.0085 

516637 

9328.18 

3577.13 

Document Users 

42.4.0086 

516626 

9327.97 

3549.69 

Usage Data Repor 

423.0.087 

7074120 

87360.00 

35856.00 


120176.86 176618.83 6552621 


SOF TecH 


2378-00-001 


47 



Heading/Task 

WBS Code 

1990 

1991 

1992 



Total Cost 

Total Cost 

Total Cost 

Maintain Systems 

4.3.0.0.000 




Install Hardware 

4.3.1.0.089 

7091.71 

12804.48 

411221 

Install Software 

432.0.090 

7608.73 

13737.98 

5361.45 

Operate CL node 

4.33.0.091 

6831.64 

17586.40 

635836 

Operate WV Node 

43.4.0.092 

19088.64 

34465.60 

13587.40 

Operate Telecomm 

433.0X593 

903033 

16305.12 

4557.07 



4965125 

9489938 

3397629 

Operations Mgmt 

4.4.0.0.000 




Coor Tiav&Rep Do 

4.4.1.0J095 

6186.70 

11170.43 

4540.95 

Proc Gds&Serv AR 

4.42.0X596 

17360.64 

31345.60 

807732 

Prep^MorufcNeg Cnt 

4.43.0X597 

9282*2 

16760X54 

3636.84 

Cost Accl 

4.4.4.0X598 

2032128 

3669120 

1213632 

EsLRev^UD P/P 

4.43.0X599 

4928.72 

8899.07 

261731 



58080.15 

104866514 

31008.94 

OperaL Travel 

43X5.0.101 

2188800 

39520X50 

14592.00 

Operations ODC 

4.6.0.0.102 

268704.00 

485160.00 

179136.00 



290592.00 

524680.00 

193728.00 


Evaluation 

5.0X5.0X300 




Define Data 

5.1X5.0.104 

31916.46 

384204 


Collect Data 

52X5.0.105 

2021230 

55318.43 

425526 

Summarize Data 

53X3.0.106 

18064*7 

55318.43 

638290 

Analyze Data 

5.4X5.0.107 

18579.00 

6440720 

4456.04 

Evaluation Mgmt 

53X5.0.108 

1758738 

3175536 

11855*2 

EvaL Travel 

5.6X5.0.109 

3456.00 

6240.00 

2304.00 

Evalution ODC 

5.7X5.0.110 

2000.00 





111836.41 

216881.46 

29254.12 

End Project 

6.0.0.0.111 





0X50 

0X50 

0.00 

195272727 

3570838.71 

103559534 


SOF TecH 


2378-00-001 


48 



Table 7-5 


Project Fiscal Year Hours and Cost by Resource 


Resource 
Name 
GHG 
MTN 
UHCL 
SofTech 


To La] 
Hours 


Total Cost 


EFB 

StrictBusi 

JStapIes 

wvucs 

wvuocr 

LegaJCons 

McKay 

AE 

Adv. Grp 
Dyer/FA 
Grass o 


17642 

51564 

4824 

30063 

18720 

192 

252 

1432 

4576 

125 

100 

7560 

480 

674 

1870 

140074 


840820.02 

1905303.26 

266680.82 

2332946.49 

292282.01 

18000.00 

16455.60 

64826.64 

171600.00 

12100.00 

5000.00 

390740.01 

93150.00 
39543.58 

109712.90 


6559161.33 


1990 

Total Hours 
6579.72 

16380.12 
1393.92 

5542.12 
5391.36 

57.60 

65.60 
253.44 

1290.24 

100.00 

2154.24 

172.80 

405.60 

668.80 

40455.56 


Total Cost 
314836.57 
577166,45 
143309.26 
488255.91 

84177.22 

5400.00 
4283.68 

11473.23 

48384.00 

9680.00 

169191.90 

33534.00 
23796.55 
39238.49 


1952727.27 


1991 

Total Hours 
9459.56 

26232.80 

2516.80 
19280.84 

9734.40 

104.00 

171.60 

959.60 

2329.60 

25.00 

100.00 

3889.60 
307.20 

268.40 

1097.20 


76476.60 


Total Cost 
444356.81 
978261.32 

90405.12 
1447247.78 

151986.64 

9750.00 
11205.48 
43441.09 

87360.00 

2420.00 

5000.00 
159668.71 

59616.00 
15747.03 
64372.72 

3570838.71 


1992 

Total Hours 
T 602.72 
8951.08 
913.28 
5240.04 

3594.24 

30.40 

14.80 
218.96 
956.16 


1516.16 


104.00 


23141.84 


Total Cost 

81626.64 
349875.49 
32966.43 

397442.80 
56118.15 

2850.00 
966.44 
9912.32 

35856.00 


61879.39 


6101.68 


1035595.34 




















Table 7-6 


Project Cost by Month 


f- 


a: 

4» • 

ac 

§ 

« 


5- 




8 : 

si 


<ry*AOrj 

oyj*A»* 


'0«0m 


©'O©' — 


s 


a 


gs 


Kl'O'*- 

•AM'O 


'0<x^ 

NOO> 


< N«0» 

vT^O> 


28S 

gsa 

iaiaim 


OONM^tn 

888888 

OOKO> 

googo 

ooooo 

oooooo 

OO^NM-4 

*# 

& -c 

• x -ii 

o > ^£j 

OoVnm 

NNNNN 

>>*»- 

• •So 

ox— « 

O OL oje • 

• •• OO V 

— >C M L • • 
O ««CLHO 

8-8t 

-?8“8 

|525-S 

cn 


8 S 

O f\I 
'O 


'O 

<\i 

>o 


8 SfC 

O '0*0 

25 


o^nm 

Nfjr*N 

f*N<N<0 


. S 
585“ 

Jill 

S wt# 

«— «- o 


s 


SS 

«w 


oooooooooo 

00<^<VM'#W\'ON« 


NNNW<M<M<VMNN 


JP 

>«L — • >* • ° X 

3> 4,it > «'§*'$'— 

«-«£*« 22? 


i? 


i «_ *ji • • * 


J LX 1 _ 

3 *S3 «N«n.3 

pXXMXXIZM 


N 


8 8 


S 


8 


ON«»0<- 

ONNNMn 


NNNNNN 

NNNNNN 

goo * 
C **— u w w 

558882 

S-“25*l 

c"«S“— ». 

5>r=25 8 


o«-NM'#m 

wnnrw« 

NNNNNN 

c . ziz i 

• OK O 

CO O LO 
O L • O * 

2 -S3“8 
18 s - 8* 

L •«,«*. O'*- 

S52S5S 


58 

L. */ 

Su 


SOF TecH 

2378-00-001 50 ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

OF POOR QUAUTY 


o 

o 

o 


tM — 1 

■ Q_ 



O • O 

-J- O *— cn * *— 
fM f-a a— o> . co 
. r— 

«3 w> to * rsj 


KOKffl 
CV ~0 ■*— O-J 


o 

u 



•— irt fcrt «0 « ■— 
n<Oi/\ vj- • aj 
^♦O O •- « O' 
f--w>rk. • o 


n 'j- k> -sT « 

o — ■*-*- < 

'OlAN. i 




n«om^ * o 

•v» 0 «Ni *o . o 

• « fM 

trs<sr<o • K 


» — o * 

Ok . 

c— « 


• ■»— 
* fM 

-*• **»<>«- . * 
Px-wrvK. 


:s 


SSSs : j 
* • 

'Tk#'* t I 


NOH 

f * k»«on^ I o 

S: 


*-towo ■ *- 

n«D^»'f • <M 
'TMO*- • <> 
f»^N > O 


'O 

UA 


O 

o 


Q 3 - <0 

LA ■ (JA 


r**» >o 



O . 

O' • 


■o 

o- 


o 

o 


O K\ <0 

O- •— fk_ 
u-i ir» ry 


O 

N» 



O' 


O 


(A 

Ok 


O kO 
O kO 


5 


fM 

r«~ 


m 

o 


■OOf » K. 
fM CO O . O 

-J- -•* O * Ok 

fO iO I Ok 





o 

o 

<z> 




liiii lisS 

o’o’k-N^ oVnw 

O*-*-*-*- NNNN 

<M<M<M<M<M (MfMfMfM 

jl £ ~ • 

>*> 5 4- C 

•••o • 3 

**- •o*-o 

S-it 2 S *_ 

-?S*S JS« 

|SH| f~! 



oo 

Mk» 

Nfj 



•— o 


oooooooooo 

OO*-fMf 0 L#|AL 0 K 40 

fM<MfM<MfMfM(MrJfMfM 

vi° . o X 

?s:SS>- 

$"*£5**22* 

CMMWA.M Vmviac 

itssts?srt 

^ixx«t«x5 


ooooo 


Of-rimLtftA 

NMlUfSJNM 

<M<M<M<M<M<M 

~-8 8> 

*- c aoo m 



isssSs 


<M<M<M<S< 4 M<M 



soFfecH 

2378-00-001 51 

ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 


Coor/UMf Group* 2.4,0.0.000 
Cfttb $!G»/fttut«2. 4. t. 0.039 


o 

o 


< ' AJU I 

-• o » O 
«*< ‘ ’ 


& 


vf o — rw . r— 

. o 

Q " — ' </> ■ 
fv **”» A-- (A t (O 

. rv. 


• — u-s cO • »• 
nom»r • <%i 
'TKlOr- < o 
NvAN. • O 






n<MN-w% * 
M«OK«- « 
«3>ACO 4 


o » 
o • 


o < 
u < 

3 — ! 


«*P»Asr 

2 #wo>- 

N»V>K 


:S 


*# 0 ^»n « *— 
<mk>n»a • «3 
N-OK^- . K. 


<0oSS I 3 


5 ~: 2 


< 

Oojk» . 
vor>o 


MAJO • 

m o — . 


OMvO > o 

O ■— r\i t p*-i 

vA into > (X 


<000 « 
AJ«OkA i 

-r-^ro < 


M'O*- * *- 
tAM <0 • to 
^tAtA « 40 


<oo*- 

AJ«- 

‘T'T 


Sii 


<TO»- 4 JA 

- 04 ) . K 


0r><0 • O 
O «— <■— • fi. 

lAtAIV * K> 


K»- 0 - * — 
tAKt<a . tA 

n.«a»a » to 
w 'O * O 


3 


8 2 

o <o 
«A 

3 


8 S 

o’ o 
>r 

S 


8 8 

I 


• «3 

■ CD 

. o 

• g 


• O 

■ o 

■ CD 


• c? 




* nj 

• o 
« o 

■ o 


• -O 

* tA 

* o 

* o 


. Q 




:3 

* o 

• o 

• o 

* CD 

• c 

* c 

« 04 

« -o 

• o 

■ o 

» c 





• <D 
t to 

• o 

• o 

• o 

• o 

• c 
« c 

• O 

* -r 

• o’ 

• o 

• c 

I O 




:s 

* o 

• o 

• o 

• o 

:s 

* <M 

• <o 

i o 

• o 

• o 

• a 




* 04 

:s 

*8 

• o 

• o 

• <o 

• to 

* o 

• o 

• o 

:s 




• « 
• to 

< o 
■ o 

» 

:s 

:s 

• o 

:s 

« o 

* o 

■ o 

• o 




• o 

* <SI 

* o 

• o 

• o 

* o 

jS 

:S 

i ° 

• o 

« d 

* s 





f SSSS 8^JS 

oooo oooo 


O • O OOOO O 
o’oVfj^^ 


: 8 ~s 

:. *-6f 
S 26*1 

►-* « 't- <-» gx— 1 

f 

r » *#Su*.c 

T> ♦ O 9 (- «£ • 

• • * 5 *oo« 

• ♦ — • C «*(-•« 


00 »-N« 

NNNNN 

*•«.? 
2 • 2 o 

2 *>>. 
« 4 < * C 

? o« o 

*- Otrt > 

* u <-6 


0 »-NM 

N««N 

<moi<m<m 


•o«-o 

goo^ 

• • •« 

*33 1 

S ee* 
*- ♦— o 


1? 


oooooooooo 

00 »*N*A*/n 4 »K« 

NAI^NAINAMMAJAi 
>.«“ > O • 

>4- • >.« ° * 

Cv«W«,M XWM« 

*-» ** s** >***->. 

9 <- «j< • • t. #J( • 
c 4 M c>jl 3 Jlk> 

-x CX«- «-£j LX «- 
3 *N 3«N4^3 

nxxMxx x ac** 


OvM( 4 ^in 
MMfiNMM 
r>J <M<M<NJ 04 <S 4 


zisJIs 

*— ■ — • M. 
C. u wjj 

— • c a<L 3 
*-o o « • y 
• o u y o 

%U&h 


0 *-««< 4 trt 

04<MOI<M<M<S4 

= .«ls 

• tt« o 

o o u y 

_o t . 8 * 

s -?“ 

*rnS m t 

«. « 4 «Z 

*5r r5« 


II!! 


N> * 

s: 


SOFJecH 

2378-00-001 52 

ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

. • OF POOR QUALITY 


O 1 
U I 


W0irt<0 

*-<m vr 

ssr 


3SS 


• "»■ 
• >r 

n»-co 

0-00 

K 

O 

• o 

• o 

* 

ie 

• o» 

KiaK 

iaiaia 

<S 

3 

* o 

‘ 

♦ 

• <M 




n • 

• CM 

• O 

ooo 

NO«S 

o 

■ o 
• o 

CM • 

• N 

52:23 

<M 

* o 

o I 

m * 

:g 

* sr 

N*on 

CM 

K> 


S S 

• M 

• o 

-ON-O 

f'-roo* 

s 

:8 

o • 

CM • 

is 

n'OC 

-0-0^ 

<> 

r>- 

• o 

cs • 

3 : 

• CM 

<M>fW 

o 


* K» 



• 

% 



:S 


3 


;s 


:s 


: S 


:s 


:8 


8 

S 


si 


? 


OQCM»0«* IA 
818888 

OOK®0> 

lissi 

oooooo 

ao^«\in 

OOv-fMM^ 



CMfMCMCMIM 

** 

& 

IjH 

'll.? 

ins 
S“> >. 

s i:s“l 

wloCC 

ifsH- 

o ««a»-o 

«-z 

a. 

Support 
Netting* 
ProJoct 
NASA ft* 
Advltor 



-rto 



<MN 



«-o 


000 <^0^0trt<#tf\ 

OO^^N«M*“N<MN 

000000^000 


oooooooooo 

OoVnm^^OK« 

nn'nnnnnaInn 
>«° -o« 

> 4 - • >•« ° * 

= ^2>c£5-ff > 

C^MMA.M V«IM« 

S JC*+*+ >-4-» >v«>. 
L. «J< • • C «J< » 

m m i >j* «_ > 

-X i.tc i-ficiu 

a *nP«x«v5 

^rXXUXXXXW 


OK«0>0'- 

OCMCMCMWW 

oooooo 

OK»-«V><OK 

SSoooS 

oooooo 

oooooo 

O^CMKl.#^ 


CM<M4MIM<M<M 


<M<M4M<M4M<M 

4M<M<M<M4M<M 

** c ooo • 

f-g^ 1 

*!hiZ£* 

«w . 5 

• o« O 

O O L U 

OL*6 • 

• • 4*0 7 

fx*fx« 

h-rj 

!!;»* 

• • NN, <■ • 

•3XX3« 


SOFfeCH 

2378 - 00-001 53 

ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 


Coor/Uitr Oroupi 2.4.0.0.000 
Eltftb SI<U/ft*ui*2. 4. 1.0,039 



o 

o 

o 

o 


* O 

• o 

• O 

• o 


o 

o 


■ o 

• o 

if 

s 

g 


: 8 

:g 

£8 

o 

o 


I o 

• o 

38 

SS 

8 

8 

O 

Csi 

• « 
♦ N 

;8 

S8 

o 

o 

£ 

* K. 

:c 

I o 

oo 

O 






Cm 

o 

o 

r 

8 

©■> 

-o 

• o. 

« 'O 

1 8 

oo 

K>0 

o 

o 

«3 

IM 

• o' 

« 4VI 

■ o 

58 



<M 

I N 


Cm 

g 

8 

s 

:g 

* o 

• o 

58 

o 

o 

O 

Kt 

is 

• o 

S8 



N 

t N 


SM 




N<VNN(V 

«*•••• 

>>•••« 



s • • • • 

km 

CiMiunnu 



O^WM'f 

«-* 

u 

• • 

<- OL 




o 




ooo 

ooo 

ooo 

*n«n 

u 



I’ll 

> > > 

• * « 


SOF TecH 

2378-00-001 54 

ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

OF POOR QUALITY 



o 
a> o 

'TO 
O 
o i-» 
CO <M 


lA O 

O O 
S 3 AJ 
S f\j 


oo 

MO 

MO 

o 


feS 

w»o 
o o 

'OM 

NN 


ss 

r *«3 

'O— 


S8 


88 

'ON 


oS 

88 


KN 



irt'ON 

333 


>ON« 



C_ <- i. 

Hi 

at«c 


n«shn«mn 

*5 ? 


00 *-N» 0 'f 


(SL-fr* 


NNNNN 

* • • * • 
>•• m m m 


fills 

0 »*NM’# 




**t5 

** JV 

waft. • 

iSfrc?? 

u<«e • ac — 

— • • • m 
m 

r «e 

«J< o — 

o •— 

1- 

^s=sf 

5-8= 

m m • • • 

12*22 

«•••« 

• >*- 
n~3 


«• > « 

.•f$S£l 





O 


2 

5 


KVKIf** 





> > > 

« « • 

aoa 


SOFfecH 

2378-00-001 55 


ORIGINAL PAGE 
OF POOR qua ! 



I <MO < 

o 

c -- . 


:3 


8 .: 

4 * 
OC 

S 


s 2: 
o ! 


< * < 


:33 

• ■ • 

:32 


:SS 

iss 


: 53 

• *eo 


S-: 


• e»« 
! 

• -**■* 
> mts. 


0 

K1 

» a 
• 0 

*000 

^>00 

CO 

O 

■ 0 

■ 0 

: S 

r-i ■ r*-* 


0 

0 

• O 

• O 

ers ■ ts\ 
« • r*-i 

cT» O 

<SJ O 


O 

* 0 

<^vrrg 
— COO 

O 

• 0 

. 0 

■-r • >1 


0 

♦ O 

ers • cr» 

-~r 0 




<0 — 

O 

IA 



O ■ 0 
0 ■ O 

f\i . rci 




K4 • »-» 
»A ■ M4 
m < K4 

f\j . 

0 

0 

<0 rg 

— 













— 

O 

«o 

* 0 
« 0 

t>oo 

MOO 

eg 

' 0 
• 0 

« 0 
* 0 

O • O 
*n • « 


0 

0 

* O 

• O 

fs • 

O * O 

ts- 0 

0 0 


tA 

0 

* 0 

'O -oco 
oso 

O 

r- 

* 0 

♦ 0 

in • w» 

0 « O 


0 

■ O 

CM • CM 

v> 0 

— 




•sr 



O * O 
O * 0 




4/4 ♦ 4/4 

rg . <\i 

-O rg 
K. rg 








’ 




cm . rg 


m 


• 0 

• 0 

000 

000 

O 

Os 

• 0 

• 0 

• 0 

• 0 

•O * so 
0 « 0 

k 

SO 

t«- 

• O 

* ° 

g . O 

40 * «D 

00 

tio 


i 

• 0 

$3* 

w^- 

40 

3 

• 0 

: 0 

SO • SO 
1:1 

sT 

Os 

st 

Os 

: 0 

« : to 

S : 8 

M4 0 

go 

m 








« 

3 


rg « rg 

ns rg 


0 

* O 

* 0 

«S8 

M*k 

'O 

• 0 

• 0 

: 8 

c:c 

O 

Os 

0 

Os 

• 0 

• 0 

M 1 in 
W « n 

W40 

490 

m 

0 

■>* 

* 0 

mvtN 

«•- 

«r 

8 

O 

t#4 

♦ 0 

» 

» 

■ 0 

«# * sf 

S:i 

to 

Os 

■sT 

O 

5 

0 

: 0 

«:« 

S:S 

to * to 

-t O 
stO 
O n 
CAl 








N • N 

O 

sO 


rg • rg 









; 




j 


9 

MT 

:s 

888 

O 

O' 

» 0 
• 0 

:s 

0 * 0 
0*0 

<0 

40 

*0 

4Tt 

• 0 

* 0 

S : S 

OO 

mo 


N 

• 0 

ss* 

*- 

■V» 

40 

-r 

sO 

s-r 

: 0 

i °* 

so : 0 

III 

fA 

<M 

Ml 

to 

N 

V\ 

• 0 

lit 

too 

go 

— 







i 

t/4 

to 


rg » eg 



■sT 

s 

K» 

N 

:S 
1 0 

N-OQ 

NOO 

f£2 

»4r 

K 

<M 

40 

00‘0 

00*0 

Os • Os 

n * « 

AIIA 

ill 

400 

K4» 

4rtOs 

§3 

s 

4A 

: 8 
: 0 

ts» # fs. 
0*0* 
■ • * 
N ♦ N 

rg t rg 

9495.07 

9200.00 

9 







N • N 


to 


rg . cm 



«M 

40 

:S 

388 

tO 

sO 

:8 

: 8 

c:r 

s 


• 0 

• 0 

W4 • W4 
to • to 

S8 

s 

kT 

0 

vT 

(M 

J 0 
# 

# 

IA«#N 

sH* 

£ 

m 

• 0 

• 

• 

• 0 

s# • s» 

gs • 0 
0 « 0 

N < (\i 

M 

Os 

<•*- 

O 

-O 

Os 

s-# 

s 

* 0 

sis 

s:a 

38 

SS 

— 







• 




! 









I 






m 

«o 

• 0 

* 0 

<MOO 

v>oo 

«v 

*/\ 

:s 

• 0 

• 0 

k : n 

n*A 

040 

s 

: 8 

rg . rg 
4T4 • tA 

NO 
M4 O 


s 

i 0 

« 

« 

i 

fe|3 

-jr 

K 

CM 

S^ 

0 # 

i ® 

• 0 

Hi 

« : « 

k«: 
ON 
eg to 
«%sO 

s» 

40 

N 

40 

4/4 

: 0 

to * V» 

1:1 
rg . rg 

s§ 

s© CM 

IIII 1 


12 


s 

s 


33 

oo 

«« 

-r *#■ 

m’n‘ 

> 

* 

-s 


tf\4K 

333 


MNN 

t 8 
-2° 
;lt 




>OK«J 


(40 

&=8 

• •• 

«. w «. 

Ill 


OO 

O^ 


i! 


O«*MI0'9 

NNfuNo# 

f"«.£ 

«**»- m c 
i£*«m **> 
4 4 > 4 

*-» — c 4t «_ 



C4 • E«e 

l-sf ■ • 
i s fsil 

>15111 




0 «-(Vm -4 


23'3'S? 

>*4 ••• 


ISSgg 

Ctuti 


£ V CO 
o — 

o •— • m 
4 >« u 
4 o cue 

g 0^-8 2 

r«^c8 

CXU4.4 


CC2 

000 


MMAs© 

«*nn 

S. -: 

Mm> 

.(? 

vjt •- 

fH 

• • • 

> > > 


SOFfecH 

2378-00-001 


56 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

OF POOR QUALITY 



<w •< 


;■» 


3 


S 38< 


5588 

sss 

'O — 


8 


>88 

588 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 


8 2 

o tn 

S 


33 

oo 

Nn 

■>»-» 

pjpj 

> 

m 

«c 

-S 


§33 


mv>tn 

C4NN 


m<OS 

888 


OKO 

fJwfi 


it 


t! 


§ *-N*A^ 

8888 
• * • • » 
ooooo 

NNNNN 
nnMWW 
3 • 

VS. L 

T> V* • 

5 A.& 


II 


£8 


00*-N«'T 


nnr>nnM 

m m > 

*j>— *> 

c « * e« 

| >-• O’ 

lilt?? 


NNNNN 

mfOfOKHO 

«•*•*>«» 

V« 


O'-MKI'T 

K>«^K>KlfO 

kJmwwm 

nnnnn 


jC 4» CO 
*;« o- 
o •* — 


8 8 8 
o n q 

2 I 


§ 338 


«KO 

CM'OCM 


S 328 

£ ~£8 

O MO'O 




8 

? 

♦ o«t 

• xtj 

4 • V 

OtcM 

• 

• • • 

i! 

M«- • C 

v m iw 3 • 

* *-> 4> • *-• 

M« ••• 

Issss 

• >wu 

• dCOL 

2aJZ$Z 

« 

a 

o 

* 

« 

I OO 


§£•£«£ 

• ** 

•CW V — 

viSi! 

E«o • * 

*8€§-g 

Cuiuiuw 

• — © «• 
C •— * <- <1 
CXOO.4 

m 

m 

«rt 

o 

* 

♦ «ff(A 

CL 

> • 
• w 

O " 

«& — OV 
Ul 

« K 

o 

Ul 

Ul 

•< 


ooo 

ooo 

"iirt'O 

nnn 

8. ? 

til 

XXv 

M 

tit 

• • • 

> > > 

• • «* 

ooo 


SOFfecn 

2378-00-001 57 

ORIGINAL PAGE is 

OF POOR QUAUTY 







N**nni 
«o fO— o- 

o*K — #*- 


RRPS 

ssSs 


RRC:: 

83SS 


tAM'OO- 

•nm'OPi 

vrt'OKi'O 

S&SK 

0"CKt>» 


8 


«)tAK<C(D 

•OQ<«-jiK 

OC^r^O 

Mtoee<M 

<0«rt<d*dN 


«^WNK 


O «KW»- 

— o<«<««r 


0>K»WM>0 

kSkCR 


-OK«* — O 

*r<0 

0'««Viy) 

KO>N.sS 


a gsssg 

«— kmnn «d 


IAKIWN® — 
K'i0«0--*0. 
OOMlAf- 


O 0«NC« 

«rt MMKirt 

«Q NW\tA«fj 

•O 

rj <-NtrtO>i 

O — *- — fO — 


3 


•4’$>0«'0 

«ON«*- 


8 3S SR 

tn o«- k« 


•+*+ 

a 


g 2^ £2 


«g 

'oV 

O'M 


2 


-oo^^-o 

«}<VN'0^ 

*V--*M 


««K-on 

*>«'ONN 

SKSSfc 

CV4*-K> 




OMlrt'O^ 

>wro<VK 

N«-N 


8 ^k>n 28 


'O Ctft * vr 

-3 3-^ * io 

K MU\ * « 


S 88:8 


N O-*- * *“ 
«M >ro> • 

O' ww • o 


S 88:8 

e sisis 

«S Jog ! <0 


8 88 IS 

e $5s:£ 

2 «J I r) 


3 S .3;S 

« xfN • <0 

K «# u% « O' 
«0 f^O • M 
« Kl*- i -#> 


lAOOCCO 

'-WMrt'OirtO 

C NfJ'OO'O 
MOOKW^ 


(XiAiA'OrtQ 

NiA)A9i<*0 

COO<AQlA 

n«o^«»n 

<M 


(M(a«m 4q 

n<#« 36 

JJ 

3S3 $5 

W«*- N 


s 


ss 

as 

IAIA 


888 


« rv 
* -•# 

• 0 • 

* 0 a 

!i 

* N 

* O a 

* a 

* ■ 

• a 

• a 

• • 
• 
■ 

♦ O' 

* "T 

a 

a 

is : 
• * ■ 

* O 

18 

* IA 

* «M 

* 0 • 

* ■ 1 

* • - 

• « . 

* a ■ 

* ■ < 

» a 

* •# 
* K» 

• ■ 

■ 

is :; 

• N 

• «A 

• O a i 

* a ■ 

• <K» 

• a 1 

• a • 

• a * 

* a 1 

* a 

* m 

• '# 
• n 

• m 
m 

:s :; 

135 

i® :i 

I 0 

* a 1 

• a * 

* at 

• a 4 

•* a 

a 

18 

• a 
a 

* 0 i< 

* 0 a t 

• * a 

• rg 

• m 

a I 

• a 1 

* a > 

* a a 

a > 

• a 

» a 

t a 

a 



SSSfcSS 

000000 

OKt'f^'ON 

§33333 

00 * 0 -— otto 

80 SS 0 S 

oo*-Nrt'f 

oVripi'fiA 

o*-nmV« 

0 *-*-•—*-*- 

NNtNNNN 


-r 

e~£lS- 

cxaj * 

0 k 

a ■g a» <L 
(•ad 1 . a 

aac «a 
L a*«.a 
• O aa^a 
a 3 a a 

• • e 

a^caaE 

Illll I 

a «_h- — * 

wzwoSt- 

c C'SJJoi 

0 — CjO O 

3 c 3 w a 
• ~ CO 
mm (. «a 

C— — aaa 

- a- a— • 

2 -sl^J 

fc. m Om ft • 

£5$S3S 

5«MX63 

«• 

MMMt C (. 

flam 


OlA<OKO» 

“ssssi 


000000 

O— 




lA'O 



||S|SSS 2 ~ 


owi<(n<#tfi'OK o 

(AM«niAiAinM«A 4 



Hlizlsl 

;^o lc > > > 

>OOW<ltfiww 


* 

W 


SOF TecH 


2373-00-001 


58 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 


Ui 



cn 


::s 


:§:s 

»■*#’« 'O 


K^-^cO < 

«WIK»t- « 




S O'irj < 

'OO-S 4 
tt-Ortf- i 


KIOOCK<M 

CgCCg 


A»<OiA^Q 

aj»'iA(AO 

«#'OKKO 

CO -vX — -r-<M 

ONNKS 
>» ’O 


2 


3CS 

r- — r o 


23828 


QlAtAtAlA < 
OOrt'ON < 
m— - -<V»m- 1 


«0 

«> 

<> 


£ 88 

M ©N# 


«« « 
-o<v « 

<MO i 


©«-{nN© * 

©■«K.«© < 


88 : 


88 : 
oo : 

s»N < 

SC: 


88 

0*0 

«*- 

MN 


s* 


©NO 
<M *^<0 
vf «# 


IS 


:S 


SC 

■ 'O 


« K 

■ O 

• <Vl 

■ m3 

■ 4VI 
« <SI 


• ~~r 

« r- 

» <M 

« N 

■ <M 



000300m- 


oooooo 


OKt'f4A©K 

9«0«3«0«0 

500 


oooooo 

o«-Nn<4© 

NNNNNN 


i 


00«-NM 

SSSSS 


OOOOOO 


OOOOOO 


0—3-0 
**- •S s — • 

CXM-I « 
— « 
«• o«^« 

C CM «J x 

O — CjQ o 


« C C 3 >.« 

< *»JZ 3 

« «oa:a.o 




sum 


0«*J 

•o< c a. 
v o v, 

f CL> - a. 
• ea 

«« * Q 

• >S5 Ja 

© 2'So o > 
— *-ox< * 

v « « 

• Co Ol** - 
LOO««** 
# o cc o « 
aucLauui 
O 



OO 

oo 

©© 



OOOOOOOO 
OO OOOOOO 
0»-NW^«rt©N 
©©Miovuntntn 



o 



■? 

UJ 


SOFJecH 

2378-00-001 61 

V ' 

PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 




