ASL01 


•Original eontalas color ^ 
plates; All DIIC reproduct¬ 
ions will be In black and 
white* " 


FINAL REPORT 



TIC 

ELECTE 

NOV 1 3 1995 

F 


Environmental Interaction for EOSAEL 

SBIR Phase I 
Solicitation #A94-086 


COMBIC 

Combined Obscuration Model for Battlefield Induced Contaminants 

Army Research Laboratory 
Battlefield Environment Directorate 



SPARTA, Inc. 


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT K 

Approved to: puoiic release^ 
Dutsnunoa Dxdinuted 


Authors: 

Karen M. McLaughlin, Melanie M. Coakley, 
Philip M. Allen and Robert E. O'Connor 


SPARTA, Inc. 


DTIG QUALITY INSPECTED 8 


19951108 169 


September 1995 









REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

0MB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information, is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estinnate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including 
suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, 
and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503. 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave Blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

September 1995 Final, March 1995-September 1995 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Environmental Interaction for EOSAEL - SBIR Phase 1 

Final Report 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

ACRN AA 2152040 56U- 
6U03 P665502-25CZ S29040 
(822000-85556519-01-C69F- 
484C) 

6. AUTH0R(S) 

Karen M. McLaughlin, Melanie M. Coakley, Philip M. Allen, 
and Robert E. O'Connor 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

SPARTA, Inc. 

4901 Corporate Drive 

Huntsville, AL 35805-6201 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

ASLOl-000 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Commander 

U.S. Army Research Laboratory 

Attn: AMSRL-BE-S 

White Sands Missile Range, NM 88002-5501 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

ARLPR: W43P6S 5053-1009 

12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for pubHc release;distribution unlimited 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

This report documents SPARTA's work on a Phase 1 SBIR effort to plan a PC/Windows-compatible 
version of EOSAEL software on CD ROM. To accomplish this, SPARTA developed draft versions of 
the Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) for all the modules of EOSAEL. Additionally, we created 
individual icons for each module while maintaining conformity within the set. We implemented the 

GUI for the COMBIC module and successfully integrated it with the COMBIC FORTRAN code. We 
incorporated comprehensive on-line help capability into our COMBIC/GUI prototype and recorded 
the prototype on CD ROM. We demonstrated the cross-platform capabiHty of the COMBIC/GUI 
protot)rpe by installing and executing it on Macintosh and SUN UNIX platforms, generating identical 
COMBIC input files to that produced by our PC/Windows compatible version used for the 
development. 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

EOSAEL, CD ROM, Battlefield Environment, GUI, Personal Computer (PC), 
Atmospheric Propagation, Microsoft Windows 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

191 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIRCATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

UL 




NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 


























Table of Contents 


1.0 INTRODUCTION.1 

2.0 PHASE I TECHNICAL OBJECTIVES.3 

3.0 WORK PERFORMED DURING PHASE I.4 

3.1 Project Software Development Tools...4 

3.2 Software Development Process.4 

3.3 Plan for Interfacing all EOS AEL Modules.5 

3.4 Documentation Review and Draft Design of Input Screens for Modules.7 

3.5 Unique Icons Created for Each Module.10 

3.6 COMBIC Module Prototype Development...11 

3.6.1 COMBIC Interface Design......12 

3.6.1. COMBIC Main Window.12 

3.6.1.2 Data Input Windows.14 

3.6.2 COMBIC Window Functionality.19 

3.6.3 EOSAEL/COMBIC Input Files.20 

3.6.4 Viewing COMBIC Output..21 

3.6.5 On-Line Help Capability.23 

3.6.5.1 Text File Manipulation.25 

3.6.5.2 Graphics Manipulation.26 

3.6.5.3 Detailed Help Window Button Descriptions.. 27 

3.6.6 FORTRAN Issues ........34 

3.7 Place and Execute the COMBIC Prototype on a CD ROM.36 

4.0 RESULTS OF PHASE I EFFORT.38 

5.0 TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY FOR COMPLETING ALL EOSAEL INTERFACES..39 


APPENDIX A 
APPENDIX B 
APPENDIX C 


Accesion For 


NTIS CRA&I 
DTIC TAB 
Unannounced 
Justification 


0 

□ 

□ 


By___ 

Distribution / 


Availability Codes 


Dist 


/)• 


Avail and/or 
Special 


1 






























List of Figures 


Figure 1. Module Interaction Overview.6 

Figure 2. TARGAC Meteorological Screen.8 

Figure 3. LZTRANs Atmospheric Data Screen.9 

Figure 4. Icon Designs For Each EOSAEL Module.11 

Figure 5. COMBIC Module Main Window.12 

Figure 6. Munition Definition Window. 15 

Figure 7. Context-Sensitive Help for Yield Factor.16 

Figure 8. Bum Duration Profile Window.17 

Figure 9. Target-Observer Laydown Window.18 

Figure 10. COMBIC GUI Generated Input File.20 

Figure 11. Context-Sensitive Help for Yield Factor.21 

Figure 12. COMBIC Input Summary File...22 

Figure 13. Contour File View Capability.23 

Figure 14. On-Line-Help Main Screen.24 

Figure 15. Postscript Equation Example.27 

Figure 16. Help Contents Screen.28 

Figure 17. Help Index Screen.29 

Figure 18. Help History Screen.. 30 

Figure 19. Help Glossary Screen. 31 

Figure 20. Help Window Welcome Screen.32 

Figure 22. Help Screen Displaying Red and Bold Text.. 33 

Figure 22. Help Figure Window.34 

Figure 23. Installation Option Screen.. 36 

Figure 24. Decompress Scress. 37 

List of Tables 

Table 1. Module Interaction Table...7 






























1.0 INTRODUCTION 


This final report documents SPARTA's work on a Small Business 
Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I effort to support the US Army 
Research Laboratory Battlefield Environment Directorate (BED) in the 
development of a PC-compatible version of EOSAEL. This work was 
performed under contract DAAL01-95-C-2012 on SBIR topic number A94- 
086 entitled, "Environmental Interaction for EOSAEL." All work reported 
herein was performed by personnel in our Huntsville, Alabama office 
during the contract period 13 March 1995 to 30 September 1995. 

This Phase I award is only the beginning -a proof of feasibility of our 
approach. By the end of Phase II, subject to an award to SPARTA, we will 
provide BED with the software on CD ROM which will allow a user to 
conduct analyses/evaluations using any or all of the EOSAEL modules while 
operating in a Microsoft Windows* environment on a 486 or equivalent PC 
with a modern Graphical User Interface (GUI) including on-line/context- 
sensitive help and documentation features. This product will be of 
considerable utility to environmental effects analysts in both the military 
and commercial sectors. It will provide these users the many benefits of 
the extensive model development and validation efforts previously 
invested in EOSAEL with a GUI that will be comfortable to any user of 
standard commercial software. 

To illustrate the entire process of interface design and 
implementation, SPARTA developed a prototype for the COMBIC module 
during Phase I. This COMBIC/GUI prototype includes the COMBIC interface 
complete with all of the functionality required to provide the user with 
help, create COMBIC input files, execute the COMBIC module and view the 
resulting output. The built-in help includes the COMBIC user's guide in a 
hypertext help facility, as well as, the context sensitive help built into the 
interface. The product is a multi-language program with the Windows 
interface routines written in C to provide all the program's calls to the 
Windows Applied Programming Interface (API) library and the COMBIC 
Module of the EOSAEL family of models remaining as it exists in FORTRAN 
to provide the computational services of the module and perform file input 
and output. The COMBIC/GUI prototype is delivered on a CD ROM. This CD 
contains all files necessary to execute the COMBIC/GUI prototype interface 
and necessary EOSAEL routines. The CD also contains install and uninstall 
routines for setting up the user's hard drive to receive the input and 


* Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation. 


1 





output files generated by the user interface and source code. A simple 
user's guide is provided to help the user install the prototype and gives 
basic examples of user/window interaction. 

SPARTA'S approach to GUI developments uses a software 
development tool (Neuron Data's Open Interface^*^) that provides the 
interface capability to other platforms types and allows for easy cross¬ 
platform capability. SPARTA demonstrated this cross-platform capability 
using our Phase I COMBIC/GUI prototype developed in a PC/Windows 
environment by installing and executing it on a Macintosh and Sun UNIX 
platforms. We feel that this demonstrated cross-platform capability is a 
major innovation. 

SPARTA has met or exceeded all of the Phase I technical objectives 
summarized in Section 2 of this final report (and promised in our Phase I 
proposal). The detailed discussions of our Phase I efforts are organized in 
Section 3. Section 4 summarizes our Phase I accomplishments. Section 5 
contains a brief discussion of why we feel a Phase II effort is technically 
feasible. 


2 





2.0 PHASE I TECHNICAL OBJECTIVES 


The technical objectives of SPARTA's SBIR Phase I effort were: 

1) Generate a plan for interfacing all EOSAEL modules within the 
Microsoft Windows environment 

2) Plan the Graphical User Interface (GUI) front-ends for each 
module 

3) Create unique identifiable icons for each module 

4) Develop a prototype for the Combined Obscuration Model for 
Battlefield Induced Contaminants (COMBIC) module, and 

5) Install and execute the COMBIC prototype Windows application on 
a CD ROM. 

The work performed to meet these objectives is described in Section 
3. The first two subsections of Section 3 contain a discussion of the 
software development tools and the software development process we 
used in accomplishment of the aforementioned technical objectives. 

Section 3.3 addresses technical objective 1 and contains our plan for 
interfacing all of the EOSAEL modules. Section 3.4 provides the draft 
review and design of the front ends for each of the EOSAEL modules 
(technical objective 2) and Section 3.5 provides the unique icons we 
created for each of these modules (technical objective 3). Section 3.6 
describes meeting technical objective 4 and contains a discussion of our 
COMBIC module prototype development. The last technical objective is 
addressed in Section 3.7, this subsection contains a discussion of the 
placement of the COMBIC/GUI prototype on a CD ROM and of the execution 
of the COMBIC module from the CD ROM. 


3 




3.0 WORK PERFORMED DURING PHASE I 


3.1 Project Software Development Tools 

Neuron Data’s Open Interface (01) is a cross-platform Graphical User 
Interface tool which allows the developer to build a portable GUI across all 
windowing standards (Microsoft Windows^^, OSF/MotiF^, Presentation 
Manager^“ and Macintosh®). 01 was developed expressly for the purpose 
of porting GUI’s across various platforms (currently numbering in the 
40’s). The basis for the cross platform flexibility comes from a complete 
library of functions needed to develop a windows type application (writing 
to a window, scrollbar movement, button clicks, drawing, printing, etc.). 
Each platform has this same complete library of functions, each requiring 
the same parameters and written in C. Hidden to the developer and the 
user, inside the functions of these libraries are commands specific to the 
various platforms. On the PC, the internal working on the functions use the 
Microsoft Windows Software Development Kit (SDK) which is unique to 
Windows. On another platform, the same C source code can be compiled 
with that platform’s library and the underlying functions use the language 
of that platform to carry out the task. When moved to another platform, 
the interface automatically takes on the “look and feel” of the new 
platform. In other words, the interface will not look like a Microsoft 
Windows application stuck on the Sun, but will take on the attributes of an 
open look based application with all of the functionality of the original 
Microsoft interface. To show the cross platform advantage of using 10, 
SPARTA has successfully ported the GUI part of the COMBIC prototype to 
the Macintosh and a Sun Unix system (Open Look and Motif based). An 
example of the COMIC Meteorological Parameters window for all four 
platforms can be found in Appendix C. Other tools used include the 
Microsoft C/C^^ and Microsoft FORTRAN compilers. 

3.2 Software Development Process 

SPARTA used a disciplined software development approach in 
designing and constructing the COMBIC interface, thus insuring that the 
product functions correctly and the source code is easily readable and 
modifiable. Structured programming principles of modularity, top-down 
flow, visual layout (i.e., wise use of indentation and spacing to improve 
readability), use of meaningful names for program variables, and 
commenting were enforced. Object oriented programming philosophy was 
applied in the design of the software. 


4 





We used examples found in the COMBIC user’s guide to test the GUI 
and FORTRAN codes. These test cases were exercised first using the 
current EOSAEL driver, and the outputs were recorded. The same test 
cases were then exercised using the Windows interface, and the outputs 
electronically compared with the first set of outputs to confirm that the 
interface is working correctly. 


3.3 Plan for Interfacing all EOSAEL Modules 

Originally, SPARTA proposed a plan to interface all modules together 
into one cohesive unit which allowed the individual modules to feed other 
modules. To confirm this plan, SPARTA talked to Dr. Alan Wetmore, the 
COTR for this Phase I effort and essentially determined from him that very 
few EOSAEL modules interacted with each other. In addition, each 
module’s documentation was studied during the course of Phase I to 
determine how it interacted with the other EOSAEL modules. The result of 

this study is documented in Figure 1. If a number is placed within the 

matrix it indicates there is a link of some kind between the two modules. 
Table 1 is a legend for Figure 1. It designates the relationship of the two 
modules indicated with that number. For instance, the number 2 between 

COMBIC and BITS says that BITS can optionally use COMBIC output for 

Concentration Length Data. For the most part, as indicated by Figure 1, the 
modules are independent of one another. However, there are a few 
instances of modules calling other modules (e.g., TARGAC and KWIK call 
XSCALE for atmospheric attenuation inputs, NOVAE optionally calls AGAUS 
to calculate Mie efficiency factors, and TARGAC optionally calls ILUMA to 
get ambient illumination data), and several cases in which inputs for one 
module may be derived from the output of another module (e.g., FASCAT 
may be called to generate a target contrast for use by TARGAC). The plan 
then is to create linkages between modules that have such dependencies. 
Our approach will be to supply a choice button in the window in which any 
dependent input is specified, which indicates that the input will be derived 
by running the related module. An example of this can also be found on 
the figures in Appendix C, where CLIMAT can be used to specify 
meteorological inputs of COMBIC. If this button is selected, the user will 
immediately be presented with the main window for the related module 
and required to set up inputs for that module before continuing with the 
setup of the original module. In this way the user will not be burdened 
with a large multi-module interface full of applications that are not 
needed. We will be able to place emphasis on the individual needs of the 
module. 


5 






Figure 1. Module Interaction Overview 


6 


Input can be 'fulfilled by other modules or other modules are called while eKecuting. 


































Figure 

Number 

Module Interaction Description 

1 

BITS optionally uses COMBIC output file for Concentration Length Data. 

2 

BITS optionally uses LOWTRN output file for Atmospheric input. 

3 

COMBIC can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

4 

COPTER can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

5 

FASCAT can optionally use LOWTRNs Aerosol Models to create FASCATs input 
for the Optical Profiles. 

6 

PFNDAT supplies input to FASCAT. 

7 

FITTE can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

8 

GRNADE can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

9 

KWIK can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

1 0 

KWIK usesXSCALE 

1 1 

LASS can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

1 2 

NMMW can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

1 3 

NOVAE uses input data from AGAUS 

1 4 

NOVAE can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

1 5 

PFNDAT is created by AGAUS. 

1 6 

REFRAC can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

1 7 

TARGAC can optionally get climatology data from CLIMAT. 

1 8 

TARGAC optionally calls FASCAT 

1 9 

TARGAC optionally calls ILUMA 

20 

TARGAC calls XSCALE 


Table 1. Module Interaction Table 


3.4 Documentation Review and Draft Design of Input 
Screens for Modules 

SPARTA received an electronic copy of the documentation for twenty 
modules in the EOSAEL family of models. We reviewed the documentation 
for each of the twenty modules provided by the Government to become 
familiar with the functionality of each module, to ascertain the required 
inputs to execute the module, and determine the generated outputs given 
successful execution. SPARTA used this information to design draft 
versions of input screens for each of the modules. As shown in Section 3.3, 
there are interdependencies within the modules of EOSAEL, our draft 


7 
















































designs of the input screens account for the interactions with other 
modules. These draft designs were generated in parallel with the COMBIC 
GUI. After a review by the government and if SPARTA is awarded Phase 
II, SPARTA will eliminate the differences in designs to government 
approved methods. 

In the design of the input screens, SPARTA maintained association to 
the current terminology, by providing the code variable name as well as 
the parameter names. For example, an input screen contains not only a 
descriptive name like time of observation, it also contains the source code 
variable name WTME. Figure 2 shows an example input screen. 

Association to the card images was also maintained by preserving the 
grouping of input parameters. In cases where related parameters were on 
several cards, this data was grouped, where possible, to appear on one 
input screen. Typically, each screen corresponds to a card or group of 
cards under the old system. In the final implementation, defaults and 
typical values will be shown where applicable. Figure 2 shows an example 
of a screen with default values and typical values displayed. The units of 
the input parameters are also provided where applicable. 


Meteorological Data: 1 of 3 


f Parameter ; 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 
Val ues 

User 

'Values 

Time of Observation 

WTME 

HHMM 

0000 - 
2400 

^DayofEuent qOqq 

Q Day Before Euent 

0 Tuio Days Before Euent 

Weather Index 

IWX(IJ) 

- 

- 

±1 Sky Cover < 50S 

Inversion Height 

WX(I.15) 

km 

0.0 - 8.0 

■■ 

4 > 3.0 ( 

Wind Direction 

WX(IJ8) 

degrees 

1 - 360 

1 4 ¥ 270 1 

Temperature 

WX(I,3) 

Celcius 

-60 - 60 


j 4 * 10.0 

Dew Point Temperature 

WX(I,4) 

Celcius 

-60 - 60 


I 1 }* 8-0 

Windspeed 

WX(I,5) 

knots 

0-70 

1 O: 8.0 

Visibility 

WX(I,6) 

- 

.1-200 


Clutter 

IWX(I,8) 

- 




■■ 

Delete 

OK 

IIIIIQQQH 


Figure 2. TARGAC Meteorological Screen 


8 

































































SPARTA has designed each module to have multiple layers of help. 
Each module will provide context sensitive help screen functionality and 
interactions, and on-line documentation from the menu bar. The various 
layers of help are described and examples provided in the COMBIC Module 
Prototype Development section, Section 3.6.5. 


In the screen designs and layouts, SPARTA determined the best 
input method for each parameter. Several methods were available. For 
parameters with lists, the input method was chosen to be a pull down 
menu listing all choices. When the list was small, radio buttons were used 
to display the choices. When ranges were provided, a sliding bar was often 
used. When the sliding bar was used, an input cell was also provided to 
give the user the option to enter the value manually. This allows the user 
to specify values with greater accuracy or outside the typical range. 
Variables for which the above mentioned input methods were not 
applicable, are specified with a generic entry cell. An example which 
shows all input methods is given in Figure 3. 


Parameter : 

Variable 

Units 

User Values 

Specify Reference 
Height for input 
Pressure, and 
Temperature. 

PHGHT 

km 

O Use flLT(l) 

O User Defined 



Parameter < 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User Values . 

Pressure 
(at km) 

PRES 

mbar 


Temperature 
(at km) 

TMP 

0 

C 

1 . 

+ 50 - 50 

Model 

Atmospheric Type 

MSCL 

- 


±1 Tropical 


Mean Scale 
Height 

nCLHT 

km 

8.28491 

Initial Layer 
Thickness 

ZDEL 

km 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure 3. LZTRANs Atmospheric Data Screen 














































In some instances, additional parameters will be needed based on 
the value of other parameters. In these cases, the dependent parameters 
will either be active or inactive when applicable. For example, the user 
may choose to use climatology data generated by CLIMAT. Parameters 
that are no longer needed will be grayed out and will become inactive. 

SPARTA maintained uniformity across each module front end design. 
Each module will have a main window, like that used for COMBIC (see 
Section 3.6), and will have the same menu bar. The choices from the pull 
down menus will be the same as in COMBIC with the exception of the 
mode, inputs, and view menu choices. The mode and input menu list is 
determined by the required and optional input for each module. The view 
list is determined by the associated output. The mode menu choice is often 
not needed and will be active only when applicable. The Inputs Menu 
Choices will differ for each module and is shown in the corresponding 
module section of Appendix A. The view menu choices will be similar to 
COMBICs with the addition of graphing and plotting choices where 
applicable. In designing our draft input screens, SPARTA followed the 
Microsoft guidelines for designing a user interface for window-based 
applications. 

Under the current card image input system, the ability to do multiple 
(batch) runs exist. This is currently implemented using a “Go Card” 
method. In the final implementation of our front ends for the various 
modules, this capability will be available. 

In Appendix A, a section is provided for each module to illustrate the 
draft input screens. Each section contains a brief synopsis of the module. 
Each draft input screen is shown and a mapping is provided from the old 
cards. The relevance of the input data is also given when known. 
Discussions of additional functionality are provided when needed. 

Based on our review of the other EOSAEL modules, SPARTA feels that 
the COMBIC prototype development dealt with most user interface issues 
to be encountered in the other EOSAEL modules. We will be able to 
maximize the reuse of previously developed code. 


3.5 Unique Icons Created for Each Module 

SPARTA has designed and created an icon for each of the current 
EOSAEL modules. After reviewing the documentation for each module and 




becoming familiar with the modules functionality, a picture sketch was 
created and given to our graphics department to be drawn and colorized. 
Each icon was designed to look similar to each other in order to create a 
felling of conformity. Special attention to background color, color scheme, 
and figure types was used to enhance this conformity throughout the icon 
set. Once these pictures were completed, further manipulation was done in 
order to create the required 32 by 32 bit icon. The final version of these 
icons is shown in Figure 4. 


V 


AGAUS 


'uuin^ 

BITS 


CL I MAT 



COMBIC COPTER 



FASCAT FITTE GRNADE ILUMA KWIK 


'WW 

LASS 




4 - 


LZTRAN MPLUME NBSCAT 



NMMW 



NOVAE 



OVRCST RADAR 




REFRAC TARAC 



UVTRAN 


XSCALE 


Figure 4. Icon Designs For Each EOSAEL Module 


3.6 COMBIC Module Prototype Development 

To illustrate the complete process of developing a GUI and linking it 
to the FORTRAN EOSAEL modules, SPARTA produced a complete 
prototype of the COMBIC module. We designed the interface, programmed 
the functionality of the windows resources, provided the user with 
multiple levels of help, programmed the application to generate the 
















COMBIC input files, set up calls to the FORTRAN routines, generated a view 
capability for looking at the resulting COMBIC output and verified the 
results with document example cases. 

3.6.1 COMBIC Interface Design 

3.6.1.1 COMBIC Main Window 

In the designed interface, SPARTA has made a main COMBIC window 
focal point for the module’s interface and all activities associated with the 
module will be activated from this main window. This main window 
comes up when the user clicks the COMBIC icon from the windows 
environment. The window acts as a backdrop to all other windows 
associated with COMBIC. All user activities are prompted with commands 
found in the main window's menu bar. These activities are grouped under 
these six headings: File. Mode. Input,Run, View and Help. Figure 5 
shows the COMBIC main window. 


COMBIC 


File Mode Input Run View 


Help 


COMBIC 

Combined Obscuration Model for Battlefield Induced Contaminants 


SX 


Army Research Laboratory 
Battlefield Environment Directorate 



SPARTA, Inc. 


Figure 5. COMBIC Module Main Window 












File is set up like most Windows application File menus to contain 
commands like New, Qp en, Qose, Save, Save As ..., and Exit. All of 
these commands are familiar and will deal with the COMBIC associated 
data files. Because this is a GUI and we anticipate the user will run 
COMBIC from the GUI, the interface keeps up with only two files: name.phl 
and name.ph2. They are the COMBIC interface data files created by the 
interface, for the interface, anytime a Save or a Save As... is performed. 

They contain all the information necessary to fill the GUI with the 
information specified by the user for Phase I and Phase II, respectively. 
From these two files, once opened, the GUI can generate all other files 
needed by COMBIC and the user. These files facilitate the retrieval of 
inputs defined (and saved) in a previous session so that the user need not 
start over with COMBIC defaults in each session. Other files that can be 
generated and saved by the GUI are discussed in section 3.6.4. 

The Mode menu bar pull down menu has three options: Phase I, 
Phase II and Both. Depending on which mode has been selected, only 
certain options of the Input menu are available to the user. Specifically, if 
Phase I is the mode selected, only Control, Environment and 
Munitions are available options under Input. For Phase II, Control and 
Target-Observer Laydown are available. The reason for this is to 
eliminate any unnecessary effort or confusion for the user. If the user 
selects Both from the Mode menu all input options are accessible. The 
GUI will also use this mode information to determine what information 
goes into the input file and the COMBIC Input Summary (section 3.6.4). 

User inputs are grouped logically within the user interface as in the 
current EOSAEL card input format. The selections on the Input pull down 
menu for Phase I and Phase II are as follows. 

• Phase I, Environment andMunitions. Within the 
Environment input selection the program takes care of required 
inputs that currently are handled with the METl, MET2, PSQl, 
PSQ2 and TERA cards. The Munitions Input selection takes care 
of all data required on the MUNT, BURN, DUST, SMLD, VEHC, BARG, 
EXTC, CLOU, SUBA, SUBB and SUBC cards. 

• Phase II, has one selection, Target-Observer Laydown which 
takes the user to a window that handles all Phase II inputs: ORIG, 
TIME, LIST, OLOC, TLOC, SLOC, VEHl, AND VEH2. Both Phase I and 
Phase II require wavelength information and this is handled with 
the Cbntrol option under Input. 


13 





From the Run option, the user may do two things, ^nerate Input 
File and Execute COMBIC. The first option does as it says and generates 
the input file based on the current user specifications. This is then 
available for viewing. The second, also generates the input file, but then 
begins the actual COMBIC execution. 

Under the View option of the menu bar, the user will be able to view 
the output from both the interface and the EOSAEL module itself. In the 
case of COMBIC, output from the interface will be the interface summary 
file and the COMBIC input file. In addition to these, the COMBIC produced 
text output file may also be viewed here. A contour plot option is 
available under this menu. These options are more thoroughly discussed 
in Section 3.6.4. 

From the Help pull down menu, the user can access full 
documentation for the COMBIC module in an On-Line-Help format. This 
can be accessed by choosing Contents or Table of Contents. See Section 
3.6.5 for a complete discussion on the On-Line Help. This menu also 
provides information on Technical Support andAbout COMBIC 
window. 

3.6.1.2 Data Input Windows 

The primary purpose of a windows environment interface is to make 
the data input process easier for the user. These windows were designed 
to maximize the information available to the user and minimize the effort 
required to specify a value. Figure 6 shows the Munition Definition 
Window. The tabular format, shown mostly in gray, is one way or 
organizing and presenting the maximum amount of information. Each 
parameter fills a row in the table and each entry type forms a column. 

Here we give a short description name for the parameter, the source code 
variable name to maintain a link to the source, the specified units and 
typical values where applicable. Munition Type (SMENU) and Obscurant 
Type (STYP) are Choice Lists where all available choices are given. The 
user only needs to read the list and make a choice. As the user makes a 
selection from the SMENU list the defaults associated with the other 
parameters change to reflect the defaults associated with the new choice. 
Check buttons are provided on the lower half of the window to allow the 
user access to the more detailed and optional munitions definitions 
parameters. While these inputs are still part of the munitions definition 
input area, the details are kept out of the way until they are specifically 
asked for. When a check box is clicked, another window will come up for 


14 




input definition specific to the check button selection. The buttons show a 
checkmark to indicate these details are being specified for this source. To 
allow for the multiple munitions defined in a Phase I COMBIC run, we have 
built in a looping feature which lets him essentially step up or down 
through his list of munitions. As the user adds a new munition definition 
(Add Button), the list expands. The user can also delete a munition 
definition by selecting the Delete Button. Other standard buttons that 
appear on every window include OK and Cancel. OK specifies, “I am 
finished with this section, save the information and Exit”. Cancel on the 
other hand means, “Do not make any changes and Exit”. 


Munition Parameters 


Window 


Help 


Munition Definition y | D | of 1 


Munition Name: Munition 1 


Munition Type: SMENU User Specified 
Obscurant Type: STYP 


Assigned internaily 


^ ? Parameter 

■:;;;Cbder^' 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

# of Munitions or Sources 

XN 


.1 to 100. 

1 

Fill Weight 

FW 

lbs or gal 

.01 to 1000. 

0 

Production Efficiency 

EFF 

/o 

l.tolOO. 

0 

Yield Factor 

YF 


0. to 20. 

0 

# of Submunitions 
per Munition 

SUBM 

- 

- 

0 


Specify ... 

Barrage Information 
Burn Duration Profiie 
Smoldering Munition 



Moving Source 
Vehicle Dust 

j HE Dust Parameters 


I Mass Extinction Coefficient 
I 1 New Sub-Cioud Model 


Add 

Delete 

OK 

Cancel 


Figure 6. Munition Definition Window 












In addition to the On-Line-Help from the menu bar Help, there is an 
About this Window option. This option gives information specific to 
helping the user interact with the current window. Context-sensitive help 
is available on every input window. To know where the context sensitive 
help is located, the user only has to watch the cursor. The cursor will 
change from an arrow to a pointing hand when the help is available. Then 
the user only has to click on the parameter description or variable name 
and a help window will pop up with information about the parameter. In 
this case, clicking on "Yield Factor" pops up the window in Figure 7. 


^ For smokes (dimensionless], the ratio of the total 
airborne mass of obscurant and absorbed water to 
the total mass of oscurant alone. 

^ For HE explosions, the crater volume scaling factor: 


If 0., internal models are used. 


lO^ 


Figure 7. Context-Sensitive Help for Yield Factor 

Windows that spawn from the main windows like Environment and 
Munitions are very similar in format to the window just discussed. An 
example is shown in Figure 8 for the Burn Duration Profile which is 
initialized from the Munition Definition window. A difference is the check 
box at the top of the screen, in this case labeled, “Specify Burn Duration 
Profile”. This check box is a means for the user to say, “Yes, I want these 
parameters specified”. It clues the code, that these parameters although 
optional are being specified. A checkmark will appear on the previous 
window indicating that the parameters are being used as a visual reminder 
to the user. The code is sensitive to the fact that changes are being made 
to the parameters and if the user tries to leave the window without 
checking this box the code will confirm, with the user, that this is what he 
actually intends to do. 







15 Obscurant Burn Duration Profile for Continuous Sources 

. BB 

Help 

D Specify Burn Duration Profiie 

Munition 1 of 1 

r ^ ^ 

The burn rate profile i 

hasiheform: "(*1'•B 5 B 6 «xp( J«t) 

and can be multiplied by any constant value since the model normalizes 1 to total mass prodi 
T|, is burn duration TBURN. In terms of the cumulative mass M(t) produced up until time t , 
the coefficients describe; 

n(l). B,(i) . -•«»(-««*)) 

---- --- - --------- ^ 

o 

(D 

Q. 



Code 
> Variable 


Typipal ; 
Values 

User . 
Vriluri 

Burn Duration 

TBURN 

s 

1. to 900. 

E 

Coefficient of Constant Term 

BRAT1 

- 

varies 

0 

Coefficient of Linear Term 

BRAT2 

- 

varies 

0 

Coefficient of Quadratic Term 

BRAT3 


varies 

0 

Coefficient of Cubic Term 

BRAT4 

- 

varies 

0 

Coefficient of Added Exponential Term 

BRAT5 

- 

varies 

0 

Coefficient of Exponential 

BRAT6 

s'^ 

varies 

0 


OK 


■■l 


i 

i 

I 


Figure 8. 


Burn Duration Profile Window 


Within the Phase I effort, SPARTA strived to simplify the input effort 
and user understanding as much as possible. This is shown clearly in the 
Phase II portion of the COMBIC module. The majority of inputs are related 
to scenario, the lay down of observer-target line-of-sight pairs and source 
placement. This could have been handled with the input formats discussed 
thus far. Instead, we programmed a graphical tool that allows the user to 
“draw” out his scenario by placing the various elements on a map. Figure 9 
shows the Target-Observer Laydown window. 


17 












































r 



This window is a graphical environment and interaction with it 
should be familiar to most Windows users. Parts of the window include 
the menu bar. Just below the menu bar at the left of the window is a Tool 
Box. To right of this is an Overview, which gives a miniature view of the 
Work Area, the bottom portion of the window. The battlefield Observers, 
Targets and Sources are positioned in the Work Area. The user may 
navigate the Work Area by using the scroll bars or by moving the wire box 
of the Overview. The required spread and size of the battlefield area will 
dictate how much of the Work Area will be needed. 

The Tool Box provides the user with the means to specify the various 
pieces of Phase II scenario. The selection tool (arrow shape) is used for 
selection of various elements of the scenario and navigation around the 
screen. Observers are represented by the Blue circle. Targets are the Red 
triangle. Stationary Sources are shown as a smoking canister and Moving 























sources by the smoking canister with an arrow. The Line-of-Sight (LOS) 
tool (line with arrow) is used to connect observers to targets and set up the 
LOS. 


To add elements to the battlefield, choose the correct tool from the 
Tool Box and click the left mouse button in the Work Area where the 
element is to be placed. The top left hand corner of the Work Area 
contains a position indicator. If the user keeps an eye on the position (x,y), 
it indicates exactly where the element will be placed on the battlefield. 
Once placed on the battlefield, the coordinates can be re-specified and 
other parameters entered by double clicking the left mouse button on the 
element. Each of the four types of elements has a different window that 
comes up with the parameters required for that element. Once the user 
has specified these parameters and they have been “OK’d” by the code, the 
icon representing the element will change to its final form. (Observers 
from an open circle to a filled circle. Targets from an open triangle to a 
filled triangle, and Sources from an upright canister to a smoking canister). 

To specify a LOS between an Observer and Target, choose the LOS 
tool from the Tool Box. 

1) Click left mouse button on the Observer 

2) Click left mouse button on a Target. Observers can have multiple 
Targets and Targets can have multiple Observers. 

So that the map represents a scenario reasonable battlefield, the use 
may change the grid size represented. The basis of the grid is a 200 x 100 
coordinate area. 0,0 is the center. The overall size can be changed by 
selecting Grid from the menu bar. This brings up a window where the use 
can specify a multiplier. For multiplier of 5 the resultant battlefield 1000, 
500. Again 0,0 is at center. 

Examples of all COMBIC windows can be found in Appendix B. 


3.6.2 COMBIC Window Functionality 

Once the interface had been designed, SPARTA used Neuron Data’s 
Open Interface tool to build the Windows resources. On completion, 01 
generates a source template written in C and a resource file containing a 
complete description of the windows and their resources which defines the 
windows during application runtime. The template is the ground zero 
starting point for developing the user interface source code. Based on the 
windows defined for COMBIC, SPARTA started with 9970 lines of C code 


19 





generated in the template files. Adding functionality to the windows 
required another 13,450 lines of code for a total of 23,420 line of C code 
developed. The functionality includes moving through the input windows 
as directed, programming menu bars, creating data structures for saving 
the users inputs, checking the validity of the user inputs, implementing 
context-sensitive help, generating COMBIC input files and viewing 
capabilities. 

3.6.3 EOSAEL/COMBIC Input Files 

From the COMBIC user's guide, SPARTA determined the exact layout 
and card image ordering required for proper input. We take the stored 
user inputs, do any appropriate verification and use a standard 10 Stream 
output method for creating the input files. These input files contain 
EOEXEC specific control card images like (PHAS, GO, DONE, FILE, etc.), as 
well as, COMBIC card images. We make use of the EOSAEL defined NAME 
card to document the input files. Once the input file has been created, the 
program calls the COMBIC FORTRAN DLL to execute the COMBIC code. An 
example GUI generated COMBIC input file is shown in Figure 10. 


WAVL 

1.060 

0.0000 

0.0000 





COMBIC 







PHAS 

1.0 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

FILE 

9.0COMHIS 






NAME 

METl 

RELHUM 

UW 

PCAT 

AIRT 

PRESR 

WINDIR 

COLDR 

METl 

90.00 

5.000 

3.000 

27.50 

962.5 

202.4 

0.0000 

NAME 

Munition 1 







NAME 

MUNT 

XN 

FW 

SMENU 

STYP 

EFF 

YF 

SUBM 

HUNT 

NAME 

1.000 

0.0000 

1.000 

0.0000 

0.0000 

0.0000 

0.0000 

155-min HC Ml canister 







NAME 








Hexachloroethane (HC) 

smoke 






GO 

NAME 

Munition 2 







NAME 

MUNT 

XN 

’ FW 

SMENU 

STYP 

EFF 

YF 

SUBM 

MUNT 

NAME 

1.000 

0.0000 

0.0000 

9.000 

0.0000 

0.0000 

0.0000 

Fill 

NAME 

weight has been 

specified 

outside of 

the typical 

value : 

range. 


User 

NAME 

Specified 







Dust, 

vehicular 







NAME 

VEHC 

VSPEED 

WIDTH 

WEIGH 

VEHTYP 

VEHDIR 



VEHC 

4.000 

3.000 

60.00 

1.000 

90.00 



GO 

DONE 

END 

STOP 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 


Figure 10. COMBIC GUI Generated Input File 


3.6.4 Viewing COMBIC Output 


20 






SPARTA has developed a capability to view all text input and output 
files associated with the COMBIC module. These options are available 
from the V.iew Menu of the Main COMBIC window (Figure 11). At any 
point in the input definition process, the user can view the COMBIC Input 
Summary. This is a text description of the inputs that have been supplied 
so far. If the user chooses to save this file, the COMBIC run can be 
accurately regenerated from this description. An example is given in 
Figure 12. 


COMBIC 


File Mode input Run 



View 


COMBIC Input Summary 
input File 
Output File 
Contour File 



COMBIC 

Combined Obscuration Model for Battlefield Induced Contaminants 




Army Research Laboratory 
Battlefield Environment Directorate 


SPARTA, Inc. 


Figure 11. Context-Sensitive Help for Yield Factor 

Once the user has specified all required information, and generated 
the input file from the Run menu, the Input File option under View will 
be available. This shows the exact COMBIC input file as COMBIC will use it 
(see Figure 11 above). Note, the use of the NAME card to label all inputs 
for easy identification by the user. And finally, after COMBIC has been 
executed, the Output File option is available and the user can view the 















standard output file generated by COMBIC. Currently, in this prototype 
development the contour plot specification inputs have not been fully 
implemented. SPARTA has made available a typical Contour plot output 
file for viewing. The user can view this at any time simply by selecting 
Q)ntour File from the View Menu. A partial example shown in the 
actual viewing window is shown in Figure 13. With the exception of the 
summary, all of these files can be saved under a user specified name. This 
way it can be taken outside of the GUI and manipulated as the user wishes 
including input to a non-GUI form of COMBIC. All of these files can be 
printed to an attached printer. 


File 


» COMBIC Input Summary * 


Control Specifications: 

Wavelength (WAVEl): 1.060 

(UAVE2); 0.0000 

(MULDV): 0.0000 

» Phase I Parameters » 

Meteorological Parameters 

Refercence Height (ZREF): 10.00 

Relative Humidity (RELHUM): 90.00 

Windspeed (at 10 m) (UW): 5.000 

Air Temperature (at 10 m) (AIRT): 

Air Pressure (at 10 m) (PRESR): 

Wind Direction (WIHDIR): 202.4 

Not a Cold Region (COLDR). 

Pasquill Stability Category (PCAT): 


27.50 
962.5 


3.000 


Munition 

Munition Name: Munition 1 
Munition Type (SMENU): 1.000 

»» 155-mm HC Ml canister 
Obscurant Type: (STYP): 3.000 

»» Hexachloroethane (HC) smoke 

# of Munitions or Sources (XN): 1.000 

Fill Weight (FW): 5.400 

Production Efficiency (EFF): 70.00 

Yield Factor (YF): 5.725 

$ of Submunitions per Munition (STJBM) : 1.000 

Munition Name: Munition 2 
Munition Type (SMENU): 0.0000 

»» User Specified 

Obscurant Type: (STYP): 9.000 

Dust, vehicular 

# of Munitions or Sources (XH): 1.000 

Fill Weight (FW): 0.0000 

*» Fill weight has been specified outside of the typical value range. 


Production Efficiency (EFF): 0.0000 

Yield Factor (YF): 0.0000 

# of Submunitions per Munition (SUBM). 
♦Vehicle Dust 

Vehicle Speed (VSPEED): 4.000 

Vehicle Width (VWIDTH): 3.000 

Vehicle Weight (VWEIGH): 60.00 

Vehicle Type (VEHTYP): Tracked 
Vehicle Direction (VEHDIR): 90.00 


0.0000 


Figure 12. COMBIC Input Summary File 










File 


1 VERTICAL 

-5.000E+01 

2.500E+01+ 


-2.OOOE+01 


HORIZONTAL 

OOOE+Ol 


4.000E+01 


987666789 
87543334578 
8753211123578 
975311111113579 
8631111*1111368 
75211*****11247 
97411*******11479 
96311*******11369 

- 06311»»»»**»11369 
96311*******11369 

5.000E+00+ 74211*****11247 

753111***111358 
864211111112478 
997542111122468 
99975433233467 
999987655555679 
9998888866677999 
999888777777888999 

- 998887766666667788999 
-98876554444445566778999 

-1.500E+01+765443322222334456788999 
-543221111111122345677899 
-4221111111111122345678999 
-2211111111111112345777899 
-2111111*11111112346778899 
+-+- 


-5.OOOE+Ol 


-2.OOOE+Ol 


1.OOOE+Ol 


4.OOOE+Ol 




3 : 


Figure 13. Contour File View Capability 


3.6.5 On-Line Help Capability 

An on-line help capability was developed as an integral part of the 
COMBIC Graphical User Interface (GUI) to assist the user in input 
specification. Current documentation of the COMBIC module was provided 
and that documentation formed the basis for the content of the on-line 
help. Documentation text was re-organized appropriately for on-line-help 
display and documentation graphics were re-drawn to present high quality 
color graphics in the on-line help. 

Figure 14 shows an example of the on-line-help screen. The buttons 
along the top of this window provide maneuverability through the help 
document or invoke other screens that contain additional information. 
Colored text in the help window provides additional functionality and 


23 













maneuverability. A brief description is provided for each functionality 
with a more detailed description provided below. 


Help: helpex.doc 


File Edit 



Help 

( Contents Index 

B^ack 

■ItttillGH 


Same level topics i 

<< 


Up 

^Welcome 





Welcome to the on line help system for COMBIC. This online 
documentation is provided to assist you in the parameter input 
process, to help you obtain a better understanding of what COMBIC 
models and how COMBIC works and to assist you in viewing COMBIC 
output. 


Topic Listing 

Figure Listing 

Table Listing 

Other EOSAEL Modules 

Quick Help on this on-line documentation 










Figure 14. On-Line-Help Main Screen 


• The Home button will return the user to the welcome screen 
shown in Figure 14. 

• The Contents button will activate a window with a listing of all 
topics contained in this help. 

• The Index button activates a window that displays a listing of 
keywords and the corresponding topics where these keywords are 
discussed. 


24 


















• The Back button returns the user to the previous topic viewed. 

• The History button displays the list of topics visited during the 

current section. 

• The Glossary Button displays glossary terms and there definitions. 

• The Same Level Topics "pull down" list allows the user to specify 

the functionality of the arrow buttons to the right. These arrow 
buttons move the user backwards or forwards through the topics. 

• The Up button displays the parent topic of the current topic. 

In order to take advantage of all these features, manipulation of the 
text was performed to add the needed annotations and markers for the 
help engine. Manipulation of the graphics was also done in order to 
display a high quality version of the tables, figures, and equations. 

3.6.5.1 Text File Manipulation 

The Government provided electronic documentation for the COMIC 
module via the DoD TEC NET system. Several file formats were provided 
based on the information content. A postscript version of the COMBIC 
documentation was provided along with individual gif files containing the 
figures. The postscript file contained the entire document as seen in hard 
copy. An ASCII text version of the document was also provided by ARL- 
BED for this task. 

Topics were identified by reviewing the provided documentation and 
analyzing the section and paragraph structure. We assumed the section 
structure would translate to the Topic/Subtopic structure. Inappropriate 
sections were omitted and some complex sections were broken down into 
several topics. Keywords were identified by reading the text and 
identifying concepts that were emphasized. Glossary terms consist of 
terms and acronyms that were defined in the documentation. During the 
discussion of a topic in the documentation, we noted when foreign ideas, 
concepts, equations, tables, and figures from other topics were encounter 
We tagged these as candidates for the jump capability that provides 
hypertext movement and allows direct jumps to the defining text in other 
sections. For instance, when a topic refers to an equation in another topic, 
a jump to that equation was provided. 

Annotated text, which means text with embedded commands, was 
needed to add the functionality described above and provide the topic, 
keywords, glossary terms, jumps, and other features of the Help Window. 


25 


This was accomplished by editing the ASCII text file using Microsoft Word. 
The converter that was provided in the GUI development package allowed 
for shortcuts when setting up a help file using a common text editor like 
Microsoft Word. Commands were added to the Microsoft Word version and 
then saved in a rich text format (RTF). We then ran the RTF file through 
the converter which added additional commands before generating the flat 
text files that were used by the help engine. This text file can also be 
edited. 

3.6.5.2 Graphics Manipulation 

Figures were provided in gif file format. However, due to the low 
quality of the gif images, each figure was redrawn and colorized by our 

technical publications department. 

Electronic versions of the tables were only provided in the postscript 
file format. In order to present high quality pictures of these tables, each 
table was regenerated by support staff using Microsoft Word and a 

graphics tool. 

Electronic copies of the equations were also only provided in the 

postscript file. Several methods of separating the equations were 

investigated. First, each equation was reproduced using an equation 
editor. Late in the effort, extraction from the postscript file was 
investigated. Postscript viewers were used to view the file and save 
individual equations as gif files. Manipulation on these files were limited 
and scaling tricky. An example of an equation pulled from the postscript 
file is provided in Figure 15. 




File Edit 


Help 


Index 


Back I History 


Same level topics ± 


jDloud Descriptions: The Phase I Output File 

COMBIC describes obscurant clouds as combinations of subclouds. 
Each subcloud is defined as either a single Gaussian puff or as a 
continuous Gaussian plume. COMBIC further distinguishes subclouds 
as buoyant or nonbuoyant depending upon whether heat is released 
into the cloud during the formation process. 

A Gaussian puff is an ellipsoidal volume with concentration which is 
greatest at its center (pec, yc,ze) and which decreases with distance 
according to scaling lengths (ssc, sy, Si). The concentration at any point 
(pc,y,z) relative to a Gaussian puff centered on (pcc,yc,zc) and containing 
a total mass of obscurant [Sauter and Hansen, 1990] At is then 


^nation I 


C{x,y,z) = 




where J> is a dimensionless scaled distance: 


Figure 15. Postscript Equation Example 


3.6.5.3 Detailed Help Window Button Descriptions 

Figure 15 again shows an example of the help screen main window. 
As previously mentioned, various buttons are available to help the user 
navigate through the on-line help system. Each button and each type of 
colored text are covered in detail here. 

Ho m e 

The Home button will return the user to the Welcome screen shown 
in Figure 14. 


27 





















Contents 


The Cbntents button opens a new window that lists all the topics as 
seen in Figure 16. The user can select a particular topic and display that 
topic in the main help window by double clicking the topic or selecting the 
topic and clicking the to ..." button. 


Contents 


1 COMBIC Welcome 

□ 

COMBIC Table of Contents 

Abstract 

Introduction 

Model Capabilities 

Model Changes and Extensions 

Obscurant Sources 

Munitions 

Muzzle Blasts 

Smoldering 

_Phase II Printer Pints_ 

■ 

□ 


Go to ... 


Figure 16. Help Contents Screen 


In d ex 

The Index button brings up an Index window, shown in Figure 17, 
that displays a list of keywords. This window is divided into two scrollable 
areas. The top portion of the window displays keywords that have been 
flagged as index entries. The bottom portion displays topics where the 
selected keyword is discussed. The user can then display in the main help 
window the selected topic by double clicking the topic or selecting the 
topic and clicking the "Goto ..." button. 













|j aerosols 


barrage 

Beer-Lamber Law 
Beer-Lambert's Law 
boundry layer model 
Bouyancy Radius 
bouyant rise 
burn duration 
Burn Rate 
Burn Rate Profiie 

Appears in topics...: 


Terminology, Definitions, and Conventions 


Adjustments, Initial Conditions and Scaling in the Buoyancy 
The Smoke Model - Source Characteristics and Cloud Descrip 
Mass Extinction Coefficients - The Extinction input Record b 


I 



Figure 17. Help Index Screen 


Back 


The Back button will take the user to the last topic visited. 


History 

The History button will bring the History window that displays a 
chronological list of topics that the user has visited during this session, 
ordered from most recent visits at the top, to least recent visits at the 
bottom. This is shown in Figure 18. The user can return to any topic by 
double clicking the topic or by selecting the topic and clicking the "Go To 
button. 


29 












History 


Terminology, Definitions, and Conventions 
Burn Duration 

Terminology, Definitions, and Conventions 
COMBiC Welcome 
COMBIC Table of Contents 
Model Changes and Extensions 
Smoldering 

Modei Changes and Extensions 
COMBiC Table of Contents 
Smoke and Dust Models 


The Smoke Model - Source Characteristics and C 


Go To ... 


Figure 18. Help History Screen 


^ossary 

The Glossary button will open a glossary window as shown in Figure 
19. The Glossary window displays an alphabetical list of all glossary words 
in a scrollable window. If the user clicks and holds the mouse button 
down on one of the terms, a glossary definition pops up in a temporary 
window. When the user releases the mouse button the temporary window 
will close. 











Figure 19. Help Glossary Screen 


Pull Down Menu (Same Level Topics) and Arrows 

The pull down menu defines how the arrow buttons behave. The 
choices are "See same level topics" and "See all topics". "See same level 
topics" causes the arrows to traverse only to topics at the same level as the 
current topic (sibling topics), skipping all lower level topics. "See all topics" 
causes the arrow button to traverse through all topics, lower level 
(children) topics and to higher level (parent) topics, in the order they 
appear in the Contents window. 


3 1 


Up 






The Up button jumps the user to the parent topic of the current 

topic. 

Colored Text Descriptions 

Within the main help window the user will find color coded text. 
Colored text signifies an action or acts as a marker. The colored Text is 
described below and Figure 20 shows an example screen with colored text. 


Help: helpex.doc 


File Edit 


^me 1 ^ntents | Index 


Same level topics ± 


Back 


Help 


History J (Glossary 


JCOMBIC On-Line Help; Table of Contents 

Welcome to the COMBIC on line help. The information presented 
here is divided into topics and subtopics for easy access. Listed 
below are the main topics. Within the topic discussions you will find 
the subtopic lists. 

Abstract 

Introduction 

Model Capabilities 

Model Changes and Extensions 

Terminology, Definitions, and Conventions 

Model Limitations 

Grade of Software 

Model Failure 

Verification and Evaluation of COMBIC 

Operating COMBIC 

Sample Runs 

Phase I Physics 

Smoke and Dust Models 

Munition Default Parameters 


Figure 20. Help Window Welcome Screen 


























Black and Yellow 

Black text with a Yellow back ground indicates the topic title. No 
action will take place when clicking this text. 

Black 

Where text is both Black and Bold and where the cursor also changes 
to a right pointing arrow when placed above this text, a pop up temporary 
window will appear if the mouse button is pressed. For example, the pop 
up window is often used to display a glossary definition or an acronym 
meaning and is the same type of temporary window used with the 
Glossary window. See Figure 21 for an example. 

Blue 

Blue text indicates a jump to another topic or label. Notice that the 
cursor will also change when above the BLUE text. Hint: to return to the 
last topic after choosing a jump, use the Back button. 

Red 

Red text, as shown in Figure 21, indicates a figure or table window 
can be displayed. Clicking on the red text will bring up a new window to 
display a figure, as illustrated in Figure 22, or a table. Notice that the 
cursor will also change. If an additional window is already open, the help 
will reuse that window. To get a new window hold down the control key 
when clicking on the red text. To close the window choose the Close 
button. 



and computation time is reduced. But this simplification is at the 
expense of the detail which can be had by specifying individual 
source locations and times. 


Obscurant clouds are modeled in COMBIC as combinations of 
subclouds having concentrations described by Gaussian 
instantaneous puffs and continuous plumes. Subdouds move 
downwind expand, and perhaps rise due to buoyancy. An example 
of a typical smoke cloud is provided that is modeled as a 
combination of a plume and a puff. Wind shear, temperature 
gradients, relative humidify, surface roughness and wind speed and 
direction can all have an effect on how the cloud rises and expands 
downwind. Optical properties are defined in terms of extinction per unit 
mass concentration for the material in each subcloud. Thus, 
transmittance includes the combined effect of extinction along the 
obseiver-target path for eveiy subcloud along that path. Output 
includes the predicted transmittance at each of the seven EOSAEL 

wavelength regions and the Concentration Length (CL) for each _ 

specified or""^ 

can also mi Concentration Length (CL): the integral of the concentration over the path 
concentratii length through the cloud 

Figure 21. Help Screen Displaying Red, Blue and Bold Text 


33 





Forces Effecting 
Rise of Exolosive Dust. 


Figure 22. Help Figure Window 


3.6.6 FORTRAN Issues 

We learned during the COMBIC prototype development for our Phase 
I contract that certain changes to the EOSAEL code are required to 
successfully compile and link it with the C GUI. When we began the effort 
we used a simple approach to the multi-language problem. The C code was 
compiled with the C compiler to create a C object file and the EOSAEL code 
was compiled with the FORTRAN compiler creating FORTRAN object files. 
This worked fine for a long time in the development of the GUI. Very late 
into the development we encountered a problem with over running the 
64k near data segment on the PC. This happened as more and more of the 
functionality was added to the GUI. The problem is that certain things like 
global variables, function declarations, window initialization routines, C and 
FORTRAN library codes have to go into this near data segment so they can 


34 









readily be found by all parts of the code. Where we had some control over 
the C portion of what went in there, we had no control over the FORTRAN. 
Each and every subroutine and function of the COMBIC EOSAEL code was 
being loaded into a different segment of the near data. To solve this 
problem, we placed the EOSAEL routines into a Dynamic Linked Library 
(DLL). By doing this, it removed all of the FORTRAN code from the near 
data segment and by being dynamically linked loaded them into a 
different section of memory when they were needed. 

Limitations of DLLs forced certain changes to the FORTRAN routines. 
In particular, any manipulation of direct access files (opening, closing, 
reading, or writing) had to be replaced by the use of interfaces to the 
Windows API C routines JLcreat, _lopen, _lclose, _llseek, _hread, and 
Jtwrite. Since these routines use byte addressing, it was necessary to pass 
the data to them in character arrays, rather than numeric arrays. This was 
accomplished by using FORTRAN EQUIVALENCE statements to assign 
character arrays to the same storage locations as the numeric arrays used 
to buffer the data to/from the direct access files. The record number used 
for each direct access read or write was converted to the corresponding 
byte address before calling _llseek to position the file. 

Also, it is illegal to stop execution within a DLL, so any STOP 
statements within the EOSAEL code were replaced with RETURN statements 
(if a labeled STOP was used, the label was printed to the primary output 
file prior to the RETURN statement). Finally, any files that were accessed 
within EOSAEL had to be opened and closed explicitly within the DLL. We 
wrote simple interface routines for COMBIC to open and close the primary 
output file. 

To test that the changes made, did not affect the results of the 
COMBIC code, SPARTA ran the COMBIC User’s Guide examples with the DLL 
version of COMBIC and a non-GUI version of COMBIC. We had perfect 
matches in all four cases. SPARTA verified that these cases were 
comprehensive enough to have exercised all areas of the code that were 
changed to accommodate the direct access read/writes. Note: The DLL 
version and the non-GUI version results matched, they however did not 
match the results in the printed document. We are certain this is related 
to the fact that we had to remove the -Fpi87 compiler option from the DLL 
compile. This affects how the floating point mathematics is handled. The 
final answers did not match, but they were off by less than a percent. The 
non-GUI version was also compiled without -Fpi87 and the fact that the 
two give exact answers backs up our belief that this is the reason. 




3.7 Place and Execute the COMBIC Prototype on a CD ROM 


SPARTA, Inc. purchased and used a software package by Stirling 
Technologies to generate a professional installation routine for COMBIC. 
With this software, we were able to set up COMBIC to install and run from 
the user’s hard-drive or run from the CD. This software also automatically 
generates an uninstall routine. 

Once the setup routine was created and tested, SPARTA used internal 
resources to record the CD. For COMBIC, this was a simple process with 
COMBIC only requiring 10 MB of the CD ROM. Through this effort, it was 
clearly seen how this process could be applied and modified to the 
complete EOSAEL installation. Example setup screens are shown if Figures 
23 and 24. 


Setup EOSAEL Library 


Installing COMBIC 



Figure 23. Installation Option Screen 


36 













Select Components 


Select the installation type you would like to use. 

Select only one option. Click Next to continue with the installation. 

®' ji n sta ll COMB I C to the H ard Dr ivel 

O Run COMBIC from the CD Rom - Working Directory on the Hard Drive 


< Back I Next > 


Cancel 


Figure 24. Decompress Scress 













4.0 Results of Phase I Effort 


The objectives of the Phase I effort were to (1) develop a plan to 
interface all EOSAEL modules to a PC/Windows environment, (2) plan the 
Graphical User Interface (GUI) front ends for each module, (3) create 
unique identifiable icons for each module, (4) develop a prototype for the 
Combined Obscuration Model for Battlefield Induced Contaminants 
(COMBIC) module, and (5) install and execute the COMBIC prototype 
Windows application on a CD ROM. We have accomplished these objective 
as our discussions in Section 2 will support. However, we also 

accomplished a very important secondary objective by providing cross¬ 
platform capability for the COMBIC/GUI prototype by using Neuron Data's 
Open Interface toolkit to develop the required Graphical User Interface 
(GUI). 


Specific accomplishments of the Phase I effort are as follows: 

(1) We designed and produced a graphical icon for each of the 
EOSAEL modules that visually portrays the physical phenomenon 
represented in the module. 

(2) We designed GUIs for all the modules that organize the inputs 
into logically partitioned input screens and provide simple 'point 
and click' access to all the inputs. 

(3) We implemented the GUI for COMBIC and successfully integrated 
it with the COMBIC FORTRAN code, verifying that it produced 
output identical to that produced by the card-image input version 
of COMBIC. 

(4) We incorporated a comprehensive on-line help capability into 
COMBIC, including context sensitive help windows and a complete 
user's manual with hypertext for accessing topics of interest and 
pop-up windows for figures and equations. When the cursor is 
moved over an area for which context sensitive help is available, 
a visible change in the appearance of the cursor occurs as a signal 
to the user. 

(5) We demonstrated cross-platform capability of the COMBIC/GUI 
prototype by installing and executing it on Macintosh and Sun 
UNIX platforms, generating identical COMBIC input files to that 
produced in the PC/Windows environment. 

(6) We recorded the enhanced COMBIC on a CD ROM and successfully 
executed the program from the CD ROM. 


38 



5.0 Technical Feasibility for Completing all EOSAEL Interfaces 

We have demonstrated the soundness of our technical approach for 
interfacing all of the EOSAEL modules by successfully applying our 
approach to the COMBIC module. We have produced a multi-language 
program with the Windows interface routines written in C to provide all 
the program's calls to the Windows Applied Programming Interface (API) 
library and the COMBIC module of the EOSAEL family of models remaining 
essentially unchanged (with the exception of certain changes in direct 
access file addressing and program control required by the Microsoft 
C/FORTRAN interface) in FORTRAN to provide the computational services of 
the COMBIC module and to perform file input and output required of 
COMBIC. COMBIC is among the most complex of the EOSAEL modules. 
Therefore, the success of the COMBIC/GUI prototype development and CD 
ROM installation establishes the feasibility of GUI development for the 
entire EOSAEL suite. 


39 




APPENDIX A 


Draft Module Interface Design 





Appendix A 
List of Figures 

Figure A-1. BITS Input Menu Choices.1 

Figure A-2. BITS Case Name Screen.1 

Figure A-3. BITS Waveband Screen.2 

Figure A-4. BITS Mass Extinction Coefficient Screen.2 

Figure A-5. BITS Atmospheric Transmittance Screen.3 

Figure A-6. BITS Spectral Signature of Target Screen.4 

Figure A-7. BITS Detector Spectral Response Screen.5 

Figure A-8. BITS Filter Spectral Response Screen.6 

Figure A-9. BITS System Optics Spectral Response Screen.7 

Figure A-10. BITS Concentration Length Screen.8 

Figure A-11. CLIMAT Input Menu Choices.9 

Figure A-12. CLIMAT Climatology Data Screen.9 

Figure A-13. COPTER Input Menu Choices.10 

Figure A-15. COPTER Helicopter Type and Path Screen.11 

Figure A-16. COPTER Surface Condition (Snow).12 

Figure A-17. COPTER Surface Conditions (Dust).12 

Figure A-18. COPTER Transceiver and Receiver Coordinates Screen...13 

Figure A-19. COPTER Meteorological Data Screen.14 

Figure A-20. COPTER Output Specification Screen.14 

Figure A-21. FASCAT Input Menu Choices.15 

Figure A-22. FASCAT Title Screen..15 

Figure A-23. FASCAT Run and Output Options Screen.16 

Figure A-24. FASCAT Background Component Screen.16 

Figure A-25. FASCAT Location, Date and Time Screen.17 

Figure A-26. FASCAT Extraterrestrial Solar Irradiance Screen. .17 

Figure A-27. FASCAT Azimuth Viewing Angles Screen.18 

Figure A-28. FASCAT Zenith Viewing Angles Screen.18 

Figure A-29. FASCAT Definition of Optical Properties, Option 1.19 

Figure A-30. FASCAT Definition of Optical Properties, Option 2.20 

Figure A-31. FASCAT Definition of Optical Properties, Option 3.20 

Figure A-32. FASCAT Definition of Optical Properties, Option 4.....21 

Figure A-33. Definition of Optical Properties, Option 5.21 

Figure A-34. FASCAT Beta Angle and Phase Function Screen.22 

Figure A-35. FASCAT Cloud Layer Information Screen.22 

Figure A-36. FASCAT Target-Observer Combination Screen.23 

A-i 










































Figure A-37. FASCAT Upward Path of Sight Screen.24 

Figure A-38. FITTE Input Menu Choices.25 

Figure A-39. FITTE Reference Screen.26 

Figure A-40. FITTE Laser Data Screen.26 

Figure A-4I. FITTE Image Parameters Screen.27 

Figure A-43. FITTE Fire Location Data Screen.28 

Figure A-44. FITTE Waveband Calculation Control Screen.28 

Figure A-45. FITTE Optional Parameters for Calculation Control Screen.29 

Figure A-46. FITTE Time-Series Calculation Control Screen.29 

Figure A-47. FITTE Variation of Fire Parameters Screen.30 

Figure A-48. FITTE Molecular Effects Calculation Control Screen.30 

Figure A-49. FITTE Meteorological Screen.31 

Figure A-50. FITTE Line of Sight Data Screen.31 

Figure A-51. GRNADE Input Menu Choices.32 

Figure A-52. GRNADE Title Screen.32 

Figure A-53. GRNADE Scenario Control Data Screen.33 

Figure A-54. GRNADE Launcher and Salvo Data Screen.34 

Figure A-55. GRNADE Threat Screen.35 

Figure A-56. GRNADE Meteorological Screen.35 

Figure A-57. GRNADE Stability Screen.36 

Figure A-58. GRNADE Munition Data Screen. 36 

Figure A-59. GRNADE Auxiliary Target Screen.37 

Figure A-60. GRNADE Mass Extinction Coefficients Screen.37 

Figure A-61. GRNADE Source Screen.38 

Figure A-62. ILUMA Input Menu Choices.38 

Figure A-63. ILUMA Location, Date and Time Screen.39 

Figure A-64. ILUMA Single Layer Option Screen.40 

Figure A-65. ILUMA Three Layer Option Screen.40 

Figure A-66. KWIK Input Menu Choices. 41 

Figure A-67. KWIK Screen and LOS Definition Screen.41 

Figure A-68. KWIK Meteorological Data Screen.42 

Figure A-69. KWIK Pasquill Category Calculation Screen.42 

Figure A-70. KWIK Munition Type Screen.43 

Figure A-71. LASS Mode and Input Menus Choices, Option 1.43 

Figure A-72. LASS Mode and Input Menus Choices, Option 2.44 

Figure A-73. LASS Line Of Sight (LOS) Definition Screen.44 

Figure A-74. LASS Coordinate Picture Screen.45 

Figure A-75. LASS Source Centerline Coordinates Screen.46 

A-ii 












































Figure A-76. LASS Munitions and Obscurant Data Screen.46 

Figure A-77. LASS Meteorological Screen.47 

Figure A-78. LASS Contour Map Parameters Screen.47 

Figure A-79. LASS Plot Screen.48 

Figure A-80. LASS Source Data Screen.48 

Figure A-8L LASS Options Screen.49 

Figure A-82. LASS Obscurant Optical Properties Screen.49 

Figure A-83. LASS Solar and Sky Data Screen.50 

Figure A-84. LASS Target and Background Albedos Screen.50 

Figure A-85. LASS Azimuth Calculations Screen.51 

Figure A-86. LZTRAN Input Menu Choices Input.51 

Figure A-87 LZTRAN Atmospheric Screen.52 

Figure A-88. LZTRAN Altitude, Temperature and Water Pressure Profiles Screen.53 

Figure A-89. LZTRAN Target and Laser Position Screen.53 

Figure A-90. MPLUME Input Menu Choices.54 

Figure A-91. MPLUME Atmospheric Screen.55 

Figure A-92. MPLUME Seeker Screen. 56 

Figure A-93. MPLUME Target Screen..56 

Figure A-94. MPLUME Contrast Screen.57 

Figure A-95. MPLUME FLIR Screen.58 

Figure A-96. MPLUME TV Screen. 58 

Figure A-97. MPLUME Missile Screen and TV Screen.59 

Figure A-98. MPLUME Radiance Screen... 59 

Figure A-99. NBSCAT Input Menu Choices.60 

Figure A-100. NBSCAT Run Parameter Screen.61 

Figure A-101. NBSCAT Source Parameter Screen.61 

Figure A-102. NBSCAT Receiver Parameter Screen.62 

Figure A-103. NBSCAT Medium Parameter Screen... 62 

Figure A-104. NBSCAT Aerosol Parameter Screen.. 63 

Figure A-105. NBSCAT Aerosol Parameter Screen.64 

Figure A-106. NMMW Input Menu Choices.65 

Figure A-107. NMMW General Parameters Screen.65 

Figure A-108. NMMW Meteorological Data Screen.66 

Figure A-109. NOVAE Input Menu Choices. 67 

Figure A-110. NOVAE Laser Screen.68 

Figure A-111. NOVAE Atmosphere and Environment Screen.69 

Figure A-112. NOVAE Target Screen.70 

Figure A-113. NOVAE Option and Control Screen.71 


A-iii 












































Figure A-114. NOVAE Breakdown and Vaporization Screen.71 

Figure A-115. NOVAE Modeling and Computation Options Screen.72 

Figure A-116. NOVAE Aerosol and Cloud Characteristics Screen.73 

Figure A-117. NOVAE Vaporization Characteristics Screen.74 

Figure A-118. NOVAE Absorption and Extinction Coefficient Profiling Screen.74 

Figure A-119. NOVAE Wind Profile Screen.75 

Figure A-120. NOVAE Stimulated Raman Scattering Screen.75 

Figure A-121. RADAR Input Menu Choices.76 

Figure A-122. RADAR Options Screen .76 

Figure A-123. RADAR Transmission Screen.77 

Figure A-124. RADAR Beam Screen.77 

Figure A-125. RADAR Detection Screen.78 

Figure A-126. RADAR Atmospheric Screen.78 

Figure A-127. RADAR Antenna Loss Screen.79 

Figure A-128. RADAR Target Screen.79 

Figure A-129. RADAR Dielectric Screen.80 

Figure A-130. RADAR Clutter Screen.80 

Figure A-131. REFRAC Input Menu Choices.81 

Figure A-132. REFRAC Terrain Screen, Option 1.82 

Figure A-133. REFRAC Terrain Screen, Option 2. 83 

Figure A-134. REFRAC Terrain Screen, Option 3.83 

Figure A-135. REFRAC Terrain Screen, Option 4.84 

Figure A-136. REFRAC Altitude Specifications Screen... 84 

Figure A-137. REFRAC Temperature Gradient Screen.85 

Figure A-138. REFRAC Temperature Gradient Screen.85 

Figure A-139. REFRAC Climatology Screen.86 

Figure A-140. REFRAC Beam Source Screen.87 

Figure A-141. TARGAC Input Menu Choices.88 

Figure A-142. TARGAC Sensor Type Screen... 89 

Figure A-143. TARGAC Acquisition Data Screen.89 

Figure A-144. TARGAC Climatology Data Screen.90 

Figure A-145. TARGAC Sensor Coefficient Screen. 90 

Figure A-146. TARGAC Optical Contrast Screen.91 

Figure A-147. TARGAC Geometry Screen.92 

Figure A-148. TARGAC Target Thermal Signature Screen.92 

Figure A-149. TARGAC High Cloud Screen.93 

Figure A-150. TARGAC Middle Cloud Screen.93 

Figure A-151. TARGAC Low Cloud Screen.94 

A-iv 











































A.l 


Broadband Integrated Transmittances (BITS) Module 


The Broadband Integrated Transmittances (BITS) module provides 
exact transmittance calculations for broadband systems operating in the 
ultraviolet through the far-infrared spectral regions by accounting for 
spectral dependence of the Beer-Lambert law across system bands. The 
user can specify data for multiple runs. BITS can optionally use a LOWTRN 
output file as Atmospheric input and optionally use a COMBIC output file 
as Concentration Length input. These options are described below in the 
Atmospheric Transmittance screen section and the Concentration Length 
screen section. Figure A-1 shows the Input Menu Choices. BITS input 
screens are Case Name, Waveband, Atmospheric Transmittance, Spectral 
Signature of Target, Detector Spectral Response, Filter Spectral Response, 
System Optics Spectral Response, and Concentration Length. 


BITS 

Input Menu 
Case Name 
Waveband 

Mass Extinction Coefficient 
Atmospheric Transmittance 
Spectral Signature of Target 
Detector Spectral Response 
Filter Spectral Response 
System Optics Spectral Response 
Concentration Length 


Figure A-1. BITS Input Menu Choices 

The Case Name screen, shown in A-2, incorporates data from the 
NAME card. This screen gives the user the opportunity to name this 
particular case for future reference. These data are not required. 


Case Marne 


Name (INAME): 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-2. BITS Case Name Screen 












The Waveband screen, shown in A-3, incorporates data from the 
BAND card. These data are required. 


Uaueband 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Short -wavelength Limit 

lAERO 

jjLm 

Long-wavelength Limit 

RD 

IJLm 

Spectral Resolution 

RNRT 

IJLm 


User 

Values 


Figure A-3. BITS Waveband Screen 

The Mass Extinction Coefficient screen, shown in A-4, incorporates 
data from the ALFA, EXTR, and EXTQ cards. Parameter Units, Wavelength, 
and Atmospheric Transmittance are dependent on the choice of the first 
parameter. These parameters will only become active when applicable. 
Active data on this screen are required. 



Figure A-4. BITS Mass Extinction Coefficient Screen 


I 

I 


A-2 








































The Atmospheric Transmittance screen, shown in A-5, incorporates 
data from the ATMO, ATMR, and ATMQ cards. Parameters 2-6, 

Wavelength, and Atmospheric Transmittance are dependent on the choice 
of the first parameter. These parameters will only become active when 
applicable. If the user chooses to use a LOWTRN data output file, specified 
by the first parameter, the user will have the option to specify an existing 
LOWTRN output file or specify LOWTRN data for a new run and use this 
new output data as input. Active data on this screen are required. 



■fi. ■ ' 

Code 

Variable 

Units 


III 

•User f; 
Values 


Atmospheric Transmlttances as a 
Function of Wavelength Option 

lOPTN 

- 

|±| User Input 

Parameter Units 

lUNIT 

- 

# um O 

Number of Header Lines 

NHEAD 

- 


Wavelengths Column Number 

WVCOL 

- 


Atmospheric Transmlttances 
Column Number 

TRNCOL 

- 


Filename 

LFLE 

- 



1 Wavelength (u>m) 

Atmospheric 
Transmittance (urn) 

Wavelength (ixm) 

Atmospheric 
Transmittance (Uni) 


































OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-5. BITS Atmospheric Transmittance Screen 


A-3 





































The Spectral Signature of Target screen, shown in A-6, incorporates 
data from the TRGT, TGTR, and TGTQ cards. Parameters 2-3, Wavelength 
and Target Signal are dependent on the choice of the first parameter. 

These parameters will only become active when applicable. Active data on 
this screen are required. 



Figure A-6. BITS Spectral Signature of Target Screen 



































The Detector Spectral Response screen, shown in Figure A-7, 
incorporates data from the DECT, DETR, and DETQ cards. Parameter Unit, 
Wavelength, and Detector Response are dependent on the choice of the 
first parameter. These parameters will only become active when 
applicable. 



Figure A-7. BITS Detector Spectral Response Screen 


A-5 

























The Filter Spectral Response screen, shown in Figure A-8, 
incorporates data from the FILT, FILR, and FILQ cards. Parameter, 
Wavelength, and Filter Response are dependent on the choice of the first 
parameter. These parameters will only become active when applicable. 
Active data on this screen are required. 



Figure A-8. BITS Filter Spectral Response Screen 


A-6 




























The System Optics Spectral Response screen, shown in Figure A-9, 
incorporates data from the SYSM, SYSR, and SYSQ cards. Parameter, 
Wavelength, and System Optics Response are dependent on the choice of 
the first parameter. These parameters will only become active when 
applicable. Active data on this card are required. 



Figure A-9. BITS System Optics Spectral Response Screen 


A-7 





























The Concentration Length screen, shown in Figure A-10, incorporates 
data from the CONL, CONR, and CONQ cards. Parameters 2-5, Time, and 
Concentration Length are dependent on the choice of the first parameter. 
These parameters will only become active when applicable. If the user 
chooses to use a COMBIC data output file, specified by the first parameter, 
the user can either specify an existing output file or specify COMBIC data 
for a new run and use this new output file as input. Active data on this 
card are required. 



Figure A-10. BITS Concentration Length Screen 


A-8 



































A.2 Climatology (CLIMAX) Module 


The Climatology (CLIMAT) module calculates and provides 
climatology data in both a standalone mode and as input to other modules. 
The user can specify data for multiple runs. The CLIMAT documentation 
indicates that CLIMAT generated data can supply input to all other 
modules. However, some modules, do not indicate whether that is an 
option. An example of this is the COPTER module. Where the potential to 
use CLIMAT is present, we have assumed that this will be implemented as 
part of Phase II. Figure A-II shows the CLIMAT Input Menu Choices. All 
input is captured in one screen, the Climatology Data Screen. 


Figure A-11. CLIMAT Input Menu Choices 

Figure A-12 shows the Climatology Input screen and incorporates all 
the variables found on the CLIMAT card. The Climatology Data Flag 
(ICLMAT) can be overruled by other modules. When specifying data for 
each module where climatology data is used, the user can choose then 
whether to use user specified data or use CLIMAT data. 







































A.3 Obsuration Due to Helicopter Lofted Snow and Dust 

(COPTER) Module 

Obsuration due to helicopter lofted snow and dust (COPTER) module 
calculates obscuration as a function of time due to snow or dust lofted by 
the downwash of a passing helicopter. The user may specify data for 
multiple runs. The Wavelength is required and should be specified by the 
EOEXEC drivers wavelength screen. Figure A-13 shows the Input Menu 
Choices. COPTER input screens are Time Specifications, Helicopter Type and 
Path, Surface Condition, Transceiver and Receiver Coordinates, 
Meteorological Data, and Output Specifications. 


COPTER 

Input Menu 
Time Specifications 
Helicopter Type and Path 
Surface Condition 

Transceiver and Receiver Coordinates 
Meteorological Data 
Output Specification 


Figure A-13. COPTER Input Menu Choices 

The Time Specifications screen captures the same data the TIME card 
captured. Data on this card are required. When these data are not 
defined, the default values will be used. Figure A-14 illustrates the Time 
Specifications screen. 


Time Specificatione 


iii 

i 

' .Parameter 

V. ■' ■' 

Code 

Variable 


Values 

start Time 

TSTART 

S 

0 

Time Increment 

TINC 

s 

1 

Time End 

TEND 

s 

When the transmission 
returns to normal 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-14. COPTER Time Specifications Screen 


A-10 






The HELI and PATH cards are combined on the Helicopter Type and 
Path screen and is illustrated in Figure A-15. The parameters Mission 
Weight/Mass, Rotor Diameter and Number of Rotors are dependent on the 
choice of the Helicopter Type. The user will be unable to change these 
values unless the Helicopter Type is "Special Case". Then these variables 
will need to be specified by the user. Data from this screen are required. 



Figure A-15. COPTER Helicopter Type and Path Screen 


A-11 

















































The Surface Condition screen captures the SNOW and DUST cards and 
is shown in Figures A-16 and A-17. The user must specify either the Snow 
or Dust parameters. The first parameter will change based on this choice. 
Data on this screen are required. 


Surface Condition (Snoui) 


I 


Specify ... O Snom O Dust 



lililiiiliiilfi&tur! 



Surface Condition 


Scaling Transmission 3 u.m to 5 u.m 

or Extinction Ratio - 

for Each Band; 8uLmto12uLm 


Millimeter Wavelength of Interest 


Code 

Variable 


SNOCOD 


EXRMIR 


EXRFIR 


WAVMN 


User 

Values 




Figure A-16. COPTER Surface Condition (Snow) 


Surface Condition (Dust) 


Specify ... O Snouj O Dust 




Parifrteter 


Surface Condition 


Scaling Transmission 3 urn to 5 um 

or Extinction Ratio - 

for Each Band: 8uLmtol2uLm 


Millimeter Wavelength of Interest 


Code 

Variable 


DSTCOD 


EXRMIR 


EXRFIR 


WAVMN 


User 

Vaiiies 



Figure A-17. COPTER Surface Conditions (Dust) 


A-12 









































The Transceiver and Receiver Coordinates screen captures data found on 
the GEOM card. Audits shown in Figure A-18. The transceiver and 
receiver coordinates along with the helicopter starting position could be 
specified as a point and click lay down as in COMBIC. An example is 
described in the COMBIC Module Prototype Development section, Section 
3.6. This implementation decision will be determined in Phase II. Data on 
this screen are required. 


Receiuer and Tnansmitten Coordinates 



Code 

Variable 

DB 


Receivsr Position 

X 

RCOORD(I) 

km 


D 

RC00RD(2) 

km 


z 

RC00RD(3) 

km 


Transmitter Position 

X 

TCOORD(I) 

km 


D 

TC00RD(2) 

km 


z 

TC00RD(3) 

km 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-18. COPTER Transceiver and Receiver Coordinates Screen 


A-13 


































The Meteorological Data input screen shown in Figure A-19 allows 
the user to specify whether to use CLIMAT data or user specified data. 
When the user chooses to use CLIMAT data, applicable parameters will 
become inactive. This screen captures the METR card and is required. 
Note that based on the current documentation, COPTER does not specify 
that input from CLIMAT can be used but the potential is present to do so. 
This implementation assumes this capability will be added in Phase II. 



Figure A-19. COPTER Meteorological Data Screen 

Figure A-20 shows the Output Specification screen and captures the 
PLOT and TXTP cards. This screen is optional and if not specified, defaults 
will be used. 


Output Spec i f i cat i on;: 



Figure A-20. COPTER Output Specification Screen 




















































A.4 Fast Atmospheric Scattering (FASCAT) Model 

The FASCAT module is a fast atmospheric scattering model for 
calculating apparent background and target radiance fields. Under the 
card system, multiple runs were not supported, this option to run multiple 
scenarios could be added and will be an implementation decision made in 
Phase II. FASCAT can optionally use LOWTRN aerosol models to construct 
data entries for the optical profiles. See the optical profiles section below 
for more details. Figure A-21 shows the Input Menu Choices. FASCAT 
input screens are Title, Run and Output Options, Background Component, 
Location, Date and Time, Extraterrestrial Solar Irradiance, Azimuth 
Viewing Angles, Zenith Viewing Angles, Optical Profiles, Beta Angle and 
Phase Function, Cloud Layer Information, Sensor and Target Combinations, 
and Upward Path of Sight. 


FASCAT 

Input Menu 

Run and Output Options 
Date, Time and Location 
Background Component 
Azimuth Viewing Angles 
Zenith Viewing Angles 
Optical Profiles ^ Beta Angle and Phase 
Functions 

Cloud Layer Information 
Sensor and Target Combinations 
Upward Path of Sight 


Figure A-21. FASCAT Input Menu Choices 

The Title screen is shown in Figure A-22 and incorporates data from 
the TITLE card. Data from this screen is not required and is present as a 
convenience to the user. 



A-15 














The Run and Output Options screen is shown in Figure A-23 and 
incorporates data from the IPRF card. 


Run and Output Options 



Code 

Variable 

Units 

; User , 

Values 

Print Option 

IPRINT 

- 

O Ignore O flctiuate 

Store Option 

1 STORE 

- 

O Ignore O flctiuate 

Reflectance Option 

ISEA 

- 

O Ignore O flctiuate 



OK 

I— 


Figure A-23. FASCAT Run and Output Options Screen 


The Background Component screen is shown in Figure A-24 and 
incorporates data from the ALBF card. Data from this card are required. 


Background Component 



Code 

Variable 

Units 


Average Surface Reflectance 

ALB 



Representative Wavelength 

LAMDA 

IJLm 


Base Altitude of Top Layer 

BAT 

km 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-24. FASCAT Background Component Screen 


A-16 












































The Location, Date and Time screen is shown in Figure A-25 and 
incorporates data from the ZENF, DAYF and THTF cards. The user must 
specify whether to specify Solar Zenith Angle or Local Time. The screen 
changes accordingly. Data on this screen are required. 



Location^ Date and Time 




. Code 
Variable 

Units 

Julian Date 

JULIAN 

- 

Latitude 

XLAT 

degrees 

0 Specify Solar Zenith Angle 

O Specify Local Time 

THETAS 

degrees 


User 

Values 



Figure A-25. FASCAT Location, Date and Time Screen 

The Extraterrestrial Solar Irradiance screen is shown in Figure A-26 
and incorporates data from the FACF card. Data on this screen are 
required. 



Extraternestria! Solan Innadiance 



Code 

Variable 

Extraterrestrial Solar Irradiance 

FAC 




Figure A-26. FASCAT Extraterrestrial Solar Irradiance Screen 


A-17 



























The Azimuth Viewing Angles and Zenith Viewing Angles screens are 
shown in Figures A-27 and A-28. These screen correspond to the NPHF, 
PHIF, NTHF and THFl cards. The user can choose to use the defaults or 
specify the data. Data from these screens are required. 


flziiTiuth Uieuiing Angies 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 


PHINT(I) 

degrees 

0 

Azinnuth Viewing Angles 

PHINT(2) 

degrees 

90 


PHINT(3) 

degrees 

180 






Cancel 


Figure A-27. FASCAT Azimuth Viewing Angles Screen 


I 

I 

I 


FflSCflT Zenith Uieiuing Angles 


O Specify Ualues O Use Default Ualues 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Zenith Viewing Angles 

THETA(J) 

degrees 


D 

User 

Values 

D 

User 

Values 

1 

5 

1 1 

100 

2 

15 

12 

105 

3 

25 

la 

1 10 

4 

35 

14 

1 15 

5 

45 

15 

125 

6 

55 

16 

135 

7 

65 

17 

145 

8 

75 

18 

155 

9 

85 

19 

165 

10 

95 

20 

175 


Display 

Defaults 


Clear 

Ualues 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-28. FASCAT Zenith Viewing Angles Screen 


A-18 








































































I 

I 

I 

I 


The Optical Profiles screen incorporate data from the NLYF, ISPF, 
ZLDFF, INDF, and the TDEF cards. Because the Aerosol Type of Atmospheric 
layer parameter dictates what other parameters are needed, the inputs on 
this screen change based on this choice. These variations are shown in 
Figures A-29 - A-33. Figure A-31 is displayed when the Aerosol type of 
Atmospheric Layer parameter is either 31, 32, 33 or 34 (Enter Phase 
Function Calculation). From this screen the user can the bring the Beta 
Angle and Phase Function screen to specify such data. This screen is 
shown in Figure A-34. From this screen, the user can add a Beta Angle and 
Phase Function pair one at a time or specify on the previous screen the 
number to be of Beta Angle and Phase Functions to be specified. If the 
user adds combinations from this screen the result will be reflected on the 
previous screen. Figure A-33 is displayed when the Aerosol Type of 
Atmospheric Layer parameter is 5 (Use LOWTRN models). From this 
screen the user chooses which LOWTRN model to use. 


Definition of Optical Properties Layer 1 of 5 


[ ; Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Type Desription 

Aerosol Type of 
Atmospheric Layer 

ISPF(ILAV) 

- 

l±l 1 

Calculates Phase 
Functions 


4 Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Base Altitude of Layer 

ZL 

km 


Single-Scattering Albedo 

w 

- 


Scattering Ratio 

Q 

- 















Rdd 

Delete 

OK 



Figure A-29. FASCAT Definition of Optical Properties, Option 1 


A-19 































Figure A-30. FASCAT Definition of Optical Properties, Option 2 



Figure A-31. FASCAT Definition of Optical Properties, Option 3 

























































Definition of Optical Properties Layer 4 of 5 


Parameter 


Aerosol Type of 
Atmospheric Layer 


Parameter 


Code I, -x User 
Variable Values 


Code 

Variable 


Base Altitude of Layer 


Single-Scattering Albedo 


Scattering Ratio 


Aerosol Asymmetry Factor 


Aerosol Asymmetry Factor 


Partitioning Factor 



Type Desrlptlon 


H-G Phase 

Function Calculation 


User 

Values 




Delete 

OK 


Figure A-32. FASCAT Definition of Optical Properties, Option 4 



Figure A-33. Definition of Optical Properties, Option 5 

A-21 
































































Figure A-34. FASCAT Beta Angle and Phase Function Screen 

The Cloud Layer Information screen incorporates the cards NCLF, and 
ALTF and is shown in Figure A-35. This screen can be repeated as needed. 
The user can add a new screen by choosing the Add button. The user can 
move to the next or previous screens by using the arrows at the top of the 
screen. The user can delete the current screen by choosing the Delete 
button. The number of Cloud Layer Information screens is shown by the 
top line of each screen. 


FflSCflT Cloud Layer* Infonmatlon 


Cloud Layers 1 of 2 □ 


Units 



Code 

Variable 

Top Altitude of Cloud Layer 

ALTOP 

Base Altitude of Cloud Layer 

ALTBT 

Amount Fraction of Cloud Layer 

AMTFR 

Cloud Type 

ICLOUD 

Relative Optical Thickness 

ICFLAC 


User 

Values 



Cirrus/Cl rrostratus 


Average Optical Thickness 




Rdd 

Delete 

OK 




Figure A-35. FASCAT Cloud Layer Information Screen 


A-22 



















































The Target-Observer Combination screen, shown in Figure A-36, 
incorporates the NDLF, DSNl and DSN2 cards. The user can add additional 
screens by clicking the Add button and can delete the current screen by 
clicking the Delete button. The user can cycle through the screens by using 
the arrows at the top of the screen. 


Target-Observer Combination 3 of 5 


: Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

/Values 

Sensor Altitude Path of Sight 

DSENS 

km 


Target Altitude Path of Sight 

DTARG 

km 


Target Reflectivity 

DTAREF 

- 


Target Normal Zenith Angle 

DZNORM 

degrees 


Target Normal Azimuth Angle 

DANORM 

degrees 


Taret Illumination 

IDTRG 

- 


Local Background Reflectivity 

DBREF 

- 


Background Normal Zenith Angle 

DZSLOP 

degrees 


Background Normal Azimuth Angle 

DASLOP 

degrees 


Background Illumination 

IDLUn 

- 


1 


Rdd 

Delete 

OK 

Cancel 




Figure A-36. FASCAT Target-Observer Combination Screen 















































The Upward Path of Sight screen is shown in Figure A-37 and 
incorporates the NULF and USNl cards. The user can add additional 
screens by clicking the Add button and can delete the current screen by 
clicking the Delete button. The user can cycle through the screens by using 
the arrows at the top of the screen. 


FflSCHT Upward Sight Paths 


Upward Path of Sight 1 of 1 



Variable 

Unita 

User 

. , Values ; 

Sensor Altitude Upward Path of Sight 

DSENS 

km 


Target Altitude Upward Path of Sight 

DTAR6 

km 


Target Reflectivity 

DTAREF 

- 


Target Normal Zenith Angle 

DZNORM 

degrees 


Target Normal Azimuth Angle 

DANORM 

degrees 


Target Illumination 

IDTRG 

- 



Rdd 

Delete 

OK 

Cancel 


Figure A-37. FASCAT Upward Path of Sight Screen 


A-24 


































A.5 Fire Induced Transmittance and Turbulence Effects (FITTE) 
Module 

The Fire Induced Transmittance and Turbulence Effects (FITTE) 
module predicts transmittance through fire plumes path radiance from fire 
plumes and, optionally, effects of fire plume turbulence on laser 
propagation for a given line of sight. The user can specify data for 
multiple runs. FITTE can use data from CLIMAT if indicated to do so on 
the Meteorological screen. Figure A-38 shows the Input Menu Choices. 



FITTE 

Input Menu 
Reference -> Laser 
Imager 
^ Target 
Fire Location 
Optical 
Waveband 

Time-Series Calculation Control 
Molecular Effects Calculation Control 
Meteorological 
Line of Sight 


Figure A-38. FITTE Input Menu Choices 



A-25 









The Reference screen, shown in Figure A-39 incorporates data found 
on the REFD card. These data are required. Based on the Scenario Type 
specified, the user must specify additional inputs by choosing the buttons 
at the bottom of the screen. The choices are Laser Data, Imager 
Parameters, and Target Data for Thermal Emission Calculations and are 
shown in Figures A-40 - A-42. They incorporate data found on the 
following cards, DETD, SCN3 and TARG. When an option is invalid the 
corresponding button will become inactive, and the text will be grayed out. 


Reference Data 



Code 

Variable 

X-axis Heading 

XHEAD 

Fire Type 

ITYPE 

FITTE Scenario Type 

ISCN 

Plume Calculation Flag 

lAVG 

Turbulence Calculation Flag 

NTURB 


: User . 
Values 


Inal 


o 4-D Plume 
O Time-aueraged Plume 


O Do Calculations 
O Cancel Calculations 


Specify ... 

I I Laser Data 

I I Imager Parameters 

I I Target Data for Thermal Emission Calculations 



Figure A-39. FITTE Reference Screen 



Figure A-40. FITTE Laser Data Screen 


A-26 






































Parameter 


Resolution Per Pixel 


Number of Columns of Pixels 


Number of Rows of Pixels 


Type of Data Stored 


Imager Parameters 


Code 

Variable 


ST I ME 


TINC 


NCALC 


VELO 


Units 


mrad 


User 

Values 




O Radiance and Transmittance 
O Apparent Temperature 


Figure A-41. FITTE Image Parameters Screen 


Target Data for Thermal Emission CaIcuI ations| 


Target 

Target 1 “ 

Temperature 

Emissivity 

TTARG 

ETARG 

(n)°C 


- 


* 

A 

w 




Figure A-42. FITTE Target Data Screen 


A-27 

































The Fire Location Data screen, shown in Figure A-43 incorporates 
data found on the SCRL card. Data on this card are required. 


Fire Localion Data 


, Parameter 


Center of Fire 


Base of Fire 


Code 

Variable 

Units 

US(l) 

m 

US(2) 

m 

US(3) 

m 


Values 


Cancel 


Figure A-43. FITTE Fire Location Data Screen 

The Waveband Calculation Control screen, shown in Figure A-44 
incorporates data found on the BAND card. Data on this card are not 
required. 


Parameter 

. Code 
Variable 

Waveband Calculation Flag 

XHEAD 

Beginning Wavenumber of Band 

ITVPE 

Ending Wavenumber of Band 

ISCN 

Number of Intervals in Band 

lAVG 

Instrument Response Function 
Over Waveband 

NTURB 

Printing of Spectrally 
Resolved Values Flag 

NTURB 


Units 


User 

Values ; 


O Single Ulauelength 
O Perform Ulaueband 


O Rectangular 
O Triangular 
O Trapezoidal 


O Do Not Print 
O Print 


Figure A-44. FITTE Waveband Calculation Control Screen 


A-28 























































The Optional Parameters for Calculation Control screen, shown in 
Figure A-45 incorporates data found on the OPTl card. Data on this card 
are not required. 


, Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Fractional Change in Temperature 

TCRITA 

Number of Calculation Steps 
Throuhgh the Plume 

NUniNT 

Number of Path Segments for 
Calculation from Plume to Observer 

NUMSEG 


User 

Values 


Cancel 


Figure A-45. FITTE Optional Parameters for Calculation Control Screen 

The Time-Series Calculation Control screen, shown in Figure A-46 
incorporates data found on the TCAL card. Data on this card are not 
required. 


1 : Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Start Time 

STIME 

Time Increment 

TINC 

Number of Calculations 

NCALC 

Velocity of Observer Toward 
Target along Line of Sight 

VELO 


Units 


■ User, 
Values 


Cancel 












































The Variation of Fire Parameters screen, shown in Figure A-47 
incorporates data found on the SVAR card. Data on this card are not 
required. 


;' Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Fire Mean Temperature 

TEMPIN 

Fractional Multiplier of 
Aerosol Efficiency Factor 

EFFAC 

Radius of Fire 

RADIN 

Burn Time 

BTIME 


Units 


User 

Values 


97316 


Cancel 


Figure A-47. FITTE Variation of Fire Parameters Screen 


The Molecular Effects Calculation Control screen, shown in Figure A- 
48 incorporates data found on the MOLS card. 


, : Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

User 

Values 

Molecular Transmittance 
Calculation Flag 

moL 

O Omit Calculations 

O Include Calculations 

Outside Plume Calculation Flag 

lATM 

O Omit Calculations 

O Include Calculations 


Cancel 


Figure A-48. FITTE Molecular Effects Calculation Control Screen 


A-30 






































The Meteorological screen, shown in Figure A-49 incorporates data 
found on the METD card. These data are required and the user must 
specify to use CLIMAT data or specify the data. If the user chooses to use 
CLIMAT data, amicable parameters will become inactive. 


Neteoro1GgicaI Data 


O Use CLIMRT Data O Use User Specified Data 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Mean Wlndspeed 

UBAR 

Wind Direction 

WDIR 

Pasqulll Stability Category 

IPAS 

Air Temperature 

TAIR 

Air Density 

RHO 

Relative Humidity 

RH 




User 

Values 




100 % 

0 % 



OK 

Cancel 


Figure A-49. FITTE Meteorological Screen 


The Line of Sight Data screen, shown in Figure A-50 incorporates 
data found on the SCEN card. Data on this screen are required. These 
coordinates could also be specified using the point and click method 
utilized in the COMBIC GUI for observers and target positions. An example 
its described in the COMBIC Module Prototype Development section. 

Section 3.6. This implementation decision will be determined in Phase II. 



Figure A-50. FITTE Line of Sight Data Screen 


A-31 
































A.6 Self-Screening Applications (GRNADE) Module 

The Self-Screening Applications (GRNADE) module models the 
transmission through smoke screens produced by multiple round salvos of 
tub-launched L8A1 and M76 self-screening grenades. Under the card 
system, multiple runs was not supported. This option can be added and 
will be an implementation decision made in phase II. GRNADE can 
optionally use CLIMAT to produce the climatology data. Figure A-51 
shows the Input Menu Choices. These GRNADE input screens are Title, 
Scenario Control Data Launcher and Salvo Data, Threat Data, Meteorological 
Data, Stability Data, Munition and Launcher Characteristics, Auxiliary Data, 
Mass Extinction Coefficients and Source Data. 


GRANDE 

Input Menu 
Title 

Scenario Control Data 
Launcher and Salvo Data 
Threat Data 
Meteorological Data 
Stability Data 

Munition and Launcher Characteristics 
Auxiliary Data 

Mass Extinction Coefficients 
Source Data 


Figure A-51. GRNADE Input Menu Choices 


The Title screen, shown in Figure A-52, incorporates data found on 
the HOLL card. Data on this card are not required. 



Figure A-52. GRNADE Title Screen 


A-32 













The Scenario Control Data screen, shown in Figure A-53, incorporates 
data found on the CNTR card. Data on this card are required. 



Figure A-53. GRNADE Scenario Control Data Screen 


A-33 

































The Launcher and Salvo Data screen, shown in Figure A-54, 
incorporates data found on the LAUN card and launcher data from the 
OPTl card. Data on this card are required. 



Salvo Data 













Figure A-54. GRNADE Launcher and Salvo Data Screen 


A-34 





























The Threat screen, shown in Figure A-55, incorporates data found on 
the THRT card. Data on this card are required. 



Figure A-55. GRNADE Threat Screen 

The Meteorological screen, shown in Figure 56, incorporates data 
found on the METR card. These data are required and the user must 
choose to use CLIMAT data, which inactivates all parameters, or choose to 
specify the data. 



Figure A-56. GRNADE Meteorological Screen 


I 

I 


A-35 












































The Stability screen, shown in Figure A-57, incorporates data found 
on the STBL card. Data on this card are required. 


St ah i I it y Dat a 






Virtual Offset , 

XPLUS 

m 

Ambient Air Temperature 

TEMPK 

(x)°C 




Figure A-57. GRNADE Stability Screen 


The Munition Data screen, shown in Figure A-58, incorporates data 
found on the OPTl card. Data on this card are not required. 



Figure A-58. GRNADE Munition Data Screen 


I 

I 

I 


A-36 












































The Auxiliary Target screen, shown in Figure A-59, incorporates data 
found on the OPT2 card. Data on this card are not required. 



Figure A-59. GRNADE Auxiliary Target Screen 


The Mass Extinction Coefficients screen, shown in Figure A-60, 
incorporates data found on the OPT3 card. Data on this card are not 
required. 



Figure A-60. GRNADE Mass Extinction Coefficients Screen 


I 

I 


A-37 












































The Source screen, shown in Figure A-61, incorporates data found on 
the OPT4 card. Data on this card are not required. 



Figure A-61. GRNADE Source Screen 


A.7 ILUMA 

The Natural Illumination Under Realistic Weather Conditions 
(ILUMA) module predicts natural illumination under realistic atmospheric 
conditions. The option will be present for the user to specify data for 
multiple runs. Figure A-62 shows the Input Menu Choices. ILUMA input 
screens are the Location, Date and Time, Single Layer Option, an Three 
Layer Option Screens. 


ILUMA 

Input Menu 

Location Date and Time 
Single Layer Option 
Three Layer Option 


Figure A-62. ILUMA Input Menu Choices 


A-38 


























The Location, Date and Time Screen, shown in Figure A-63, 
incorporates data found on the GEOS and DATE cards. All data on this 
screen are required. 





an 


Specify Location 


■-: «■;; > ? 1 i ?'4 assfeilli 

wmww-mm 




wmwmmmmWmmmmwm- 

||igfl^l|g||| 

SLON 


-90.0 - +90.0 


mmmrnmMrnmmsmmmmm 

RG 

- 

- 



Specify Date and Time 



Figure A-63. ILUMA Location, Date and Time Screen 


A-39 


































The Single Layer Option Screen, shown in Figure A-64, incorporates 
data found on the WEAX card. The Three Layer Option screen shown in 
Figure A-65, incorporates data found on the ALBD, CLFR, AND CLDS cards. 
Either the single or the three layer option must be chosen. 



Figure A-64. ILUMA Single Layer Option Screen 



Figure A-65. ILUMA Three Layer Option Screen 


A-40 























































A.8 Munition Expenditure (KWIK) Module 

The Munition Expenditure (KWIK) module is a smoke munition 
expenditure algorithm that predicts the required number of white 
phosphorus or hexachloroethane howitzer and mortar smoke munitions 
necessary to reduce the probability of target detection to a given level. 

The multiple run option will be available. KWIK can optionally use 
CLIMAT data to specify climatology data. KWIK calls XSCALE during 
execution to determine the transmittance through natural aerosols. Figure 
A-66 shows the Input Menu Choices. Inputs are captured in four input 
screens: Screen and LOS Definition, Meteorological, Pasquill Stability 
Calculation and Munition Type. 


KWIK 

Input Menu 
Screen and Line Sight 
Munition Type 

Meteorological Pasquile Stability Calculation 
Julian Calculation 
Time Calculation 


Figure A-66. KWIK Input Menu Choices 

The Screen and LOS Definition screen is shown in Figure A-67 and 
captures data found on the SCRN card. 


neen and LOS Detinition 




TIME 

min. 


Screen Length . 

XO 

m 


Slant Range Observer Target 

H3 

km 


Elevation Angle 

AST 



Azimuth qf LOS 

DLS 



; terrain Roughness Length 

TRL 

m 


Adverse Weather or 

Hase Correction 

FOG 

- 










Figure A-67. KWIK Screen and LOS Definition Screen 


A-41 
































The Meteorological Data screen captures data found on the METR 
card and is shown in Figure A-68. The user has the choice to use the 
CLIMAT data or specify the data. If the user chooses to use CLIMAT data 
all parameters will become inactive. This screen can invoke the Pasquill 
Category Calculation Screen at the users choice when the user specified 
data option is selected. This screen is shown in Figure A-69 and 
incorporates data from the PASQ card. 



Mean Wlndspeed S3 m/s 

Wind Direction DO (xf 



Figure A-68. KWIK Meteorological Data Screen 



Figure A-69. KWIK Pasquill Category Calculation Screen 


A-42 

































































The Munition Type screen captures data found on the MUNI card and 
is shown in Figure A-70. Data on this screen are required. 



Figure A-70. KWIK Munition Type Screen 


A.9 Large Area Screening Systems (LASS) Module 

The Large Area Screening Systems (LASS) module provides a tool for 
the study of large area screening systems applications and effects. LASS 
documentation does not indicate interaction with other modules, nor does 
it indicate which cards are required. Lass is made up of two models: the 
Transport and Diffusion model and the Radiative Transfer model. Figure 
A-71 and A-72 show the Mode and Input Menu Choices for each model 
respectively. The user signifies which model to use from the Mode menu. 
The Input Menu choices change accordingly. Input for the Transport and 
Diffusion Model is captured in eight input screens: Line Of Sight (LOS) 
Definition, Source Data, Source Centerline Coordinates, Munition and 
Obscurant Data, Meteorological, Contour Map Parameters, Plot, Source Data, 
and Options. Input for the Radiative Transfer model is captured in four 
input screens: Obscurant Optical Properties, Solar and Sky Data, Target and 
Background Albedos, and Azimuth Calculations. 



LASS 

Mode Menu 

Transport and Diffusion 
Radiative 

Input Menu 

Line Sight Deflnition 

Source Centeriine Coordinates 

Munitions and Obscuration Data 
Meteorological Data 

Contour Map Parameters 

Plot 

Source Data 

Options 


Figure A-71. LASS Mode and Input Menus Choices, Option 1 


A-43 























LASS 

Mode Menu 

Input Menu 

Transport and Diffusion 

Obscurant Optical Parameters 

Radiative 

Solar and Sky Data 


Target and Background Albedos 


Azimuths Calculations 


Figure A-72. LASS Mode and Input Menus Choices, Option 2 

The Line Of Sight (LOS) Definition screen captures data found on the 
SCEN card and is shown in Figure A-73. From this screen the user can 
bring the Coordinate Picture Screen, shown in Figure A-74. This screen is a 
display sketch illustrating the relationship between a user coordinate 
system and the north-east system. 


Reference Obseruer and Target Data 




RT(X) 

m 

RT(V) 

m 

RT(Z) 

m 

R 

m 

lOBSZ 

degrees 

PHLOS 

degrees 

PHNOR 

degrees 




*1 



mm 




ibI, 


Figure A-73. LASS Line Of Sight (LOS) Definition Screen 


A-44 










































X 


Sketch illustrating relationship 
between a user coordinate system 
and the north-east system. 





Figure A-74. LASS Coordinate Picture Screen 


A-45 
















The Source Centerline Coordinates screen captures data found on the 
LINE card and is shown in Figure A-75. 


> Cl ij p c e IJ e n t e n I i ri e L- ij ci n d i ri o t e c: 







XS(1) 

m 

VS(l) 

m 

XNun 

- 

SLEN 

m 

PSI 

degress 





Figure A-75. LASS Source Centerline Coordinates Screen 

The Munitions and Obscurant Data screen captures data found on the 
SRCD card and is shown in Figure A-76. 



f1 u n i t. i 0 ri a n d 0 b c; u r‘- a n t [I a t a 






Mass Emission Rate 



Eyapofati on T;im6 Scaio 


QEnis 


EFF 


VF 


EXTCO 


ZSRC 


FI 


F2 





Figure A-76. LASS Munitions and Obscurant Data Screen 

A-46 















































The Meteorological screen captures data found on the METl card and 
is shown in Figure A-77. The user must specify whether to use CLIMAT 
data or user specified the data. When the user chooses to use CLIMAT 
data, the other parameters will become inactive. This data on this screen 
is required. Note that based on the current documentation, LASS does not 
specify whether input can be taken from CLIMAT but the potential is 
present to do so. This implementation assumes this capability will be 
added. 


Het eofoIogicaI Dat i 




Pasquill Stability Category 

PASQ 



Mean Windspeed 

USPD 

m/s 


Wind Direction 

UDIR 

degrees 


Surface Roughness 

ZRUF 

m 


Mixing Height 

HM 

m 


Scavenging Factor 

G5CAV 

- 



liBRH 





Figure A-77. LASS Meteorological Screen 

The Contour Map Parameters screen captures data found on the 
CMAP card and is shown in Figure 78. 


Map Parainet ens 





Grid Spacings 

DEL 

m 


Mlnimuh Concentration 

cniN 

- 


Downwind Limit 

XMAX 

m 


Crosswind Limit 

VMAX 

m 


Multiplication Factor 

CFAC 

- 



If 


liiiBi 


Figure A-78. LASS Contour Map Parameters Screen 


A-47 



































The Plot screen captures data found on the PLOT card and is shown 
in Figure A-79. 



Figure A-79. LASS Plot Screen 


The Source Data screen captures data found on the SCRL card and is 
shown in Figure A-80. This screen captures the location of the generators 
and can be repeated. By using the Add and Delete buttons the user can add 
another screen or delete the current screen. The user can move through 
the screens by using the arrows at the top of the screen. The top line 
displays to the user which screen he is presently viewing for example 1 of 
1. This data could be gathered in a point and click laydown as in the 
observer and target screen in COMBIC. This is discussed in Section 3.6, 
COMBIC Module Prototype Development. This will be an implementation 
decision made in Phase II. 



Figure A-80. LASS Source Data Screen 


I 

I 


A-48 































The Options screen captures data found on the OPTN card and is 
shown in Figure 81. 



Figure A-81. LASS Options Screen 


The Obscurant Optical Properties screen captures data found on the 
OBSC card and is shown in Figure A-82. 



Figure A-82. LASS Obscurant Optical Properties Screen 


A-49 

























The Solar and Sky Data screen captures data found on the SOLR card 
and is shown in Figure A-83. 



Figure A-83. LASS Solar and Sky Data Screen 


The Target and Background Albedos screen captures data found on 
the ALBO card and is shown in Figure A-84. 



Figure A-84. LASS Target and Background Albedos Screen 










































The Azimuth Calculations screen captures data found on the RTAZ 
card and is shown in Figure A-85. 



Figure A-85. LASS Azimuth Calculations Screen 


A. 10 Laser Transmission (LZTRAN) Module 

The Laser Transmission (LZTRAN) module calculates molecular 
absorption coefficients for specific laser frequencies. The LZTRAN 
documentation was unclear in some areas. This implementation is based 
on our current interpretation. The things which were unclear will be 
resolved before the final implementation in Phase II. The documentation 
also did not indicate which cards are required. This will also be resolved 
before final implementation. LZTRAN accepts wavelength from EOEXEC 
driver. Figure 86 shows the Input Menu Choices. Input is captured in 3 
input screens: Atmospheric, Altitude, Temperature and Water Pressure 
Profiles, and Target and Laser Positions. 


LZTRAN 

Input Menu 
Atmospheric Data 
Target and Laser Positions 

Altitude, Temperature and Water Vapor Pressure Profiles 


Figure A-86. LZTRAN Input Menu Choices Input 


A-51 

















The Atmospheric screen incorporates data found on the ATMO card. 
This screen is illustrated in Figure 87. The Model Atmosphere Type 
parameter determines the value of the Mean Scale Height parameter and 
this is reflected in the displayed value. An exception is when the user 
choices User Specified for Model Atmosphere Type, then the user must 
specify the Mean Scale Height. 







PRES 

mbar 



TMP 

0 

c 

+ 50 - 50 


MSCL 

- 





MCLHT 

km 

8.28491 


ZDEL 

km 




mmmi 


IWiiiMliWl 


Figure A-87. LZTRAN Atmospheric Screen 


A-52 




































The Altitude, Temperature and Water Pressure Profiles screen 
incorporates data found on the ALTL, TEMP, and PH20 cards. This screen 
is illustrated in Figure A-88. The user chooses from a pull down menu for 
each variable. Corresponding values for Altitude, Temperature and Water 
Vapor Pressure change accordingly. If the user chooses the User Specified 
option, then the cells for the corresponding parameters become active and 
the user must specify the data. 



Figure A-88. LZTRAN Altitude, Temperature and Water 
Pressure Profiles Screen 

The Target and Laser Positions screen incorporates data found on the 
TARG, and DESG cards. This screen is illustrated in Figure A-89. This 
screen could also be implemented as a point and click lay down on a grid 
as in COMBIC. This implementation decision will be made in Phase II. 



























































A. 11 Missile Smoke Plume Obscuration (MPLUME) Module 

The Missile Smoke Plume Obscuration (MPLUME) module will predict 
obstruction and imaging system degradation of helicopter designation 
systems caused by smoke from a missile plume. The user can specify data 
for multiple runs. The MPLUME documentations user’s guide section did 
not breakdown the input by card though the examples were given by card 
input. The data was gathered into a presumable card layout to stay 
consistent with other modules. Any errors will be resolved before final 
implementation. MPLUME documentation does not indicate that input can 
be supplied by other modules, but does state that MPLUME is called by 
other modules. Those modules are not identified. Figure A-90 shows the 
Input Menu Choices. MPLUME input screens are Atmospheric, Seeker, 
Target, Contrast, FLIR, TV, Missile and Radiance. 


MPLUME 

Input Menu 
Atmospheric 
Seeker Data 
Target Data 
Contrast Data 
FLIR Data 
TV Data 
Missile Data 
Radiance Data 


Figure A-90. MPLUME Input Menu Choices 


A-54 






The Atmospheric screen is shown in Figure A-91 and incorporates 
data from the ATMOS card. The user must choose to use data from 
CLIMAT or specify the data. If the user chooses to the CLIMAT option, all 
input cells will become inactive. Current documentation does not indicate 
use of the CLIMAT option, but the potential is there and this 
implementation assumes it will be added. Data on this screen are required. 



Figure A-91. MPLUME Atmospheric Screen 


A-55 




























The Seeker screen is shown in Figure A-92 and incorporates data 
from the SEEK card. The Target screen in shown in Figure A-93 and 
incorporates data from the TARG card. The coordinates of the seeker and 
the target could also be determined by a lay down option like that in the 
COMBIC model. This implementation option will be determined in Phase 
11. Data gathered on both screens are required. 



Figure A-93. MPLUME Target Screen 



































The Contrast screen is shown in Figure A-94 and incorporates data 
from the CONT card. Data on this screen are required. 


Contrast Data 



iiUHIMi 

Solar Azimuth Angle 

AZS 

Solar Zenith Angle 

ZENS 

Temperature Difference 

TBATD 

Background Temperature 

BAT 

Average Display Luminance 

ADL 

Display Contract Ratio 

DCR 


degrees 


degrees 


Kelvin 


Kelvin 


ml 


Figure A-94. MPLUME Contrast Screen 


Cancel 


A-57 





























The FLIR screen and the TV screen is shown in Figure A-95 and A- 
96 incorporate data from the FLIR and TV cards receptively. Data 
gathered on either screen are not required. 


FLIR Data 





Gain 

Q User Spetified 
O Set By t<iiodel 

Level 

''0'lprsi'iififielF 

O Set By Hodej 


Contrast Option 


Display Temperature Range 


Display Minimum Temperature 


Field of View 


Grid Calculation Option 




0 iUide O Narroiiji 



Figure A-95. MPLUME FLIR Screen 



Figure A-96. MPLUME TV Screen 


I 

I 

I 


A-58 




































The Missile screen, shown in Figure A-97, incorporates data from the 
MISSILE card. The coordinates of the missile could also be determined by 
a lay down option like that in the COMBIC model. Data on this screen are 
required. 



Figure A-97. MPLUME Missile Screen and TV Screen 

The Radiance screen, shown in Figure A-98, incorporates data from 
the RADN card. Data on this screen are required. 



lllliiiil 

1 

Missile Radiance Option 

lOPTN 

Arbitrary Location Radiance Option 

FDTR 

Display Minimum Temperature 

FDMT 

Field of View 


Grid Calculation Option 



Gain 

0 User Specified 

O Set By Model 

Level 

O User Specified 

O Set By Model 


O lUide ' IO Narirbiif 


Figure A-98. MPLUME Radiance Screen 

A-59 







































A. 12 Narrow Beam Multiple Scattering (NBSCAT) Module 

The Narrow Beam Multiple Scattering (NBSCAT) module is a multiple 
scattering propagation model applicable to narrow light beams transmitted 
through aerosol clouds. The user may use Aerosol data from a previous 
NBSCAT run as input. No other special input or interaction with other 
modules is mentioned in the documentation. Figure A-99 shows the Input 
Menu Choices. NBSCAT input screens are Source, Run, Receiver, Medium 
and Aerosol Parameters. 


I 

I 


NBSCAT 

Input Menu 
Run Parameters 
Source Parameters 
Receiver Parameters 
Medium Parameters 
Aerosol Parameters 


Figure A-99. NBSCAT Input Menu Choices 

The Run Parameter screen is shown in Figure A-100 and 
incorporates data from the RUNP card. Data on this screen are required. 



Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Number of Radial Positions 

LRMAX 

- 


Maximum Radial Position 

RMAX 

cm 


Calculation Option 


Calculate? 

Transmitted On-Axis Power 

ITRAN5 

O No o ves 

Range-resolved Lidar Return 

ILIDAR 

O No O Ves 

Transmitted On-Axis Power 

ITRPRO 

O No O Ves 

Lidar Profile 

ITRPRO 

O No O Ves 


OK 


Cancel 


A-60 



































Figure A-100. NBSCAT Run Parameter Screen 

The Source Parameter screen is shown in Figure A-101 and 
incorporates data from the SORC card. Data on this screen are required. 




Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Position 

ZSD 

km 


Maxinrium Radial Position 

WO 

cm 


Transmitted On-Axis Power 

BEAMD 

cm 


Range-Resolved Lidar Return 

BEAMQ 

- 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-101. NBSCAT Source Parameter Screen 


The Receiver Parameter screen is shown in Figure A-102 
incorporates data from the DETR card. Data on this screen are required. 


A-61 
































Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Calculation Position for the 
Transmitted Irradiance Profile 
and/or the On-Axis Received Power 

ZDTD 

km 

Calculation Position for 
the Lidar Profile and/or the 
On-Axis Lidar Return 

ZDLD 

km 

Radius of On-axis 
Transmission Receiver 

DRTD 

cm 

Radius of On-Axis 

Lidar Receiver 

DTLD 

cm 

Half Angle Field of View of 
Transmission Recieverand 
Transmitted Irradiance Profile 

FOVT 

rad 

Half Angle Field of View of 

Lidar Receiver and Lidar Profile 

FOVL 

rad 


User 

Values 


Cancel 


Figure A-102. NBSCAT Receiver Parameter Screen 

The Medium Parameter screen and the TV screen is shown in Figure 
A-103 incorporates data from the MEDP card. Data on this screen are 
required. 



A-62 











































The Aerosol Parameter screen, shown is Figure A-104 and A-105, 
incorporates data from the AERP card. Data on this screen are required. 
The user must choose to read aerosol scattering properties from phase 
function file or use aerosol cloud parameters from a previous NBSCAT run. 
Based on the users choice, the data cells on this screen will change 
accordingly. 


o 


Read Rerosol Regular Scattering ^ 
Properites From Phase Function File ^ 


Use Rerosol Cloud Parameters 
From Preuious NBSCRT Run 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Number of Range Positions 

NIH 

- 


Cloud Depth 

ZCD 

km 


Refernce Position 

ZD 

- 


Number of Different Aerosol Types 
to be Mined at Reference Position 

NMIX 



Cloud Entenction Coeffiecint 
at Reference Position 

ALPE 

km 


Phase Function Identifier 

IDPF 

- 


Aerosol Weight 

W6T 

- 



























OK 


Cancel 




Figure A-104. NBSCAT Aerosol Parameter Screen 























^ Read Rerosol Regular Scattering ^ Use Rerosol Cloud Parameters 
^ Properties From Phase Function File ^ From Preuious NBSCRT Run 


Parameter 


Number of Range Positions 


Cloud Depth 
Refernce Position 


Number of Different Aerosol Types 
to be Mixed at Reference Position 


Mnemonic Units 


Cloud Extonction Coeffiecint 
at Reference Position 

ALPE 

Forward Scattering Coefficient 

ALSPD 

Backscattering Coefficient 

ALSMD 

Absorption Coefficient 

ALAD 

The Product C"^ < sin0'^> 

DIFP 

The Product C"< s1n0"> 

DIFM 

Phase Function Identifier 

SAPD 

Forward Scattering Coefficient 

SAPM 

Backscattering Coefficient 

BETAD 


rad 


rad 


km Vsr 


User 

Values 


Cancel 


Figure A-105. NBSCAT Aerosol Parameter Screen 


A. 13 Near Millimeter Wave (NMMW) Module 

The Near Millimeter Wave (NMMW) module calculates any 
combination of the following cases: 

a. Oxygen refraction and absorption. 

b. Water vapor and oxygen refraction and absorption 

c. Water or ice fog, extinction and back scatter 


A- 64 












































d. Drizzle, widespread, or thunderstorm rain extinction and 
backscatter 

e. Dry, moist or wet snow extinction and backscatter. 

NMMW can receive wavelength from the EOEXEC driver. The user can 
supply data for multiple runs. Climatology data can be supplied by 
CLIMAT. Figure A-106 shows the Input Menu Choices. The input screens 
for NMMW are General Parameters and Meteorological Data. 


NMMW 

Input Menu 
General Parameters 
Meteorological Data 


Figure A-106. NMMW Input Menu Choices 

The General Parameters screen captures data found on the PATH, 
FOG, RAIN and SNOW cards and is shown in Figure A-107. These data are 
required. 



Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Rain Rate 

RAINRT 

mm/hr 


Rain Type 

RTVPE 

- 

O Drizzle 

O Ulide Spread 

O Thunderstrom 

Snow Rate 

SNOWRT 

mm/hr 


Path Length 

MMWPTH 

km 


Fog Density 

FOGDEN 

g/m^ 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-107. NMMW General Parameters Screen 


A-65 































The Meteorological Data screen captures data found on the METR 
card and is shown in Figure A-108. The user must choose to either use the 
CLIMAT data, which inactivates all parameters or specify the data. 




O Use CLIMflT Data O Use User Specified Data 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Pressure 

PRESS 1 

mbar 

133 and up 


Temperature 

TEMPI 

°C 

- 

Ih ^ ► 

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIRIIIII 

0 

Humidity 

ABSHUM 

g/m^ 

percent 

- 

O Absolute 

O Relatiue 4 t 

0 100 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-108. NMMW Meteorological Data Screen 


A.14 Nonlinear Aerosol Vaporization and Breakdown Effects 
(NOVAE) Module 

The nonlinear aerosol vaporization and breakdown effects (NOVAE) 
module computes both aerosol breakdown and vaporization effects on High 
Energy Laser (HEL) propagation in the repetitive pulse mode and only 
aerosol vaporization effects in the continuous wave mode. The user can 
specify input for multiple runs. NOVAE can interact with CLIMAT to 
determine the wind speed and direction. Other interactions are not 
mentioned. NOVAE documentation did not indicate which screens were or 
were not required. Figure A-109 shows the Input Menu Choices. NOVAE 
input screens are Laser, Atmosphere and Environment, Target, Option and 
Control, Breakdown and Vaporization, Modeling and Computation Options, 
Aerosol and Cloud Characteristics, Vaporization Characteristics screen. 
Absorption and Extinction Coefficient Profiling, Wind Profile, and 
Stimulated Raman Scattering. 


A-66 

























I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

n 

I 

I The Laser screen, shown in Figure A-110, incorporates data from the 

LASl and LAvS2 cards. 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 


NOVAE 

Input Menu 
Laser 

Atmosphere and Environment 
Target 

Option and Control 
Breakdown and Vaporization 

^ Modeling and Computation Options 
Aerosol and Cloud Characteristics 
^ Vaporization Characteristics 
Absorption and Extinction Coefficient Profiling 
Wind Profile 

Stimulated Raman Scattering 


Figure A- 109. NOVAE Input Menu Choices 


I 

A-67 

I 





I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 


User 

Values 

Beam Diameter 

DIAM 

■■ 


Beam Power 




Maximum Power 


kw 


Energy per Pulse 

ENGPUL 

kJ 


Maximum Energy per Pulse 

ENGMAX 



Fractional Obsuration 


- 


Pulse Repetition Frequency 

PRF 

Hz 


Time Duration of Pulse 

TO 

s 


Beam Quality In Times 
Diffraction Limited 

TIMSDL 

- 


One Sigma High Frequency 
Jitter Angle 

THJH 

urad 


One Sigma Low Frequency 
Jitter Angle 




Aspect Ratio 




X-dImenslon 
Rectangular Aperature 

XDIM 

m 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-110. NOVAE Laser Screen 


The Atmosphere and Environment screen, shown in Figure A-lll, 
incorporates data from the ATMl and ATM2 cards. The user can use data 
determined by CLIMAT for the Wind Speed and Wind Direction. When this 
option is chosen, these parameters will become inactive. 


A-68 





































o Use CLIMHT Data Use User Specified Data 


[ -1 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Magnitude of Wind 


m/s 


Reference Height 

HWINDO 



Wind Direction Angle 

ANGWND 



Exponent In Wind Power law 

WNDPOW 

- 


Square of Refraction Index 
Structure Constant 

CNSQO 



Exponent in Power Law for 
Refractive Index Structure Constant 

CNSQPW 

- 


Vertical Profile Option 

CN2FLAG 

- 

O On O Off 

Quantity Constant 

SCRPTS 



Absorption Coefficient 

ABSOR 



Scattering Coefficient 

ABSSCA 



Scale Height for 
Absorption Coefficient 

HA 

km 


Scale Height for 

Scattering Coefficient 

HS 

km 


Height of Aperature 

HTDEV 

m 


Target Height 

HTTAR 

m 






OK 

Cancel 


Figure A-111. NOVAE Atmosphere and Environment Screen 

The Target screen, shown in Figure A-112, incorporates data from 
the TARl and TAR2 cards. 













































Figure A-112. NOVAE Target Screen 

The Option and Control screen, shown in Figure A-113, incorporates 
data from the CTRL card. 



Parameter 


Radius of Circle 


Laser Type 
Waveform 

Slew Option Indicator 


Code 

Variable 


ICDWRP 


IDSLEW 


Number of Integration Steps NPT 


Tilt Control Option 


Interaction of Linear Effects 
with Blooming Indicator 


IDTLCO 




Units 


User 

Values 


CN2FLAG 


O Continuous lUaue 
O Pulse Repetition 

|±| Dust/Non-vaporizing Materials 


Summary Output 




o No Tilt Control 
O Tilt Control Rsssumed 


^ High Frequency Effects included in 
^ Beam Size Before Blooming Calculations 

^ Hll Linear Effects are 
^ Ressumed Rfter Blooming 











































Figure A-113. NOVAE Option and Control Screen 

The Breakdown and Vaporization screen, shown in Figure A-114, 
allows the user to access the Modeling and Computation Options, Aerosol 
and Cloud Characteristics and Vaporization Characteristics screens. 


®idl. 8ii(ni IPsTOsugHgp® 


Specify ... 


1 Modeling and Computation Options 


1 Aerosol and Cloud Characteristics 


1 Vaporization Characteristics 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-114. NOVAE Breakdown and Vaporization Screen 


The Modeling and Computation Options screen, shown in Figure A- 
115, incorporates data from the AVBl card with the exception of the 
Aerosol Type (lAER) parameter which is found on the Aerosol and Cloud 
Characteristics screen. Based on the choice of the Mie Efficiency Factor 
Option, the AGAUS module may be called for the Mie data calculation. 
Additional AGAUS parameters are also needed. This data will also be 
gathered using GUI screens and these screen will be made available 
through the input menu when this choice is made. 


A-71 













Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Breakdown Option 

IBRK 

cm 

O Do Not Check for Breakdouin 

O Check for Breakdouin 

Print Option 

IPRTOP 

- 

|±| Summary Output 

Number of Phase Integral 
Steps in Cloud 

NPA 

- 


Recondensation Option 

IRECON 

- 

O Recondensation Neglected 

O Complete Recondensation Rsssumed 

Exponential Extinction 
Scaling Option 

EXEXSC 


O Enponential Eutinction Scaling Assumed 
O Enact Eutinction Calculated 

Mie Efficiency 

Factor Option 

DATAP 

- 

O Use Enact Mie Data Files 

O Use Rppronimate Mie Enpressions 

O Call HGUflS Mie Data for Calculation 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-115. NOVAE Modeling and Computation Options Screen 


The Aerosol and Cloud Characteristics screen, shown in Figure A-116, 
incorporates data from the AVBl, AVB2 and AVB3 cards. 


A-72 


















Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Aerosol Type 

lAER 

- 

1*1 Dust/Non-vaporising Materials 

Range to Leading Edge of Cloud 


km 


Cloud Length 

LA 

m 


Cloud Transmittance 

TA 

U.m 


Air Temperature 

TATM 

■■1 


Air Pressure 

PATH 

■ilB 


Air Thermal Conductivity 

KAIR 

W/cm*K 


Relative Humidity 

RELH 

percent 

T « ► 

6 Too r 1 

Real Part of the Index of Refraction/ 
Mass Extinction Coefficient 

NR/MEC 

(m^/g) 


Imaginary Part of the Index of 
Refraction/Mass Absorption 
Coefficient 

NI/MAC 

(m^/g) 


Air Temperature 

TATM 



Air Pressure 


- 


Air Thermal Conductivity 


K 


Air Pressure 


(g/cm ) 


Air Thermal Conductivity 


J/g*K 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-116. NOVAE Aerosol and Cloud Characteristics Screen 


The Vaporization Characteristics screen, shown in Figure A-117, 
incorporates data from the AVB4 card. 


A-73 



















































Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Vapor Specific Heat 

CPV 

J/g*K 


Heat Vaporization 

LHA 

J/g 


Evaporation Coefficient 

EPSA 

- 


Vapor Diffusion Coefficient 

DCA 

cm /s 


Vapor Gas Constant 

RGA 

J/g*K 


Air Thermal Conductivity 

KAIR 

W/cm*K 


Vapor Molecular Weight 

MV 

g/mole 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-117. NOVAE Vaporization Characteristics Screen 


The Absorption and Extinction Coefficient Profiling screen, shown in 
Figure A-118, incorporates data from the APRO card. 


iiSil iSildl 11 ln®^t 1 ®ijir i5c 9)©(( l?P®f 0 liiragl 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Absorption Coefficient Option 

lAEPRO 

km 



Co 

CO 

km 


Coefficent from 

Cl 

Cl 

km 


the Model 

C2 

C2 

km 



C 3 

C3 

km 



a = exp(CgX^ + C^x^ _C.jX + ) 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-118. NOVAE Absorption and Extinction 
Coefficient Profiling Screen 

The Wind Profile screen, shown in Figure A-119, incorporates data 
from the WPRO card. 


A-74 



























Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Wind Profiling Option 

WINPRO 

- 

O On O Off 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-l]9. NOVAE Wind Profile Screen 

The Stimulated Raman Scattering screen, shown in Figure A-120, 
incorporates data from the ATMS card. 




Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

stimulated Raman 
Scattering Option 

IRAN 

- 

O On O Off 

Stimulated Raman 
Scattering Type 

SRSTYPE 

- 

O Uibrational O Rotational 

devalue 

5R5LINE 

- 


Scattering, Absorption and 
Breakdown Option 

IRAN 

- 

O On O Off 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-120. NOVAE Stimulated Raman Scattering Screen 

A. 15 Millimeter Wave System Performance (RADAR) Module 


The Millimeter Wave System Performance (RADAR) module 
calculated the range performance of millimeter wave systems. The user 
may define data for multiple runs. Radar documentation does not indicate 
which data cards are optional and which are required. Figure A-121 
shows the Input Menu Choices. RADAR input screens are Options, 
Transmission, Beam, Detection, Atmospheric, Antenna Loss, Target, 
Dielectric, and Clutter. 


A-75 






















RADAR 


Input Menu 

Options 

Transmission 

Beam 

Detection 

Atmospheric 

Antenna 

Target 

Dielectric 

Clutter 


Figure A-121. RADAR Input Menu Choices 

The Options screen, shown in Figure A-122, incorporates data 
the INDC card. 


p 

= ? • - i©l©eil 0pllP®Ri© ^ 

* 1 . 


O The radar is coherent. 

O The radar is noncoherent. 


^ The scenario is defined mith an attenuation 
^ loss factor. 

^ The program is to calculate the attenuation 
^ loss factor. 

O Use NUL simple rain model. 

O Use Rogers and Olsen rain model. 

O Use DRBrouin rain model. 

O Short-range surface-to-surface surueillance. 
O Long-range surface-to-air suueillance. 

O The radar beam is uerticallg polarized. 

O The radar beam is horizontally polarized. 


OK Cancel 


Figure A-122. RADAR Options Screen 


I 

A-76 

I 












The Transmission screen, shown in Figure A-123, incorporates data 
from the TRAN card. 


dUilli 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Receiver Noise Factor 


dB 


Bandwidth Correction Factor 

CB 

dB 


Gain of Receiving Antenna 

GR 

dB 


Gain of Transmitting Antenna 

hline GT 

dB 


Transmitter Power 

PT 

Watts 


Pulse Length 

TAU 

]JLS 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-123. RADAR Transmission Screen 

The Beam screen, shown in Figure A-124, incorporates data from the 
BEAM card. 




Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Antenna Height 

AHFT 

ft 


Radar Beamwidth in Azimuth 

BWDA 

degrees 


Radar Beamwidth in Elevation 

BWDE 

degrees 


Antenna Tilt 

EL 

degrees 


Scanning Frequency 

SCMFQ 

Hz 


Peak Sidelobe Ratio 

SLDB 

dB 


Wave Height 

WHFT 

ft 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-124. RADAR Beam Screen 


A-77 












































The Detection screen, shown in Figure A-125, incorporates data from 
the DETC card. 


Parameter 


Probability of False Alarm 


Swerling Fluctuation Case 


Number of Pulses Integrated 


Cumulative Probability Cutoff 


Probability of Detection 
Maximum Probability of Detection 


Minimum Probability of Detection 




Code 

Variable 


PCREQ 


PDMAX 


PDMIN 



User 

Values 



Cancel 


Figure A-125. RADAR Detection Screen 

The Atmospheric screen, shown in Figure A-126, incorporates data 
from the ATMO card. 




Parameter 


Variable 


Units 


User 

Values 



Figure A-126. RADAR Atmospheric Screen 


A-78 









































The Antenna Loss screen, shown in Figure A-127, incorporates data 
from the LOSS card. 




Parameter 


Antenna Ohmic Loss 


Scanning Antenna Pattern Loss 


Receiver Transmission Line Loss 


Transmitter Transmission Line Loss 
Miscellaneous Losses 


Code 

Varibale 



Units 

dB 

dB 


dB 


dB 


dB 


User 

Values 



Atmospheric Transmission Loss Factor ALTX dB/km 


O Haue Program Calculate 
O User Specified | 


Cancel 


Figure A-127. RADAR Antenna Loss Screen 

The Target screen, shown in Figure A-128, incorporates data from 
the TARG card. 




Parameter 


Height Increment 
Range Increment 


Height of Target 


Range Offset 
Target Cross Section 


Ground Velocity of Target 


Code 

Variable 


DELHT 


BELR 

■■ 

HT 

m 

RO 

■■ 

SIG 

■■ 

VTGT 



User 

Values 



Figure A-128. RADAR Target Screen 


A-79 









































The Dielectric screen, shown in Figure A-129, incorporates data from 
the DATA card. 




Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Imaginary Part of Dielectric Constant 
of Surface 

DIELI 

Real Part of Dielectric Constant 
of Surface 

DIELR 

Number of Range Points Desired 

NPTS 





Figure A-129. RADAR Dielectric Screen 

The Clutter screen, shown in Figure A-130, incorporates data from 
the CLUl and CLU2 cards. 


Parameter 

Radar Type 


Pulse Frequency Type 


Clutter Input Choice 

Average Surface Clutter RCS 
Per Unit Area 


Average Volume Clutter RCS 
Per Unit Area 


First Corner of Response Function 


Second Corner of Response Function 


Clutter Improvement Factor 


Probability of False Alarm Due 
to Clutter 

Required Signal to Clutter Ratio 


Pulse Repetition Frequency 


Number of Poles for Filter 


User 

Values 



- 

TYPRF 

- 

IFSIG 

- 

DISG 

m /m 

DNUE 

m /m 

FI 

Hz 

F2 

Hz 

CLTI 

dB 


Sinusodial 


O Input Ruerage 
O Input Spectrum 



















































A. 16 PFNDAT 


The PFNDAT Database contains data used by several EOSAEL Modules 
and cannot be executed. Therefore, GUI screens were not required and 
their creation was ignored. 


A. 17 Optical Path Bending (REFRAC) Module 

The Optical Path Bending (REFRAC) module calculates the amount of 
curvature a ray of light experiences as it passes over a complex terrain 
surface. Figure A-131 shows the Input Menu Choices. REFRAC input 
screens are Terrain, Temperature Gradient, Climatology, and Beam Source 
screen. 


REFRAC 

Input Menu 

Terrain ^ Range and Altitude Specifications 

Temperature Gradient 

Climatology 

Beam Source 


Figure A-131. REFRAC Input Menu Choices 




The Terrain screen, shown in Figure A-132, incorporates data from 
the FLAT, STIK, FOUR, and SINE cards. The user must indicate at the top of 
this screen which terrain shape type to be used. Figures A-133 through A- 
135 show the parameters available to the user based on this choice. When 
either STIK or FOUR terrain type is chosen, the user must enter 
specifications for the terrain points. The user can access this screen, the 
Range and Altitude Specifications screen shown in Figure A-136, using the 
button made visible and active when either option is chosen. From the 
Range and Altitude Specifications screen, the user can Add, and Delete 
terrain points and the number of terrain points will be reflected on the 
previous screen. 



Specify ... 

O Flat Terrain Data Q ^TIK Data O FOUR Data Q Ci'est Data 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 


User 

Values 

Range from Observer 

RANGE 

■■ 







OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-132. REFRAC Terrain Screen, Option 1 


A-82 














Specify ... 

O Flat Terrain Data Q STIK Data O FDUR Data O Crest Data 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Range from Observer 

RANGE 

Number of Terrain Points 

NPOINTS 


Units 


User 

Values 



I I Specify Terrain Point Parameters 


Figure A-133. REFRAC Terrain Screen, Option 2 


Cancel 


Specify ... 

O Flat Terrain Data O ^TiK Data O FOUR Data O Crest Data 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Range from Observer 

RANGE 

Number of Terrain Points 

NPOINTS 


Units 


User 

Values 



I I Specify Terrain Point Parameters 



Cancei 


Figure A-134. REFRAC Terrain Screen, Option 3 









































specify ... 

O Flat Terrain Data O STIK Data O FOUR Data O Ci^est Data 


Code 

Variable 


Parameter 


Number of Dips 


Amplitude of Each Dip AMP 


Units 


User 

Values 




Cancel 


Figure A-135. REFRAC Terrain Screen, Option 4 


: ®ifiidl il D H fi ip©© 8 iJ I ©@1l 8 PP©' 


Range and Altitude Specifications: 1 of 2 — 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Range from Observer 

RANGE 

m 

Altitude Above 

Local Elevation 

NPOINTS 

m 


User 

Values 




Delete 



Cancel 



A-84 









































The Temperature Gradient screen, shown in Figure A-137 
incorporates data from the WEBB, and SIML cards. Figure A-138 shows 
the choices available if the user chooses to use the Obukhov Length option 






Specify ... 


O Pomer Laiu Enponent 

O Obukhou Length 


Uses a gradient value at 2m and an exponent. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Power Law Exponent 

P.L.E 








OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-137. REFRAC Temperature Gradient Screen 


iilFpre, T©tip§(p®'|iaiP© ; 


Specify ... 


O Poujer Lauj Enponent 

O Obukhou Length 


Uses a gradient value at 2m and an exponent. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 


User 

Values 

Temperature Gradient 

TEMP 

GRAD 

- 


Obukhov Length 

OBUK 

m 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-138. REFRAC Temperature Gradient Screen 


A-85 































The Climatology screen, shown in Figure A-143, incorporates data 
from the CLIMMIDE and CLIMEURO cards. The user can choose to use the 
CLIMAT Module. Applicable data will become active or inactive, 
depending on this choice. 


I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 



O Use CLIMflT Data O Use User Specified Data 


Parameter 

iHI 

Units 

User 

Values 

Region Indicator 

MM 

- 

O Middie East 

O Europe 

Month of Vear 

MONTH 



Hour of Day 

HOUR 

- 


Cloudcover 

CLOUD 

1/8 



OK 


Cancei 


Figure A-139. REFRAC Climatology Screen 


A-86 




































The Beam Source screen, shown in Figure A-140, incorporates data 
from the BEAMSPRD and BEAMHOME cards. The parameters on this screen 
are dependent on the choice made at the top of the screen. Applicable 
parameters will become active or inactive based on this choice. 


I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 


O Use a set of beams projected at different inital angles. 

^ Use a particular beam that luill strike the target 
^ at the desired height. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Transmitter Height 
Above Local Terrain 

BEAMSPRD 

m 


Target Height 

Above Local Terrain 

TARGET 

m 


Sight Elevation 
Above Sea Level 

HEIGHT 

m 


Boresight Elevation 
Angle Relative to the 
Normalized Surface 

ELEV 

milli- 

radians 


Beamspread to be Used 
in the Plotting Routine 

BEAMSPREAD 

milli- 

radians 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-140. REFRAC Beam Source Screen 


A-87 




























A. 18 Target Acquisition (TARGAC) Module 


The target acquisition (TARGAC) module predicts the atmospheric 
effects on the ability of EO sensors to detect and/or recognize a target. The 
user can specify data for multiple runs. TARGAC calls XSCALE and 
optionally CLIMAT, and ILUMA. TARGAC also uses FASCAT generated 
data. Currently FASCAT must be ran off line and the data supplied to 
TARGAC must be put on a special card. The implementation shown here 
assumes that modifications will be done to allow FASCAT to be accessed 
from TARGAC and lessen the load on the user. Figure A-141 shows the 
Input Menu Choices. TARGAC input screens are Sensor Type, Acquisition 
Data, Climatology Data, Sensor Coefficient, Optical Contrast, Geometry 
Screen, Target Thermal Signature, High Cloud, Middle Cloud, Low Cloud, 
Subjective Resolution Curve Definition, Illumination, Meteorological, 
Contrast Tranmittance, Thermal Contrast Model, Abscissa and Ordinate 
Point Pairs, Site, Smoke, Sound, Target, and Extinction and Humidity. 


TARGAC 

Input Menu 
Sensor Type 
Acquisition Data 
Climatology Data 
Sensor Coefficient 
Optical Contrast 
Geometry Screen 
Target Thermal Signature 
High Cloud 
Middle Cloud 
Low Cloud 

Subjective Resolution Curve Definition 

Illumination 

Meteorological 

Contract Transmittance 

Thermal Contrast Model 

Abscissa and Ordinate Point Pairs 

Site 

Smoke 

Sound 

Target 

Extinction and Humidity 


Figure A-141. TARGAC Input Menu Choices 


A-88 





The Sensor Type screen, shown in Figure A-142, incorporates data 
from the TAC.DAT file. Most other input screens are dependent on this 
choice. Certain screen are invalid or required based on the selection of the 
Sensor Type. After the Sensor Type has been defined, the appropriate 
screens will then be available through the Input Menu. Invalid screens 
will be grayed out on the Input Menu List. 


S®lii®®P Tn«@ 


Parameter 


Sensor Type 


Code 

Variable 


Units 


Typical 

Values 


User 

Values 

O Direct Uieui Optics 
O Image Intensifier 
O Silicon Teleuision 
O Thermal Imager 
O User Defined 



Figure A-142. TARGAC Sensor Type Screen 

The Acquisition Data screen, shown in Figure A-143, incorporates 
data from the AQUI card. The number of probabilities of performance can 
either be entered in the first parameter or determined by the number 
specified on this screen. The defaults are shown and the data on this 
screen are required. 




Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Number of 
Probabilities 

NPROB 


PF(I) 

Probabilities 
of Performance 

PF(2) 


PF(3) 

Minimum Target 
Dimension 

DIM 



User 

Values 


O One O Tino O Three 



Figure A-143. TARGAC Acquisition Data Screen 
































The Climatology Data screen, shown in Figure A-144, incorporates 
data from the CLIM card. These data are optional and only needs to be 
present if the user chooses to use the CLIMAT module. 




□ Inuoke Option to Use the CLIMRT Module 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Region Indicator 

LOCAT 

- 

fT| European Lowlands 

flonth 

MONTH 

- 


Climatology Class 

ICLASS 

- 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-144. TARGAC Climatology Data Screen 


The Sensor Coefficient screen, shown in Figure A-145, incorporates 
data from the COEF card. These data only need to be present if the user 
chooses the User Defined Sensor on the Sensor Type screen and the Type of 
Input for the Subjective Resolution Curve parameter on the Subjective 
Resolution Curve Definition screen is set to Coefficient. This screen will be 
available through the Input Menu only when applicable. 


=3^+3^ln(x)+...+3^ln(xf 


1= 

IlifK 


6@©tT' 



Di 

B1 








— 

Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 




^0 

AA(1) 






^1 

AA(2) 






□ 2 

AA(3) 





Sensor Coefficient 


AA(4) 







AA(5} 






^5 

AA(6) 






^6 

AA(7) 





OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-145. TARGAC Sensor Coefficient Screen 


I 

I 


A-90 












































The Optical Contrast screen, shown in Figure 146, incorporates data 
from the CONT card. This card is required. The user must specify whether 
to use Internal or External calculation method for the contrast. If Internal 
is chosen the variable on this screen are active and values must be chosen. 
The defaults are shown. If the user chooses the external option, he will 
then specify which module to use in order to determine the contrast. 
Currently the user calculates the contrast off-line and then enters this 
value. The option to do this calculation on-line will be added in Phase II of 
this project. 


ol 


mmmm 



■ 

mm 


H 

■ 



Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Compute Contrast 
Option 

- 

- 

O Internal O Enternal 

Target Type or 
Material 

ITAR6T 

- 

± 1 Light Green Paint 


Background Type 
or Material 

IBACKG 

- 


±1 None 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A~146. T ARC AC Optical Contrast Screen 


A-91 





















The Geometry screen, shown in Figure A-147, incorporates data from 
the GEOM card. These data are required. 





Figure A-147. TARGAC Geometry Screen 


The Target Thermal Signature screen, shown in Figure A-148, 
incorporates data from the GNRC card. These data are required only when 
the Sensor Type defined on the Sensor Type screen is defined to be a 
Thermal Imager. This screen will be available through the Input Menu 
only when applicable. Defaults are not specified for this screen. 


_ I’lgr^gfc iDaigwiad . ■ ■ v.- '-y'vfv 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Target 

Temperature 

ALAT 

K 

280 - 320 

1 : 4 W 

Background 

Temperature 

ALONG 

K 

280 - 320 

11 ' 

Length of Effective 
X-dimension 

TARGAZ 

m 

0.5 - 20.0 

ii; ► 

Length of Effective 
V-dimension 

TARGAZ 

m 

0.5 - 20.0 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-148. TARGAC Target Thermal Signature Screen 


A-92 






















































The High, Middle and Low Cloud screens, shown in Figures A-149 
through A- 151, incoiporate data from the HCLD, MCLD, and LCLD cards. 
These data are only required when the Sensor Type defined on the Sensor 
Type screen is defined to be a Thermal Imager. These screens will be 
available through the Input Menu only when applicable. Default values 
are shown. 




Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Time of Forecast 
or Observation 

WTME 

HHMM 

0000 - 2400 

T1 12 ±1 00 


Cloud Indicator 

IWX(L4) 

- 

None, Thin, 
or Thick 

±1 None 


Cloud Fraction 

WX(L9) 

percent 

0.0 - 1.0 

|T 4 * 

0.0 

Cloud Base Height 

WX(I,12) 

km 

9.0 - 12.0 

il ► 

9.0 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-149. TARGAC High Cloud Screen 


ElSMdl 


Parameter 


Time of Forecast 
or Observation 


Cloud Indicator 


Cloud Fraction 


Cloud Base Height 


Code 

Variable 


WTME 


IWX(I,5) 


WX(LIO) 


WX(I,13) 


Units 


HHMM 


percent 


km 


Typical 

Values 


0000 - 2400 


None, 
or Any 


0.0 - 1.0 


4.0 - 8.0 


User 

Values 


T\ 12 Itl 00 


^ None 


4 * \ 0.0 


4 * \ 4.0 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-150. TARGAC Middle Cloud Screen 


A-93 

































































Figure A-15 


TARGAC Low Cloud Screen 


The Subjective Resolution Curve Definition screen, shown in Figure 
A-152, incorporates data from the IFUN card. These data are only 
required when the Sensor Type defined on the Sensor Type screen is 
defined to be User Defined. This screen will be available through the Input 
Menu only when applicable. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Type of Input for 
the Subjective 
Resolution Curve 

IFUN 

General Device 
Type 

IDEV 

Magnifiction 

AAMAG 

Contrast Limit 

CLIM 


Units 


User 

Values 


Coefficients 


Direct View Optics 


1.0 


0.2 


Cancel 


Figure A-152. TARGAC Subjective Resolution Curve Definition Screen 


A-94 




























































The Illumination screen, shown in Figure A-153, incorporates data 
from the ILUM card. These data are only required when the Sensor Type 
defined on the Sensor Type screen is defined to be either. Direct View 
Optics, Image Intensifier, or Silicon Television. This screen will be 
available through the Input Menu only when applicable. The user has the 
option to have ILUMA calculate the illumination level or have the user 
specify the needed data. Base on this choice, the screen will display the 
required data parameters. When the External option is chosen, the user 
must enter the parameters 2-5 or parameter 6 in Figure A-153. 



Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Compute 

Illumination Option 

- 

- 

O Internal O Enternal 

Illuminance 

AL 

fc 

1000.0 

Significant 

Weather 

SIGWX 

- 

±1 Sky Cover < 50^ 


State of Ground 

OBSURF 

fc 


Precipitation Type 

PRTVPE 

- 

±1 None 

Moon Phase 

mooN 

- 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-153. TARGAC Illumination Screen 


A-95 












































The Meteorological screen, shown in Figure A-154, incorporates data 
from the META, and METB cards and some data from the TIME card. Data 
is required for at least 3 time intervals at or before the time of interest. 

The user may add or delete screens by using the Add and Delete buttons. 
The Number of Data Sets (NTIM) found on the TIME card is calculated 
internally based on the number of defined sets. The user can move from 
screen to screen using the arrows at the top of the screen. Parameters that 
are no longer used by the model have been left off. The Clutter parameter, 
which currently is not being used is shown under the speculation that this 
will be included in later versions as the document indicates. 


Meteorological Data: 1 of 3 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Time of Observation 

WTME 

HHMM 

0000 - 
2400 

® Day of Euent 

Q Day Before Euent 
O Topo Days Before E 

0000 

uent 

Weather Index 

iwxdj) 


- 

1 +1 Sky Cover < 50^ 

Inversion Height 

wxd.is) 

km 

0.0 - 8.0 

I- * * 

3.0 

Wind Direction 



um 


Temperature 

WX(C3) 

Celcius 


* > 10.0 

Dew Point Temperature 

WX(C4) 

Celcius 


< ► 8.0 

Windspeed 

WXd,5) 

knots 


ii 4 * 8.0 

Visibility 

WXd,6) 

- 


4 ¥ 

10.0 

Clutter 

IWXd,8) 

- 

- 



Rdd 

Delete 

OK 

Cancel 


Figure A-154. TARGAC Meteorological Screen 


A-96 










































The Contrast Tranmittance screen, shown in Figure A-155, 
incorporates data from the METD card. These data are only required when 
the Sensor Type defined on the Sensor Type screen is defined to be either, 
Direct View Optics, Image Intensifier, or Silicon Television. This screen will 
be available through the Input Menu only when applicable. If the user 
chooses to use the CLIMAT module, data from the CLIMAT module will 
supersede data defined here. Effected parameters will be inactive. Data 
from this card are used when calling XSCALE. 




fewItPiggiL Tpeijii(fli8ibiiini®©-. 



Figure A-155- TARGAC Contrast Transmittance Screen 


A-97 





































The Thermal Contrast Model screen, shown in Figure A-156, 
incorporates data from the NRUN card, and some data from the TIME card. 
These data are required only when the Sensor Type defined on the Sensor 
Type screen is defined to be a Thermal Imager. The Number of Thermal 
Contrast Model Runs (NRUNTM), found on the TIME card, is calculated 
internally by the number of defined output times. 



Eigure A-156. TARGAC Thermal Contract Model Screen 














































The Abscissa and Ordinate Point Pairs screen, shown in Figure A-157, 
incorporates data from the POIN card. These data are optional and only 
needs to be present if the user chooses the User Defined Sensor on the 
Sensor Type screen and the Type of Input for the Subjective Resolution 
Curve parameter on the Subjective Resolution Curve Definition screen is set 
to Pairs of Points. This screen will be available through the Input Menu 
only when applicable. 



Figure A-157. TARGAC Abscissa and Ordinate Point Pairs Screen 



























The Site screen, shown in Figure A-158, incorporates data from the 
SITE card. These data are required only when the Sensor Type defined on 
the Sensor Type screen is defined to be a Thermal Imager. This screen will 
be available through the Input Menu only when applicable. Defaults for 
this screen are shown. 




Parameter 


Latitude 


Longitude 


Julian Day 


Time of Interest 


Elevation 


Average Temperature 


Surface Albedo 


Code 

Variable 


RLATT 


RLONG 


IDATE 


ITIMOT 


ELEV 


TBAR 


ALB 


Units 


degrees 


degrees 


HHMM 


ft 


Celcius 


Typical 

Values 


“90 - 90 


■180 - 180 


1 - 366 


0000 - 2400 


•1300 - 30000 


-60 - 60 


0.0 - 1.0 


User 

Values 


^ » I 55 




4 ^ 


188 


[T| 12 Til 00 


4 » 


1000 


4 ¥ 


4 ¥ 


0.15 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-158. TARGAC Site Screen 


The Smoke screen, shown in Figure A-159, incorporates data from 
the SMOK card. Data on this card are optional. 




Parameter 

Code 

Variable 


User 

Values 

Smoke Screen Type 

ISMYPE 


1 il Large Area Smoke Screen or Fog Oil 

Amount of Smoke 

ISMUCH 

- 

1 + 1 Light 

Smoke Screening Degree 

IPH 

- 


Amount of High Explosive 

IHE 

- 

|±| Light 

Distance from Detector 
to Screen 

SriANGE 

km 

3.0 

Distance for Line Of Sight 
Through the Screen 

SMEL 

m 

o 

o 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-159. TARGAC Smoke Screen 


A40() 



































The Sound screen, shown in Figure A-160, incorporates data from the 
SOND card. These data are applicable only when the Sensor Type defined 
on the Sensor Type screen is defined to be a Thermal Imager. This screen 
will be available through the Input Menu only when applicable. 



Figure A-160. TARGAC Sound Screen 


The Target screen, shown in Figure A-161, incorporates data from 
the TARG card. These data are applicable only when the Sensor Type 
defined on the Sensor Type screen is defined to be a Thermal Imager. This 
screen will be available through the Input Menu only when applicable. 



Figure A-161. TARGAC Target Screen 


A-lOl 
















































The Extinction and Humidity screen, shown in Figure A-162, 
incorporates data from the XSCL card. These data are required. This 
screen supplies the data necessary to call XSCALE, which is used to supply 
the extinction and humidity profiles in the lowest layers of the 
atmosphere. Data defaults are given. 



Figure A-162. TARGAC Extinction and Humidity Screen 


A402 





















A. 19 Ultraviolet Transmission and Lidar Simulation (UVTRAN) 
Module 

The Ultraviolet Transmission and Lidar Simulation (UVTRAN) module 
is an atmospheric transmission and lidar return calculation module for 
visible and ultraviolet wavelengths. The UVTRAN documentation did not 
give variable names. As a consequence, no variable names are given in the 
following example screens buts the place for those names as been 
preserved. The UVTRAN documentation did not indicate card requirement. 
Figure A-163 shows the Input Menu Choices. UVTRAN input screens are 
Ozone Concentrations, Trace Gas Concentrations, Altitude of Receiver and 
Visibility Measurement, Aerosol Attenuation Profile, Path, Transmission, 
Lidar, Mie Lidar Calculations, Fluorescence Lidar Calculation, Fluorescence 
Range and Concentration, and Lidar System Modifications. 


UVTRAN 

Input Menu 

Ozone Concentrations 

Trace Gas Concentrations 

Altitude of Receiver and Visibility Measurement 
Aerosol Attenuation Profile 

Path 

Transmission 

Lidar 

Mie Lidar Calculation 
Fluorescence Lidar Calculation 
Fluorescence Range and Concentration 
Lidar System Modifications 


Figure A- 163. UVTRAN Input Menu Choices 


A-l()3 






The Ozone Concentrations screen, shown in Figure A-164, 
incorporates data from the OZON card. 



Figure A-164. UVTRAN Ozone Concentrations Screen 


The Trace Gas Concentrations screen, shown in Figure A-165, 
incorporates data from the TGAS card. 



Figure A-165. UVTRAN Trace Gas Concentrations Screen 


A-104 










































The Altitude of Receiver and Visibility Measurement screen, shown 
in Figure A-166, incorporates data from the ALT card. 


- 'iBi I i i©e© fi w©ip ill I @ fl fe li i I Hi i®®®¥JiP’Qini®[itii^‘ . •„ 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Receiver Altitude 

- 

km 


Altitude of the 
Visibility Measurement 


ppbv 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-166. UVTRAN Altitude of Receiver and Visibility 
Measurement Screen 


The Aerosol Attenuation Profile screen, shown in Figure A-167, 
incorporates data from the AERO card. Second and third variables on this 
screen are inactive or active depending on the choice of the first variable. 




Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Aerosol Attenuation 
Assumption 

- 

- 

O Constant upith Height 

Increase with Height 
^ bg a Factor of K Percent per V Meters. 

^ Decrease with Height 
^ by a Factor of K Percent per V Meters. 

Percent Change 

X 

percent 


0 100 

Vertical Distance 

y 

m 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-167. UVTRAN Aerosol Attenuation Profile Screen 


A-105 

































The Path screen, shown in Figure A-168, incorporates data from the 
PATH card. The second on this screen is dependent on the first variable. 
Figure A-169 shows another variation of this screen. 



Figure A-168. UVTRAN Path Screen, Option 1 



B Figure A-169. UVTRAN Path Screen, Option 2 

I 

I 


I 

I 


A406 





































The Transmission screen, shown in Figure A-170, incorporates data 
from the TRAN card. 







E 

A. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Number of Ranges 

- 

- 


Shortest Range 

- 

km 


Range Interval 

- 

km 


Resolution 

- 


O Loui O High 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-170. UVTRAN Transmission Screen 

The Lidar screen, shown in Figure A-171, incorporates data from the 
LIDR card. Based on the fifth variable on this screen, one of two other 
screen will be come accessible through the input menu. They are the Mie 
Lidar Calculation screen and the Fluorescence Lidar Calculation screen. 



Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Number of Ranges 

- 

- 


Shortest Range 

- 

km 


Range Interval Length 

- 

km 


Background Condition 

- 

- 

O Daylight Clear 

O Daylight Ouercast 
O Night 

Calculation Type 


- 

O Fluorescence 

O Mie 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-171. UVTRAN Lidar Screen 


A-107 





The Mie Lidar Calculation screen, shown in Figure A-172, 
incorporates data from the MLID card. The first variables choices will be 
based on the values of the Lidar screen. Each range interval will be 
accessible through a dynamically created list. 


18© ll.8dlw> 


Mie Lidar Calucalatlons: 1 of 1 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Range 

- 

- 

|±| Range 1 

Aerosol Excess 

- 

- 

O Bark^ratter 


O Attenuation 

Beta/Attenuation Ratio 

- 

- 


Sigma Multiplier 

- 

- 



Bdd 

Delete 

OK 

Cancel 


Figure A-172. UVTRAN Mie Lidar Calculation Screen 


The Fluorescence Lidar Calculation screen, shown in Figure A-173, 
incorporates data from the FLID card. The first variable, Range, choices 
will be based on the values of the Lidar screen. Each range interval will be 
accessible through a dynamically created list. 

\= ,Fiiti]©ip©©f®ijiKg© yi^y,jQ[|©iM[|iBl:8®ni ■ ^V'.-:,:-' I I ^ 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Model Type 

- 

- 

O Gas O Particle 

Wavelength Shift 

- 

- 


Cross-section per nm 
for Fluorescence 

- 

m^/nm 




Specify Range and Concentration Values 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-173. UVTRAN Fluorescence Lidar Calculation Screen 


A-108 



























The Fluorescence Range and Concentration screen, shown in Figure 
A-174, incorporates data from the MLID modification card. The first 
variable, Range, choices will be based on the values of the Lidar screen. 
Each range interval will be accessible through a dynamically created list. 



Fluorescence Lidar Calucalations: 1 of 1 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Range 

- 

km 

± Range 1 

Concentration 


ppbv 



Rdd 

Delete 

OK 

Cancel 


Figure A-174. UVTRAN Fluorescence Range and Concentration Screen 

The Lidar System Modifications screen, shown in Figure A-175 
incorporates data from the LSYS card. The default values are shown. The 
shading on the window will indicate whether the value is a default or user 
specified. The user can also get the default value from the content 
sensitive help. 


■fc|](il®p 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Values 

Laser Pulse Energy 

- 

joule 

1.00 

Receiver Mirror Diameter 

- 

m 

.600 

Receiver Field of View 

- 

mrad 

2.00 

Spectral Bandwidth of System 


nin 

.500 

Transmitter Efficiency 

- 

- 

.550 

Receiver Efficiency 

- 

- 

.540 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-175. UVTRAN Lidar System Modifications Screen 


A-109 





A. 20 Natural Aerosol Extinction (XSCALE) Module 


The Natural Aerosol Extinction (XSCALE) module calculates the 
transmittance through the naturally occurring aerosols haze, fog, rain, 
snow, and icefog. The user can specify data for multiple runs. CLIMAT can 
be called if that option is chosen. Card requirements were not given. 

Figure A-176 shows the Input Menu Choices. XSCALE input screens are 
Aerosol, Meteorological and Detector Data, Horizontal, Slant Path 
Predictions, Cloud Parameters, Icefog Aerosol Information, and Detector 
Response Function. 


XSCALE 


Input Menu 


Aerosol, Meteorological and Detector Data 


Horizontal 


Slant Path Predictions 


Cloud Parameters 


Icefog Aerosol Information 


Detector Response Function 



Figure A-176. XSCALE Input Menu Choices 


The Aerosol, Meteorological, and Detector screen, shown in Figure A- 
177, incorporates data from the AERO card. The Aerosol Index parameter 
determines the necessity of other parameters on this screen. These 
dependent parameters will become active or inactive based on the 
selection of the aerosol index. When the meteorological data are needed, 
the user can either specify the data or choose to use data from CLIMAT. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Aerosol Type 

lAERO 

- 

lil Accept the algorithm defaults | 

Detector Radius 

RD 

cm 


Rain Rate 

RNRT 

mm/hr 



O Use CLIMHT Data O Use User Specified Data 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Relative Humidity 

RH 

percent 

L 1 

0 ' -' 

Temperature 

TEMP 

OC 

u ■* N 1 

0.100 '-' 

Wind Speed 

WNDVEL 

m/sec 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-177. XSCALE Aerosol, Meteorological and Detector Data 


A-110 










The Horizontal screen, shown in Figure A-178, incorporates data 
from the HORZ card. 




Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Horizontal Distance 

HORDI 

km 


Altitude 

ALT 

km 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-178. XSCALE Horizontal Screen 

The Slant Path Predictions screen, shown in Figure A-179, 
incorporates data from the SLNH, SLNS and PLOT card. 


ill® 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Horizontal Distance 

HORDI 

km 


Slant Distance 

SLNDI 

km 


Elevation Angle 

ANG 

degrees 


Altitude 


km 


Saving Profile Option 

mmrn 


O Do Not Sane O Sane 

Slant File Name 

- 

1_ 

PRGFIL 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure A-179. XSCALE Slant Path Predictions Screen 


A-lll 


















































The Cloud Parameters screen, shown in Figure A-180, incorporates 
data from the CLD card. 



■■ S'llwd! (F'®iP«©tt©iPf’ ’ 


O Include Effect of Cloud O Do Not Include Effect of Cloud 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Cloud Ceiling Height 

CEILHT 

km 


Cloud Thickness 

THICK 

km 



O Model Inuersion Layer O Do Not Model Inuersion Layer 


Parameter 


Code 

Variable 



User 

Values 


Inversion Layer Thickness AINVHT km 



Figure A-180. XSCALE Cloud Parameters Screen 

The Icefog Aerosol Information screen, shown in Figure A-181, 
incorporates data from the ICEF card. Water vapor source parameter 
determines whether the other parameters need to be specified. Dependent 
parameters will become active or inactive based on the selection of the 
water vapor source parameter. 




User 

Values 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Water Vapor Source 

ISOURC 

- 

Fraction of Particles 

DECPER 

- 

Mean Diameter of 
Source Particles 

XMEAN 

m 

Mode Diameter of 
Source Particles 

XMODE 

m 

Nearness of Open Water 

IWATER 

- 


Accept the algorighm defaults 


O lliater Not Nearby O Ibater Nearby 


Cancel 


Figure A-181. XSCALE Icefog Aerosol Information Screen 


A-112 


































The Detector Response Function screen, shown in Figure A-182, 
incorporates data from the RESF card. The user can specify up to 20 
wavelength and response value pairs. The user can specify the number of 
pairs before entering them or enter the pairs of numbers and the sum will 
be calculated for the user. 



Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

User 

Values 

Number of Wavelength Dependent 

Sensor Response Function Values Specified 

NBR 

-- 



Wavelength 

Response Value 

Wavelength 

Response Value 










































OK 


Cancel 


Figure 182. XSCALE Detector Response Function Screen 


A413 




























Appendix B 
List of Figures 

Figure B-1. COMBIC Main Window .....1 

Figure B-2. File Menu............1 

Figure B-3. Mode Menu.. • . • • • • .2 

Figure B-4. Input Menu.....- .. -2 

Figure B-5. Run Menu........ .3 

Figure B-6. View Menu ............ • ..3 

Figure B-7. Help Menu........ • • -4 

Figure B-8. Control Parameters Window - WAVL, FREQ, WVNUM... .4 

Figure B-9. Input Environment Window - MET'l. 5 

Figure B-10. Compute Pasquill Stability Window - PSQ1, PSQ2...5 

Figure B-11. Context Sensitive Help - Compute SZHOUR. 6 

Figure B-12. Context Sensitive Help - Compute SJDATE.6 

Figure B-13. Soil and Surface Parameters Window - TER A.7 

Figure B-14. Optional Meteorological Parameters Window - MET2.7 

Figure B-15. Munition Definition Window - MUNT.8 

Figure B-16. Barrage Parameters Window - BARG.8 

Figure B-17. Burn Duration Profile Window - BURN............9 

Figure B-18. Smoldering Source Parameters Window - SMLD . 9 

Figure B-19. Extintion Coefficients Window - EXTC. 10 

Figure B-20. Subcloud Definition Window - SUB A. ........10 

Figure B-21. Subcloud Initial Obscurant Radii Window - SUBB ..11 

Figure B-22. Subcloud Bouyancy Characteristics Window - SUBB... 11 

Figure B-23. Subcloud Initial Conditions Window - SUBC.12 

Figure B-24. HE Dust Parameters Window - DUST. 12 

Figure B- 25 Moving Sources Window VEHC.. 13 

Figure B-26. Vehicular Dust Parameters Window VEHC ..... .. 13 

Figure B-27. Target-Observer Laydown Window... 14 

Figure B-28. Origins Window - ORIG...... 14 

Figure B-29. Print Parameters Window - LIST... 15 

Figure B-31. Observer Parameters Window - OLOC ..... 16 

Figure B-32. Target Parameters Window - TLOC........ 16 

Figure B-33. Source Parameters Window - SLOC... 17 

Figure B-34. Moving Source Parameters Window - VEHl, VEH2.. 17 

Figure B-35. Grid Size Specification Window. 18 

Figure B-36. View Text Window - COMBIC Input Summary.... .18 

B-i 


















































Figure B-1. COMBIC Main Window 


R 

©maiwe. 

E 

- 

Ms 

Mode Input Run View 

Help 


New 
Open ... 
Close 

Save As ... 


Exit 


COMBIC 


Combined Obscuration Model for Battlefield Induced Contaminants 





Army Research Laboratory 
Battlefleld Environment Directorate 



SPARTA, Inc. 


Figure B-2. File Menu 


B-] 












Combined Obscuration Model for Battlefleld Induced Contaminants 




Army Research Laboratory 
Battlefield Environment Directorate 



SPARTA, Inc. 


Figure B-3. Mode Menu 




File Mode iQjCfpi]j Run View _ 

Control 

Environment 

Munitions 

Target-Observer Laydown 


COMBIC 

Combined Obscnration Model for Battleneld Induced Contaminants 


Army Research Laboratory 
Battlefleld Environment Directorate 



SPARTA, Inc 


Figure B-4. Input Menu 
















•LIMIHI 



Combined Obscuration Model for BatUefield Induced Contaminants 



Army Research Laboratory 
Battlefield Environment Directorate 



SPARTA, Inc. 


Figure B-5. Run Menu 




File Mode Input Bun 1_ 


COMBIC Input Summary 
input File 
Output File 
Contour File 



Combined Obscuration Model for Battlefield Induced Contaminants 




Army Research Laboratory 
Battlefield Environment Directorate 



SPARTA, Inc. 
















File Mo<Jc Input Run View _ 

Contents 

Table of Contents 

Jechnical Support 
About COMBIC ... 




COMBIC 

Combined Obscuration Model for Battlefield Induced Contaminants 


iil.1 




nusAi 


Army Research Laboratory 
Battlefield Environment Directorate 



SPARTA, Inc. 


Figure B-7. Help Menu 


Window 


Help 


Specify... 


<S>:Waye|ength ■ O Frequency O Wave Number 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

Wavelength 
(Lower Interval Value) 

WAVE1 

|Tm 

1.06 

0 

Wavelength 
(Higher Interval Value) 

WAVE2 

|im 

0 

0 

Number of 

Equal Intervals 

MULDV 

- 

1 

0 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure B-8. Control Parameters Window - WAVL, FREQ, WVNUM 


B-4 





































Window 




Use CLIMAT to specify Meteorologits>i Parameters 




Specify the reference height (m) for input ^REF Hil 
windspeed^ temperature and pressure. __ 


Parameter 


Relative Humidity 


Windspeed (at 10.0 m) 


Air Temperature (at 10.0 m) 


Air Pressure (at 10.0 m) 


Wind Direction 


Code 

Variable 


Typical User 
Values Value 


RELHUM 


UW 


AIRT 


PRESR 


0. to 100. 


.2 to 30. 


degC --10. tO'IB. 


mb up to 1020. 



id Direction WINDIR degwrtN 0. to 360. 

this considered a Cold Region? (COLDR) O Yes # No 


Pasquill Stahility 
Category/Value: 


y Neutral ^ 

C p E 

3.0 A.Q 5.0 


Soil and Surface ~ Optional Meteorological 
Parameters Parameters 


Compute 

Category 


7.0 


Cancel 


I 


Figure B-9. Input Environment Window - METl 


□ Compute Pasquill Stability Category 


H— 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

Sit© Latitude 

SLAT 

degrees 

O.to 90. 

E 

Site Longitude 

SLONG 

degrees 

-180. to+180. 

0 

Time of Day 

SZHOUR 

hrs + 
decimal 

0.0 to 240 

0 

Julian Date 

SJDATE 

days 

0. to 365. 

0 

% Cloud Cover 

CCOV 

% 

O.to 100. 

0 

Height of Lowest 
Cloud Layer 

CCEIL 

m 

100. to 9999. 

0 


Ground Condition (GCOND): Land Use Category/Roughness Length [RLGTH): 


Bare Ground User-Specified 


Bare Ground 


Snow Patchy < 6' 
Snow > 6' deep 


User-Specified 


Bare desert playas = 0.0003 
Tundra = 0.004 


Figure B-10, Compute Pasquill Stability Window - PSQl, PSQ2 


B-5 







































































Figure B-11. Context Sensitive Help - Compute SZHOUR 

























'■ i®0D Siorxil ©Hiifeiiii 


□ Specify Soil and Surface Parameters 


These parameters allow the user to modilythe environment parameters 
that affect cloud diffusion (ZNOT) or obscurant production. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

Surface Roughness 

ZNOT 

m 



Surface Soil 

Silt Content 

SILT 

<y 

0. to 100. 


Depth of 

Sod Cover 

SOD 

m 

0. to 2. 

0 

Snow Cover 

SNOW 

- 

Yes or No 

O Yes 
^ No 


Cancel 


Figure B13. Soil and Surface Paranneters Window - TERA 


= 


r 

Help 

□ Specify Optional Meteorological Parameters 





Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 


Inversion Height 

ZINV 

m 

30. to 1000. 

[[ 


The following parameters are used only in sensitivity studies or 
boundary layer model effects. 



Average Static 
StabiliV FLAG 

SBARM 

- 

Yes or No 

O Yes 
# No 


Average Static 
Stability Parameter 

SOAR 

2 


0 


Surface Friction 
Velocity^ 

USTAR 

m/s 

.001 to 2. 

S Internal Model 

Sensible Heat 

Flux 

SHFLX 

watt/m ^ 

varies 

Internal Mode! 






OK Cancel 



Figure B-14. Optional Meteorological Parameters Window - MET2 


B-7 































ISHBH 



|g||gg|p||||||gg|j 

Window 



Help 


Munition Definition y | fl | of 1 


Munition Name: | Munition 1 _ 

Munition Type: SMENU I User Specified 
Obscurant Type: STYP I Assigned internaiiy 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

# of Munitions or Sources 

XN 

- 

.1 to 100. 

1 

Fill Weight 

FW 

lbs or gal 

.01 to 1000. 

0 

Production Efficiency i 

EFF 


1.to 100. 

0 

Yield Factor 

YF 

- 

0.to20. 

0 

#of Submunitions 
per Munition 

SUBM 

- 

- 

0 


Specify... 

Barrage Information Mass Extinction Coefficient Moving Source 

Burn Duration Profile New Sub-Cloud Model Vehicle Dust 

Smoldering Munition HE Dust Parameters 


Add 

Delete 

OK 

Cancel 


Figure B-15. Munition Definition Window - MUNT 


="1:: ; _ :[SaaMig®^ _ DP 

_ Help 

□ Specify a Barrage 

Munition 1 of 1 

This option modifies the muniton source to be treated as multiple rounds ignited or exploded 
over an area with crosswind width YBARL meters and downwind length XBARL meters and 
uniformly distributed in time □verT=TBARG seconds. 

NOTE: This generates an approximate representation of obscurant production resulting in 
again in computation speed at the expense of the detail. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

Production Rate 

RATEB 

rnds/s 

O.tolO. 

Gl 

Barrage Duration 

TBARG 

s 

0. to 300. 

0 

Alongwind Length 

XBARL 

m 

0. to 500. 

0 

Crosswind Width 

YBARL 

m 

0. to 500. 

0 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure B-16. Barrage Parameters Window - BARG 


B-8 

















Help 

□ Specify Burn Duration Profile 

Munition 1 of 1 

and can be multiplied by any constant value since the model normalizes 1 to total mass prod 
Tjj is burn duration TBURN . In terms of the cumulative mass M (t) produced up until time t . 
the coefficients describe: 

•'(<)-Bl(i)4B2(if.iB3[if.iB,[i] .Bs(l-.«P(-B,t)) 

uced. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

Burn Duration 

TBURN 

s 

l.to 900. 

[[ 

Coefficient of Constant Term 

BRATl 

- 

varies 

Q 

Coefficient of Linear Term 

BRAT2 

- 

varies 

0 

Coefficient of Quadratic Term 

BRATS 

- 

varies 

0 

Coefficient of CubicTerm 

BRAT4 

- 

varies 

0 

Coefficient of Added Exponential Term 

BRAT5 

- 

varies 

0 

Coefficient of Exponential 

BRAT6 

3*1 

varies 

0 


OK 

Cancel 

1 


Figure B-17. Burn Duration Profile Window - BURN 


: (oftefaiwimTi (Item [^iiciB'uljfMff sOli OlXf gamiftiiiMi® iMOSBg 


Help 


□ Specify Smoldering Munition 


Munition 1 of 1 

The bum function for smoldering munitions Is: 

Mnew(T) = Mold(T) T < TStILD 


TBURN: 0.0 


Mnew (T ) = Mold (TSI1LD)»exp-|^ 


CSMLD 


TBURN-TSMLD 


^(T-TSriLD)j T > TSMLD 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

Time Smoldering Begins 

TSMLD 

s 

l.to 500. 

n 

Smoldering Coefficient 

CSMLD 


varies 

0 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure B-18. Smoldering Source Parameters Window - SMLD 


B-9 


































="1 ®[Ti(DODaD ©ixMftfete | ^ | ^ 

_ Help 

□ Specify Extinction Coefficients 


Munition 1 of 1 

All values MUET be specified if this option is selected! 


Obscurant Type: CLTYP (same as STYP) 
Not Defined 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

0.^-0.7 [am Waveband 

R(2) 

m2/g 

0.to20. 

Q 

0.7-1.2 [inn Waveband 

R(3) 

m^/g 

O.to 20. 

0 

1.06' [im Waveband 

■SSH 

m^/g 

0. to 20. 

0 

3.0-5.0 |im Waveband 

mmm 

m^/g 

O.to 20. 


8.0-12.0 [im Waveband 

R(6) 

m^/g 

O.to 20. 

0 




0. to 20. 

0 


OK 


Cancel 


Figure B-19. Extintion Coefficients Window - EXTC 


_ Help 

□ Specify Subciouds 

Munition 1 of 1 

Subcloud Definition y f H | ot 1 


The following parameters are related to the primaty subcloud definition. 

If absent then a default structure is assumed based on SMENU or STYP. 
_ CQMBIC will assign non-specified values. _ 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Fraction of Obscurant 
Mass in Subdoud 

FRACT 

- 

O.tol. 

0 

Relative Amount 
of Free Carbon 

DCARB 

- 

O.to 10. 

0 

FLAG 

PLUME 

- 

- 

0 Instantaneous Puff 
O Continuous 

FLAG 

RISMOD 

- 

- 

O Buoyant 

0 Nonbuoy ant 

O Canted Stem 


Extinction Coefficient fSEXTI: ! Assigned Internally 
Is this subcloud ballistic? O Yes No 

i Initial Obscurant i Bouyancy Initial 

Radii Radius Conditions 


Add 


Delete 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure B-20. Subcloud Definition Window - SUBA 


B-10 




















































Help 


□ Specify Initial Obscurant Radii 


Subcloud 1 of 1 

All parameters default to model or menu values if input as 0. or not supplied. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Initial Cloud 

Radius Downwind 

ROBSX 

m 


0 

Initial Cloud 

Radius Crosswind 

ROBSY 

m 

l.toBO. 


Initial Cloud 

Radius Vertical 

ROBSZ 


l.toBO. 

0 


iOKj 


Cancel 

... 




Figure B-21. Subcloud Initial Obscurant Radii Window - SUBB 


He 


□ Specify Bouyancy Characteristics 


Subcloud 1 of 1 

With the exception ofWUP, all parameters default to model or menu values 
if input as 0. or not supplied. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Bouyancy Radius 

RBUO 

m 

.01 to 10. 

0 

Mean Cloud 
Temperature 

TCLOUD 


270. to 9999. 

0 

Thermal Production 
Coefficient 

QOBS 

cal/g obsc 

O.to 2000. 

0 

Initial Upward 
Velocity 

WUP 

m/s 

0. to 100. 

0 


jOKj 


Cancel 

'.' 




Figure B-22. Subcloud Bouyancy Characteristics Window - SUBB 


B-11 




































□ Specify Initial Conditions 


I 

I 










□ 

B 


Help 


Subcloud 1 of 1 


Only EVAPF defaults to internal stored or modeled values if input as 0. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Initial Height 

ZBURST 

m 

O.toBO. 

0 

Fall Velocity 

VFALL 

m/s 

O.tolO. 

0 

Limiting Fraction 

EVAPF 

- 

0.to1. 

0 

Evaporation 

Parameter 

EVAPD 

s"^ 

O.tolO. 

0 

Reflection Coefficient 

REFCO 

- 

O.tol. 

0 

Momentum Radius 

RMOM 

m 

O.tolO. 

0 

Horizontal Velocity 

VHOR 

m/s 

0. to 100. 

0 


loicj 


Cancel 


Figure B-23. Subcloud Initial Conditions Window - SUBC 


[nJI lltogO 


□ Specify HE Dust Parameters 

Munition 1 of 1 

DOB. DELIV. CASEL CASED, and CYDEG are ignored if YF is nonzero. 


YF; 0.0 


Help 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

Depth of Burst 

DOB 

m 

-5.to 5. 

g; 

Length of Casing 

CASEL 

m 

.1 to 2. 

0 

Diameter of Casing 

CASED 

m 

.01 tol. 

0 

Dip Angle 

CYDEG 

deg 

O.to 90. 

0 

Delivery Type 

DELIV 

- 

- 

O Uncased Static 
O Cased Static 

O Cased Live Fire 


■ i Wet Cohesive Soil 
- : Wet Sand Moist Cohesive Soils 
. : Diy-to-MoistSand 
Dry Sandy 


Dry Cohesive Soil 

OK 


Cancel 

Rock 





Soil Type (SOIL): |__0 


Figure B-24. HE Dust Parameters Window - DUST 


B-12 





















































□ Specify a Moving Source 


Munition 1 of 1 


Any obscurant can be specified as a moving source. This passes speed and 
direction to Phase II. It is more common, however, to use Phase II inputs to 
specify sources as moving. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Moving Source 
Speed 


O.to 35. 

0 

Moving Source 
Direction 

VEHDIR 

deg 

0. to 360. 

0 


Figure B-25. Moving Sources Window - VEHC 


□ Specify Vehicular Dust 


^MiMDOacr LR^r^DDTKiitegg: 


Munition 1 of 1 


If the total dust is input as afill v/eight (F\A/) on the previous window, the interna! vehicular 
dust model will not be used. The dust production rate is then determined from TBURN 
specified with the Burn Duration Profile. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable/ 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

Moving Source 
Speed 

VSPEED 

m/s 

0. to 35. 

0 

Vehicle Width 

VWIDTH 

m 

O.to A. 

0 

Vehicle Weight 

VWEIGH 

tons 

0. to 70. 

0 

Vehicle Type 

VEHTYP 

- 

- 

® Wheeled 
O Tracked 

Moving Source 
Direction 

VEHDIR 

deg 

0. to 360. 

0 



Figure B-26. Vehicular Dust Parameters Window - VEHC 










































Figure B-27. Target-Observer Laydown Window 


Help 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

ArbitratyX-Origin 

XORG 

m 

0. 


Arbitrary Y-Origin 

YORG 

m 

0. 

0.0 

Arbitrary Z-Origin 

ZORG 

m 

0, 


Compass Heading 

XORDIR 

deg wrtN 

0. to 360. 


Wind Direction 

WNDIR 

deg wrt N 

O.to 360. 

0.0 

Arbitrary Time Origin 

WNDIR 

s 

0. 

0.0 


iOKi 


Cancel 

.. . 




Figure B-28. Origins Window - ORIG 


B-14 

























































(Mb 3 [FteaaaSBOg':;^'- 


Print Flag (PRNT): 

^ Suppress all output except ECHO, errors and VIEW/GREY pictures. If any. 

O Print transmittance for all LOS that intersect at least one cloud. 

O Also print pathlength and contributing histories for each contributing subcloud. 
O Add a second output file fUNITC] to dump cloud positions and sizes with time. 



Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

Uf 

Va 

>er 

lue 

Time to Begin Printout 

TBEGIN 

s 

0. to 7200. 

([ 

Time to End Printout 

TEND 

s 

0. to 7200. 

■ 

■ 


Time Increment 
for Printout 


0.1 to 10. 



Cancel 


Figure B-29. Print Parameters Window - LIST 


Code 

Variable 


Parameter 


Time Updates Begin BEGIN 


Time Updates End 


Units 


Typical User 

Values Values 



Time Increment 
for Cloud Updates 



E 


CUM 


Minimum CL 


Cloud Removal Limit CLEND 


CLACC 


0 . 


1. to 7200. 


.1 to 10. 


1. to 1000. 


.001 to .1 



Tolerance Level 
Romberg Integration 



1 — zzz — 1 


OK 





Figure B-30. Cloud Updates Window - TIME 


B 15 






































































Observer Number (OBSNj: 1 
Name: Observer 1 I 


Parameter 

Code ,, .. 

, Units 

Variable 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

■ 


Obser\/er Position 

■ 


X Coordinate 

XOBS 

ID 

varies 

-82.8 

YCoordinate 

YOBS 

m 

varies 

-36.2 

Z Coordinate 

ZOBS 

m 

varies 

HHQH 


Observer Active VievWng Time 


STIMO 




Figure B-31. Observer Parameters Window - OLOC 


lr@l7g](Fii IF-!KS(i(ti®OD _■ ■ 


Target Number (TARN): 1 
Target Name: | Target 1~ 

Parameter . 


0. to 7200. 


0. to 7200. 


OKI Cancel 



Code ,, -. 

.. - . , Units 

Variable _ 

Target Position 


Typical User 
Values Values 


X Coordinate 

XTAR 

m 


YCoordinate 

YTAR 

m 

varies 

-40.1 

Z Coordinate 

ZTAR 

m 

varies 

0.0 


I 


OKI Cancel 


Figure B-32. Target Parameters Window - TLOC 


B-16 























































V ' ■ ■ \ ,r h 

_ Help 

Source Name: | Source | 

Phase I Name: | Load Phase I Munitions First! \±\ 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 

# of Munition or Sources 

XN 

- 

varies 

1 


Source Position 


X Coordinate 

XM 

m 

varies 

-71.2 

YCoordinate 

YM 

m 

varies 

-29.6 

Z Coordinate 

ZM 

m 

varies 

0.0 


Source Active Time 


Start 

STIM 

s 

O.to 7200. 

0.0 

End 

ETIM 

s 

O.to 7200. 

0.0 



OK 


Cancel 


Figure B-33. Source Parameters Window - SLOC 



.r 


Help 


Moving Source Name: 1 Moving Source | 


Phase 1 Name: 1 Load Phase 1 Munitions First ! I ± 



Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Values 


# of Munition or Sources 

XNV 

- 

varies 

1.0 


Source Starting Position, Direction and Speed 



Starting X Coordinate 

XSTAR 

m 

varies 

-54.1 


Starting Y Coordinate 

YSTAR 

m 

varies 

-30.6 

Starting Z Coordinate 

ZSTAR 

m 

varies 

0.0 

Direction 

VDIR 

deg wrt N 

O.to 360, 

0.0 

Speed 

VSPEED 

m/s 

O.to 35. 

0.0 


Source Active Time 



Start 

STIMV 

s 

O.to 7200. 

0.0 


End 

ETIMV 

s 

O.to 7200. 

0.0 

Remove 

ETIMC 

s 

O.to 7200. 

0.0 



lOKl Cancel 





-^ 


Figure B-34. Moving Source Parameters Window - VEHl, VEH2 


B-17 



















1 


a 


IP 

File 


1 

» COMBIC Input Summary * 




1 

Control Specifications: 

Wavelength (WAVEl): 1.060 

(¥AVE2): 0.0000 

(MULDV): 0.0000 




I 

^****^**^^**^*^»***^*^** 

«• Phase I Parameters * 




ffll 

Meteorological Parameters 




1 

1 

■ 

Refercence Height (ZREF); 10.00 

Relative Humidity (REIHUM): 50.00 

Windspeed (at 10 m) (U¥): 2.200 

Air Temperature (at 10 m) (AIRT): 27.50 

Air Pressure (at 10 m) (PRESR): 962.5 

Wind Direction (WINDIR): 202.4 

Hot a Cold Region (COLDR). 

Pasquill Stability Category (PCAT): 3.000 




1 

1 

1 

Munition 

Munition Name: Munition 1 

Munition Type (SMENU): 1.000 

** 155-mm HC Ml canister 

Obscurant Type: (STYP): 3.000 

Hexachloroethane (HC) smoke 
# of Munitions or Sources (XH): 1.000 

Fill Weight (FW): 5.400 




1 

*1 1 

L* 

a 



I 


I 


Figure B-36. View Text Window - COMBIC Input Summary 


























Appendix C 
List of Figures 


Figure C-1. COMBIC Meteorological Parameters Screen for Microsoft Windows..1 

Figure C-2. COMBIC Meteorological Parameters Screen for Macintosh.2 

Figure C-3. COMBIC Meterological Parameters Screen for Sun Open Look.3 

Figure C-4. COMBIC Meteorological Parameters Screen for Sun Motif. 4 


C-i 








Window 


Use CLIMAT to specify Meteorological Parameters 


Specify the reference height [m] for input 



Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

Relative Humidity 

RELHUM 

% 

0. to 100. 

0 

Windspeed (at 10.0 m) 

UW 

m/s 

.2 to 30. 

0 

Air Temperature (at 10.0 m) 

AIRT 

deg C 

--lO. to “15. 

0 

Air Pressure (at 10.0 m) 

PRESR 

mb 

up to 1020. 

0 

Wind Direction 

WINDIR 

deg wrtN 

0. to 360. 

0 


sthis considered a Cold Region? (COLOR) O Yes No 


*1*'*']^ D I 3.6 I iMiPMUlit Ne utraT~||HH|^H 


Pasquili Stability 
Category/Value: 


Soil and Surface Optional Meteorological 


Parameters 


Parameters 


Compute 

Category 


7.0 


Cancel 


Figure C-1. COMBIC Meteorological Parameters Screen for Microsoft 
Windows 


















































Use CLIMAT to specify Meteorological Parameters 



Specify the reference height (m) for input 
windspeed, temperature and pressure. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 

User 

Value 

Relative Humidity 

RELHUM 

% 

0. to 100. 

0 

Windspeed ( at 10.0 m) 

UW 

m/s 

.2 to 30. 

0 

AirTemperature ( at 10.0 m) 

AIRT 

deg C 

-40. to 45. 

0 

Air Pressure ( at 10.0 m) 

PRESR 

mb 

up to 1020. 

0 

Wind Direction 

WINDIR 

deg wrt N 

0. to 360. 

0 


Is this considered a Cold Region? (COLOR) O Ves ® No 


Pasquill Stability 
Category/Value: 


3.6 


Compute 

Category 


ABC 

I 

0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 


D E 


4.0 5.0 


Soil and Surface Optional Meteorological 
Parameters Parameters 


F G 

1 1 ^ 

6.0 7.0 


OK 

L ...J 


Cancel 1 


.. - . \ 


Figure C-2. COMBIC Meteorological Parameters Screen for Macintosh 























































Window 


Meteorological Parameters [Test:0] 

Use CLIMAT to specify Meteorological Parameters 
reference height (m) for input 10.0 


Specify the reference height (m) for input 
windspeed, temperature and pressure. 


Parameter 

Code 

Variable 

Units 

Typical 

Values 


Relative Humidity 

RELHUM 

% 

0. to 100. 


Windspeed ( at 10.0 m) 

UW 

m/s 

.2 to 30. 


Air Temperature ( at 10.0 m) 

AIRT 

deg C 

-40. to 45. 


Air Pressure ( at 10.0 m) 

PRESR 

mb 

up to 1020, 


Wind Direction 

WINDIR 

deg wrt N 

0. to 360. 

.... ..... 


s this considered a Cold Region? (COLOR) _X®.*. 


P»s,ulll stability p runTtabIc Neutral 

Category/Value: ^. 



Soil and Surface Optional Meteorological 
Parameters Parameters 


Compute 

Category 


7.0 

Cancel 


Figure C-3. COMBIC Meterological Parameters Screen for Sun Open Look 


C-3 






































Meteorological Parsameters [Test:!] 


Window 


Use CLIMAT to specify Meteorological Parameters 


Specify the reference height (m) for input 
windspeed, temperature and pressure. 


Parameter 


Relative Humidity 
Windspeed ( at 10.0 m) 


Code 

Variable 

RELHUM 



Units 


Typical User 
Values Value 

0. to 100. 


.2 to 30. 


Air Temperature ( at 10.0 m) AIRT 


deg C -40. to 45. 


Air Pressure ( at 10.0 m) 


Wind Direction 


PRESR 


mb up to 10201 


WINDIR deg wrt N 0. to 360. 


Is this considered a Cold Region? (COLOR) Ves 


Pasquill Stability 
Category/Value; 


D 3.6 


Unstable Neutral 


Compute 

Category 


Soil and Surface 
Parameters 


Optional Meteorological 
Parameters 


Cancel 


Figure C-4. COMBIC Meteorological Parameters Screen for Sun Motif 













Major Platforms Supported 
UNIX 

DG Aviion 
DEC RISC Ultrix 
DEC Alpha OSF/1 
DEC Alpha NT 
HP 9000 Series 700/800 
IBM RS6000 
Interactive UNIX 
NCR System 3000 
SCO 

Silicon Graphics 
Sun SunOS 

Sun Solaris for SPARC or Intel 
SONY NEWS (RISC) 

SONY NEWS (CISC) 

UnixWare 

Microsoft Windows 3.X and Pen Windows 
Microsoft Windows 95 (early 96 release) 
Microsoft Windows NT 
Intel x86 
DEC Alpha 

DOS - Character Mode 
OS/2 - Presentation Manager 
Macintosh 
Power Macintosh 

DEC Alpha Open VMS and VAX/VMS 
IBM VM, MVS and CICS Mainframes 


C-5 




