grades for non-uniformly distributed 
structures due to the inherent need to 
employ a uniform global grid. FMM or 
QR techniques are better suited than 
FFT techniques; however, neither the 
FMM nor the QR technique can be 
used at all frequencies. 

This method has been developed to 
efficiently solve for a desired parameter 
of a system or device that can include 
both electrically large FMM elements, 
and electrically small QR elements. The 
system or device is set up as an oct-tree 
structure that can include regions of 
both the FMM type and the QR type. 
The system is enclosed with a cube at a 0- 
th level, splitting the cube at the 0-th 
level into eight child cubes. This forms 
cubes at a 1-st level, recursively repeating 
the splitting process for cubes at succes- 
sive levels until a desired number of lev- 


els is created. For each cube that is thus 
formed, neighbor lists and interaction 
lists are maintained. 

An iterative solver is then used to de- 
termine a first matrix vector product for 
any electrically large elements as well as 
a second matrix vector product for any 
electrically small elements that are in- 
cluded in the structure. These matrix 
vector products for the electrically large 
and small elements are combined, and a 
net delta for a combination of the ma- 
trix vector products is determined. The 
iteration continues until a net delta is 
obtained that is within the predefined 
limits. The matrix vector products that 
were last obtained are used to solve for 
the desired parameter. The solution for 
the desired parameter is then presented 
to a user in a tangible form; for example, 
on a display. 


This work was done by Vikrarn Jandhyala 
and Indranil Chowdhury of the University of 
Washington for Johnson Space Center. For 
further information, contact the Johnson 
Technology Transfer Office at (281) 483- 
3809. 

In accordance with Public Law 96-517, 
the contractor has elected to retain title to this 
invention. Inquiries concerning rights for its 
commercial use should be addressed to: 

Janice C. Walsh 

Federal Reporting Compliance Licensing Spe- 
cialist 

UW Tech Transfer 
University of Washington 
4322-1 1 th Avenue, N.E., Suite 500 
Seattle, WA 98105-4608 
E-mail: uwinvent@u. Washington, edu 
Refer to MSC-24439-1, volume and number 
of this NASA Tech Briefs issue, and the page 
number. 


©Accelerated Adaptive MGS Phase Retrieval 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


The Modified Gerchberg-Saxton 
(MGS) algorithm is an image-based 
wavefront-sensing method that can turn 
any science instrument focal plane into 
a wavefront sensor. MGS characterizes 
optical systems by estimating the wave- 
front errors in the exit pupil using only 
intensity images of a star or other point 
source of light. This innovative imple- 
mentation of MGS significantly acceler- 
ates the MGS phase retrieval algorithm 
by using stream-processing hardware on 
conventional graphics cards. 

Stream processing is a relatively new, 
yet powerful, paradigm to allow paral- 
lel processing of certain applications 
that apply single instructions to multi- 
ple data (SIMD). These stream proces- 
sors are designed specifically to sup- 
port large-scale parallel computing on 
a single graphics chip. Computation- 


ally intensive algorithms, such as the 
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), are par- 
ticularly well suited for this computing 
environment. This high-speed version 
of MGS exploits commercially available 
hardware to accomplish the same ob- 
jective in a fraction of the original 
time. The exploit involves performing 
matrix calculations in nVidia graphic 
cards. The graphical processor unit 
(GPU) is hardware that is specialized 
for computationally intensive, highly 
parallel computation. 

From the software perspective, a paral- 
lel programming model is used, called 
CUDA, to transparently scale multicore 
parallelism in hardware. This technology 
gives computationally intensive applica- 
tions access to the processing power of 
the nVidia GPUs through a C/C++ pro- 
gramming interface. The AAMGS (Accel- 


erated Adaptive MGS) software takes ad- 
vantage of these advanced technologies, 
to accelerate the optical phase error char- 
acterization. With a single PC that con- 
tains four nVidia GTX-280 graphic cards, 
the new implementation can process four 
images simultaneously to produce a 
JWST (James Webb Space Telescope) 
wavefront measurement 60 times faster 
than the previous code. 

This work was done by Raymond K. Lam, 
Catherine M. Ohara, Joseph J. Green, Sid- 
darayappa A. Bikkannavar, Scott A. Basinger, 
David C. Redding and Fang Shi of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. For more in- 
formation, contact iaoffice@jpl.nasa.gov. 

The software used in this innovation is 
available for commercial licensing. Please con- 
tact Daniel Broderick of the California Insti- 
tute of Technology at danielb@caltech.edu. 
Refer to NPO-4 7101. 


@ Large Eddy Simulation Study for Fluid Disintegration and Mixing 

This work is directly applicable to simulations of gas turbine engines and rocket engines. 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A new modeling approach is based 
on the concept of large eddy simula- 
tion (LES) within which the large 
scales are computed and the small 
scales are modeled. The new approach 
is expected to retain the fidelity of the 


physics while also being computation- 
ally efficient. Typically, only models for 
the small-scale fluxes of momentum, 
species, and enthalpy are used to rein- 
troduce in the simulation the physics 
lost because the computation only re- 


solves the large scales. These models 
are called subgrid (SGS) models be- 
cause they operate at a scale smaller 
than the LES grid. 

In a previous study of thermodynami- 
cally supercritical fluid disintegration and 


28 


NASA Tech Briefs, August 2011 


