Computer Technology 


A Tutor That's Up to the Task 


P resent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) 
are opening the doors to virtual classroom and 
training environments where students and trainees 
are getting undivided attention with one-on-one 
computer-based instruction. Such new developments are 
effectively alleviating concerns over long-standing edu- 
cational issues, such as student-teacher interaction 
and student- to-teacher ratios. Furthermore, high-level 
research demonstrates that students who engage in learn- 
ing using Al-based Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) 
generally perform better and learn faster, compared to 
classroom- trained students. 

With assistance from NASA’s Marshall Space Flight 
Center, a new breed of ITS for technical training and 
complex problem-solving has hit the market to provide 
students and trainees with the decision-making skills 
necessary to succeed to the next level. The Task Tutor 
Toolkit™ (T 3 ), developed by Stottler Henke Associates, 
Inc., of San Mateo, California, is a generic tutoring sys- 
tem shell and scenario authoring tool that emulates 
expert instructors and lowers the cost and difficulty of 
creating scenario-based ITS for technical training. 

The functionality of Stottler Henke Associates’ T 3 far 
exceeds that of traditional computer-based training sys- 
tems, which test factual recall and narrow skills by 


prompting students to answer multiple-choice or fill-in- 
the-blank questions. The T 3 , on the contrary, lets students 
assess situations, generate solutions, make decisions, and 
carry out actions in realistically complex scenarios. At the 
beginning of each scenario, the T 3 tutoring system pres- 
ents a briefing that describes the situation and the goals 
the students should pursue. Each scenario contains 
a solution template that specifies a partially-ordered 
sequence of action patterns that match correct 
sequences of student actions. During each scenario, the 
built-in simulator notifies the tutoring system of each 
student action. The T 3 uses this information to evaluate 
the student action by comparing it with the scenario’s 
solution template and with error rules that detect incor- 
rect actions. 

To prevent running into “dead-end” situations, stu- 
dents can request hints and ask questions by clicking on 
buttons in the user window. Rather than just setting up 
students with the right answers to complete a scenario, 
the T 3 simulator explains why the recommended actions 
should be taken. When students carry out a correct action 
specified by the solution template, the T 3 awards them 
credit for applying the principles linked to the action. At 
the end of each scenario, the tutoring system displays a 
report card that lists the principles the students success- 
fully — and unsuccessfully — demonstrated. These results 



The T 3 Authoring Tool lets instructors edit scenarios by demon- 
strating, generalizing, and annotating solution templates. Icons in 
the left pane show actions organized into ordered and unordered 
groups. The right pane shows the attributes of the selected 
action, “Enable telemetry.” 


60 


SPINOFF 2003 




The T 3 Tutoring System window provides feedback and hints 
“on demand” to students during scenarios. 


can be sent to a learning management system to record 
the students’ performance, knowledge, and skills. 

The T 3 is just as easy for instructors and subject mat- 
ter experts to operate. It consists of a set of Java™ soft- 
ware libraries and applications that let the user create the 
scenarios quickly and easily, without programming. The 
system’s Simulator and Authoring Tool are used to cre- 
ate application- specific scenarios and lesson plans. The 
Simulator hosts the correct sequence of actions for the 
scenario, and the Authoring Tool records these actions to 
generate the initial solution template. 

The tutoring technology was developed from 1997 to 
2002, under a Small Business Innovation Research 
(SBIR) contract with Marshall, to address NASA’s need 
for rapid deployment of scenario-based tutoring systems. 
NASA utilized the toolkit to create the Remote Payload 
Operations Tutor (RPOT), a system that lets scientists 
who are new to space mission operations learn to 
monitor and control their experiments aboard the 
International Space Station, according to NASA’s exist- 


ing payload regulations, guidelines, and procedures. 
RPOT combines simulations with automated tutoring 
capabilities to provide hints and instructional feedback 
to its students. The system makes it unnecessary for 
NASA to dedicate an instructor for each student during 
the simulation exercises. 

NASA is exploring the possibility of using the toolkit 
for onboard training of Space Station flight crews where 
human instructors cannot be made easily available. This 
could also serve a purpose in the pre-flight phase when 
flight crews are traveling away from the high-fidelity 
training simulators. 

Outside of NASA and the corporate and technical 
training realm, the T 3 may be used in educational settings 
of all levels for math problem-solving and scientific lab- 
oratory procedures. The software could also be practical 
for students at technical institutes and trade schools that 
teach equipment operations and maintenance. 

Task Tutor Toolkit™ is a trademark of Stottler Henke Associates, Inc. 
Java™ is a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc. 


SPINOFF 2003 


61 


Computer Technology 




